Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3691 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: St. Lucia 
Project ID: P111708 
Project Name: Additional Financing to the St. Lucia Disaster Management Project II 
Task Team Leader: Francis Ghesquiere 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: LCSUW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (80%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme: Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
3.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Additional Financing credit in the order of US$3 million equivalent to the Saint 
Lucia Disaster Management Project II - DMPII (Project ID P086469, Loan 72380-SLU//Credit 
39360-SLU) would scale up investments under Component 1: Physical Prevention and 
Mitigation Works and would allocate additional project funds to Component 4: Project 
Management.  The rationale for the request is: (i) the need for additional mitigation works to 
solidify the gain achieved through works implemented in Dennery Village 
–
one
of
the most 
vulnerable communities asprioritized by the government; and (ii) the continuation of the 
successful Small Mitigation Works program, including small works in response to last year’s 
Hurricane Dean, and completion of a technical audit ; and (iii) the need to cover some of the 
additional project management costs.  
 
The AF would not entail any change to the DMPII development objectives.  In accordance with 
the original project, the development objective of the project is (a) to further strengthen 
infrastructure against the impact of adverse natural events (hurricane, flooding, etc) through the 
implementation of physical mitigation measures, and (b) to strengthen the institutional 
management and response capacity of the cognizant ministries and agencies for disaster 
management through the provision of facilities, critical equipment, technical assistance and 
Page  2
training.  Its scope is limited to part (a) through the scaling up of local risk management 
activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Government expects to scale up the following activities; (a) coastal protection works for 
Dennery Village, and (b) drainage, river walls and slope stabilization activities.  Specific 
investments would include: i) creation of communal recreation areas as part of the consolidation 
of the beach reclamation activity at Dennery Village; ii) extension of the ravine works at 
Dennery River and Trou A Leau to ensure greater stability as a result of recent river erosion; iii) 
continuation of the small mitigation works, including small works in response to Hurricane Dean 
last year, and technical audit and iv) project management.  
 
Project Description per Component  
 
Component 1 - Physical Prevention and Mitigation Works: The estimated cost of these 
activities is US$3.35 million (of which US$2.71 million of IDA resources are requested, 
representing 90% percent of the Additional Financing).  
 
(a) Coast Protection Dennery Village  - Beach Reclamation Efforts: The estimated cost of these 
activities is US$360,000 (of which US$306,000 of IDA resources are requested, representing 
10.2% percent of the Additional Financing).  
 
In Dennery, the success of the sea defense construction led to 15,000 square feet of reclaimed 
beach, more than originally envisioned 
–
this process was also accelerated by the performance of 
the breakwaters during Hurricane Dean.  The additional funds allocated to this sub-component 
would support the creation of a communal recreation area, such as a small public park, to prevent 
potential encroachment on this land by unauthorized persons, as recommended by the technical 
audits.  Three concepts for landscape improvement were proposed to the local community - the 
community’s preferred landscape improvement plan depicts landscaping and recreational 
improvements and would provide the public with an open space for community use.  Terms of 
Reference for final technical designs of the public space will be prepared by May 25, 2008. In 
the meantime, the PCU will also work closely with partner agencies to ensure that land 
encroachment from the newly reclaimed beach is prevented. The PCU has hired a Land Surveyor 
to determine the boundaries of the reclaimed land. The survey will be completed by June 1, 
2008.  
 
No physical relocation or loss of a preexisting shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, loss of 
income sources or means of livelihood, resulting from an involuntary taking of land occupied 
before the beginning of the project, is foreseen.  However, the Bank's policies will apply to any 
activities unexpectedly resulting in involuntary resettlement, that in the judgment of the Bank, 
are (a) directly and significantly related to the Bank-assisted project, (b) necessary to achieve its 
objectives as set forth in the project documents; and (c) carried out, or planned to be carried out, 
contemporaneously with the project.  
 
Page  3
(b) Dennery River and Trou A L’eau Ravine Works: The estimated cost of the works is 
US$470,000 (of which US$367,000 of IDA funds are requested, representing 12% percent of the 
Additional Financing).  
 
The additional funds allocated to this sub-component would support the revised scope of works, 
which entails extension of a berm and elevation of the embankment from the Dennery Bridge 
200 meters upstream to the mouth of the Dennery River, where the existing gabion baskets are.  
This will protect an additional 50 households.  Although not envisioned originally, work in the 
area has revealed that this extension is necessary for the newly constructed river defenses to be 
fully effective.  An engineering firm was contracted to conduct a topographical survey that 
served as the basis for the revised design of the coastal ravine protection works for the Dennery 
Village. An Environmental Assessment/Environmental Management Plan was developed and 
approved by the Bank in 2004 as part of the original works.  The Bank environmental specialist 
has checked that new works do not exceed in scope.  
 
Furthermore, the extension of the berm required the acquisition of a portion of seven plots of 
privately owned land.  Although no physical relocation of housing units was necessary, nor was 
there any need for livelihood restoration or social assistance, the involuntary taking of land 
triggered the Bank's 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement Policy.  The team, with the assistance of a 
social development specialist, has been working on the implementation of the Abbreviated Land 
Acquisition Plan the PCU drafted, on behalf of the government, in February 2007.  A 
fundamental requirement of the plan was for the land owners to be fairly compensated, according 
to national legislation as well as Bank policy, before the beginning of the physical extension 
works.  
 
As of January 2008, three out of the seven land owners have received their due compensation.  
The four pending payments pertain to absentee land owners living outside St. Lucia.  The 
Government of St. Lucia is in contact with these landowners and will continue to work with 
them as needed to carry out the land registration process.  It has opened in the care of the High 
Court a sundry deposit account in the General Ledger, and a savings account at the Bank of Saint 
Lucia to guarantee the availability of compensation funds for the remaining landowners for a 
period of 12 years. A confirmation of disbursement of the money into the accounts will be sent 
by May 30, 2008.  In the unforeseen case that the design for the extension works is modified and 
additional land acquisition becomes necessary, this acquisition will follow the same procedures 
established in the Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan.  
 
(c) Small Mitigation Works - Integration of Hazard Mapping Objective with Small Mitigation 
Works and Technical Audit: The estimated cost for these activities is US$2,515,000 (of which 
US$2,037,000 of IDA are requested, representing 68% percent of the Additional Financing).  
 
The additional funds allocated to this sub-component would support the continuation of 
investment in the drainage, river walls and slope stabilization works program that is of great 
interest to the Government.  In particular, the Ministry of Communications, Works, Transport 
and Public Utilities (MCWT&PU), with the support of the PCU, would like to conduct a 
technical audit of the works and a scientific analysis of current landslide vulnerabilities.  This 
analysis will be used to assess the benefits of the works already completed and to predict slope 
Page  4
stabilities in order to best plan and continue the works.  It will also estimate the potential costs of 
landslide and hurricane losses to determine the benefits of local investment in landslide and 
hurricane mitigation measures.  The proposal includes working with a specialized NGO who has 
worked with the St. Lucian Government on low-cost community-based strategies for landslide 
mitigation.  This component also includes small works for the recovery from Hurricane Dean last 
year.  
 
Component 4 
–
Project Management:  The estimated cost these activities is US$615,000 (of 
which US$290,000 of IDA are requested), representing 10% percent of the Additional 
Financing).  
 
(d) Project Management Associated with a Two-year extension  
 
In order to allow for sufficient time to complete the existing activities, as well as the proposed 
continuation of ongoing project activities, project management costs must be increased to 
finance the implementation of the project.  The Government will put the majority of funds 
needed for this component as part of the Borrower’s contribution.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
As in the original project, the project will be carried out throughout the island of Saint Lucia; site 
selection for small works has been based on the following criteria:  
 
(i) Specific risk exposure to natural disasters (flood, wind damage, land slips, etc);  
 
(ii) Strategic importance of infrastructure at risk; and  
 
(iii) Probable Community participation in the works.  
 
Scope and coverage remains unchanged: The AF will continue to support activities in areas that 
were already covered by the project's original DMPII.  In addition to operating in the same 
zones, the AF scope and the type of AF financed activities remain unchanged.  The AF will also 
continue to support activities in Dennery, a village of 5,000 inhabitants is located on the east 
coast and is vulnerable to floods.  
 
Key stakeholders and mechanisms for consultation and disclosure: The key stakeholders are the 
residents of the communities benefiting from AF investments in physical prevention and 
mitigation activities. They have received a tailor-made safeguard tutorials and are aware of the 
Bank's policies vis-Ã -vis informational sessions provided by the project's environmental 
specialist.  
 
Dennery Village: The primary beneficiaries will be the Dennery Community, local authorities, 
and local civil society that have been closely involved in the development of the proposed 
mitigation measures.  Extensive public consultations were held with the community which 
resulted in the development of the engineering approach that was chosen for the original project.  
The additional mitigation works will solidify the gain achieved through works implemented in 
Dennery village.  The Bank environmental specialist has checked that new works do not exceed 
in scope.  
 
The team worked with the PCU to assure that appropriate consultations were conducted in the 
preparation of the Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan.  These consultations revealed a need for 
Page  5
more continuous dialogue with the affected land owners.  Since then, the municipal 
communications officer for the town of Dennery has been working satisfactorily as a liaison 
between the PCU and the affected people, to assure that they were well informed about the 
compensation process and the scope of the proposed works.  
 
In the case of the Dennery coastal defenses, as with the original project, impacts are expected to 
reduce catastrophic property loss from severe storm damage, reduce coastal erosion and reduce 
the pressure for relocation along the margins of the adjacent river watersheds.  The beach 
reclamation area and the creation of a public space will restore the community’s principal 
recreation area generally improving local quality life.  Impacts are limited to the Dennery Bay 
Area with no impacts identified affecting areas beyond Dennery community.  This is due to the 
fact that the bay is a wholly closed hydraulic system.  The relevant screening and assessment 
procedures will be used.  
 
Additional Small Mitigation Works: These have generally been identified at the request of local 
communities.  In many cases, works will be implemented with strong community participation 
and will result in the strengthening or hardening of existing works against severe storm events.  
The proposal includes with an NGO specializing in low-cost community based disaster risk 
management and landslide mitigation with experience with the St. Lucian Government.  
 
If the screening procedure reveals that a safeguard might be triggered, the review requirements 
under Bank policy and St. Lucian law will be triggered under PCU implementation procedures.  
These require public consultation with affected groups.  As these projects relate to prevention 
and mitigation of flood and hurricane impacts, stakeholders include all levels of society with 
particular benefit realized by economically disadvantaged segments unable to provide for their 
own proper protection.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower Capacity: The PCU has successfully implemented past and on-going operations with 
the Bank and is well aware of the Bank’s policy on environmental impact.  As recorded in the 
Mid Term Review, implementation has been very satisfactory.  
 
Additional works contemplated under the extension of the project are of the same nature as 
those currently under way and no change in safeguards framework is anticipated.  Thus, the AF 
will continue to be classified as a Category B project.  The works in Dennery were contemplated 
in the current project and under the current framework, but implementation has been deferred for 
additional funds.  Works completed in Dennery under the current project were designed after 
extensive community consultation and an Environmental Impact Assessment, and the same 
procedures will be followed in the additional phase.  The works completed so far have improved 
coastal protection and reduced economic losses.  
 
In terms of environmental issues, the project's environmental specialist has participated on 
every mission since project inception. He has confirmed that the scope of works does not exceed 
that of the original project.  The Environmental Assessment envisioned this works, and will be 
updated as necessary to account for any potential cumulative impacts of additional works.  As in 
the original project, the remaining works planned are considered category C.  The screening 
Page  6
procedures of the original project will be followed.  The PCU will use this to assure that future 
works proposed are in compliance with Bank’s safeguards procedures. In the case that sub-
projects are found to increase the project's category, an Environmental Assessment will be done.  
 
There was a full review of the implementation of the EA framework in the Mid Term Review 
(MTR), showing the project has met or exceeded all environmental safeguard expectations.  In 
summary, the findings of this assessment were:  
 
•
General Environmental Performance of projects under DMP II – A review of the site 
works and activities was carried out and the project met or exceeded all environmental safeguard 
expectations.  No problems were encountered with implementing the EA/EMF. The PCU and the 
Ministry of Communications and Works have consistently demonstrated a commitment to the 
implementation of project environmental policies and guidelines both in spirit and in action.  The 
roles and responsibilities for authorizing and supervising the project financed works, including 
the guidelines and the screening process, have been clearly defined and applied.  For example, 
when engineers noted that absent additional work on the riverbank up river (in toward the coastal 
road to the base of the bridge), flooding would continue, and since the review noted that the issue 
of encroachment on private lands would have to be addressed first, the PCU immediately 
contacted the Bank and a social specialist from the Bank began to work with the government to 
guide them on this issue.  
 
The environmental issues will remain specific to the local areas since the AF's Component 1 
will focus on small physical prevention and mitigation activities.The small works for 
rehabilitation from Hurricane Dean will be limited to small-works necessary for rapid economic 
and social recovery, and as per the selection criteria.  The environmental screening methods for 
environmental impacts and cultural property currently employed under the DMPII will be 
applied during the identification and selection process of all the works implemented under the 
AF.  
 
In terms of social safeguards, avoiding physical relocation of people was prioritized when the 
original program of works was consulted with the community.  Hence the involuntary 
resettlement policy was not originally triggered.  During implementation, however, an 
abbreviated land acquisition plan was prepared to establish the procedures that would be put in 
place in order to acquire land to accommodate the extension of works under Component 1.b. 
Dennery River and Trou A L’eau Ravine Works, as detailed above.  Also as stated above, in the 
unforeseen case that the design for the extension works is modified and additional land 
acquisition becomes necessary, this acquisition will follow the same procedures laid out in the 
Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan (dated February 2007).  
 
Likewise, in respect to the beach reclamation sub-project under Component 1.a., no physical 
relocation or loss of a preexisting shelter, loss of assets or access to assets or loss of income 
sources or means of livelihood is foreseen resulting from an involuntary taking of land occupied 
before the beginning of the project.  However, the Bank's policies will apply to other activities 
resulting in involuntary resettlement, that in the judgment of the Bank, are (a) directly and 
significantly related to the Bank-assisted project, (b) necessary to achieve its objectives as set 
Page  7
forth in the project documents; and (c) carried out, or planned to be carried out, 
contemporaneously with the project.  
 
Other than these safeguard considerations, the AF is estimated to produce a positive social 
impact, as it will continue to strengthen the local participation in disaster risk management 
system.  This will be the case particularly through the methodology used by the specialized NGO 
in its low-cost community-based landslide risk prevention works, where the community is 
closely involved in the identification, preparation and execution of local risk management 
projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Gerald E. Meier (LCSUW) 
Ms Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Since the goal of the Project is to mitigate risks to natural disasters, in principle, the 
recommended mitigation works do not carry any environmental negative risks, but rather, seek to 
reinforce environmental protection as risk mitigation.  In addition, according to the procedures 
under the DMPII, the process of identifying the mitigation works needs to undergo the processes 
described below, and have the environmental approval of the MCWT&PU.  
 
Dennery Village Flood Protection Works: An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
dated February 22, 2004 was prepared for the original project, including a social assessment and 
stakeholders’ workshop.  The EA includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) outlining 
procedures and adequate agreements to ensure adequate screening of each subpoject, 
identification of potential impacts and necessary mitigation measures.  
 
The work program was developed in consultation with the Dennery community, so as to 
minimize environmental degradation.  The EIA showed strong demand for the project from the 
Dennery residents who are at risk of experiencing damage to their property in case sea swells, 
storm waves and floods.  According to the original study, many of the residents place a high 
social value on living in their present location, which would be further protected with the 
additional works.  The success from the original activities is already evident, as seen in their 
performance during Hurricane Dean last year, where they successfully protected the community, 
and as seen by the request for the Additional Financing.  
 
Small Mitigation Works:  Preparation of the original project included preparation of an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) to identify key elements that must be considered for project 
location and design.  These guidelines and screening processes will be capable of detecting 
possible impacts in archeological or historical sites and ensuring compliance with OP 4.11.  The 
EA included in the Operation Manual of the original project is applicable for this works in the 
additional phase and includes:  
 
a)
A
PCU project implementation procedure for environmental management of small works 
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
activities.  This requires special attention based on the Ba
nk’s environmental and social 
safeguard policies and integrates requirements promulgated under St. Lucian law.  
 
b)
Environmental guidelines and screening process describing procedures to be followed to 
comply with Bank’s safeguards policies; those guidelines result in the incorporation of contract 
clauses to be included in contacts issued under the program of small mitigation works.  This 
process applies to small works activities such as construction or repair of retention walls, river 
wall protections, etc.  
 
The assessment process, presented in detail in the Operations Manual, is a three-part 
exercise. It consists of a screening procedure, a checklist evaluation, and a set of contract clauses 
designed to impose environmental management requirements. It is designed to determine first 
whether it is appropriate to use this checklist procedure for the application of environmental 
requirements.  If a project presents the potential for significant environmental impacts, an 
environmental assessment is required and this procedure is not applicable. The second part of the 
process is the application of the checklist to determine the nature of the environmentally 
important activities that are likely to arise during the projects construction. Once these activities 
are identified, a series of standard contract clauses are then applied based on the checklist, to 
define contractor environmental performance requirements.  
 
The Mid Term review includes an evaluation of past project performance with regards to 
implementation of the EMP and assessment of the borrower’s capacity for implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The project is not expected to have any negative impact on movable or immovable objects, 
sites, structures, groups of structures, natural features or landscapes with archeological, 
paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural significance. The 
assessment carried out during the DMPII indicates that it would be very unlikely that any project 
activity will have any negative impact on physical cultural resources.  In addition, as highlighted 
in the EMP of the EA, screening procedures are in place in order to identify any potential 
impacts and identify mitigation measures.  Nevertheless, in the event that an archeologically or 
culturally significant resource is found (‘chance find’) in the project area, the following 
procedures will be followed:  
 
-work will be stopped immediately  
 
-the Archaeological and Historical Society will be contacted for an evaluation of the site.  
No work can be continued without approval of the entity.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
An Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan -required for the acquisition of private lands involved 
in the extension of the ravine works in the Dennery River- was developed in February 2007 with 
the oversight of the project's social specialist.  This plan was submitted by the Government of 
Saint Lucia (GOSL) and approved by the Bank, and the requirements are being followed.  
 
Although the need for land acquisition triggered the Involuntary Resettlement policy OP 
Page  9
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
4.12, this "involuntary taking of land" did not however give rise to any physical relocation or 
loss of preexisting shelters, loss of assets or access to assets, loss of income sources or means of 
livelihood.  
 
In the unforeseen case that the design for the extension works is modified and additional 
land acquisition becomes necessary, this acquisition will follow the same procedures established 
in the Abbreviated Land Acquisition Plan.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/09/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The PID and ISDS (cleared by SAT) will be sent to the Infoshop upon clearance.The updated 
EA to account for any potential cumulative impacts of additional works should be disclosed 
prior to the start of the additional works involving the extension of a berm and elevation of 
embankment from the Dennery Bridge.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Francis Ghesquiere 
05/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
05/22/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
05/22/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  10
