Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/28/2008 
Report No.:  AC3844
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sudan 
Project ID:  P113586 
Project Name:  Southern Sudan Emergency Food Crisis Response Project 
Task Team Leader:  John Jaramogi Oloya 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 11, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objec
tive (PDO) is “increased access to food for consumption 
by food insecure households or groups found in six counties of Southern Sudan”.  This 
objective will be achieved through two but very inter-related strategies: (a) accelerated 
supply response of productivity enhancing technologies covering the six counties. This 
strategy will ensure short to long-term interventions that accelerate own production of 
staple foods for own consumption and internal distribution.  Key investments include: 
provision of extension services, agricultural technologies in crops and animals 
production, accelerated investments in food storage and reduction of post-harvest losses 
at farm and local authority levels; and (b) safety net measures that will target food 
insecure households in the same locations through public works implemented by ILO and 
NPA/AAH-I, on the basis of task-specific as well as incentive-based approaches to public 
works for enhanced food consumption of the groups.  These activities will target 
approximately 130,000 households and are set out in the following paragraph below.   
 
3. Project Description 
a)  Component 1: Support to Agricultural Productivity (US$ 3.0 million)  
 
Page  2
This component will do two things. First, it will target food insecure households in the 
selected counties as a short-and medium-term strategy, to double own food production 
and improve post-harvest management of selected staple food crops all year round.  
Secondly, it will promote through targeting of mainly cooperative societies in the surplus 
areas (Morobo, Yambio and Raja) as well as in food deficit areas (Tonga, Mayom and 
Tonj North), increased acreages (and therefore outputs) of selected staple food crops for 
seed bulking  and consumption through trade. Under the component, the operation will:  
 
(i) use community grant mechanisms to finance productivity enhancement: procurement 
of oxen and oxen farming technologies, seeds, hand tools, and other agricultural 
equipment. It will also finance advisory services, capacity building and technical 
assistance. (ii) fund construction of low cost food banks at strategic locations and 
importantly at farm level, food granaries.  
 
This supply response will support the scaling-up of community-based grant mechanisms 
now being implemented under the MDTF-S projects.  Specifically, it aims to reduce food 
price vulnerability at the community levels through improved domestic production of 
selected staple food crops thereby increasing total aggregate of domestic food supply.  
This strategy also supports the implementation of actions to manage future food risks.  In 
support of the latter, a quick assessment will be carried out. focusing on increasing own 
domestic  production is fully justified as a short-to medium term strategy because the 
current prices of imported cereals and staple foods are very high due to transport costs 
and taxation. These activities will be implemented through NPA/AAH-I and will involve 
LAs and community-based organizations (CBOs).  
 
b) Component 2:  Strengthening Community Safety Nets (US$ 1.5 million)  
 
Within the context of the GFPR framework, this component will seek to mitigate 
shortfalls in food available for consumption to the food insecure households through 
public works.  Through public works, food insecure households will manage shocks 
resulting from escalating food prices arising form low food supply mainly associated with 
seasonal floods and inaccessibility of some of the areas.  The component will be 
implemented through the LAs and public works designated NGOs, selected by the GoSS.  
Participating households will be selected on the basis of agree criteria by the NGOs and 
LAs . The component will therefore finance training, tools and equipment, non-wage 
costs and skilled labors to enable these food insecure groups to access food for 
consumption through the markets.  The likely activities to be implemented will include 
repairs of rural roads to allow accessibility by trucks.  This will include patching of roads, 
building river crossing, construction of village storage, etc.  The focus will be in 
establishing public assets that would enhance agricultural productivity. Overall, it enables 
the food insecure households to access food for urgent consumption during hardship 
times through existing markets as a mitigating measure to manage shocks that normally 
come with sudden price surges exacerbated by inaccessibility.  Second, it provides “seed 
capital” to transit the hardship through own production for home consumption.  
 
(c) Component 3: Support to Project Implementation Arrangements (US$ 0.5 million)  
 
Page  3
This component will finance the administrative costs of the implementing NGOs, 
operation costs, technical assistance (including furniture and logistics), training, and 
purchase of goods and equipment for the project implementation units (PIUs). It will also 
provide furniture and logistics for the technical assistants in the PIUs.  The component 
will therefore support the strengthening of public structures for coordination at the 
different levels (National and County) as well as the costs related to the management of 
the different activities. Specifically, the project management costs, monitoring and 
evaluation (M&E) and information and communication services will be funded under this 
component.  The component will also fund a half day workshop to provide an overview 
of the Banks’s safeguards policies and the draft ESAF for South Sudan especially OP/BP 
4.10 to ensure that the presence of indigenous tribes are identified and appropriate plan is 
developed.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project will be located in the following Counties: Yambio (Western Equatoria State); 
Murobo (Central Equatoria State); Raja (Western Behr el Ghazal State); Moyum (Unity 
State); Tonj North (Warrap State) and Tonga (Upper Nile State)   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (AFTTR) 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No adverse environmental impacts expected that cannot be effectively mitigated by 
known measures. Since the project is being prepared under OP8.00 (Emergency 
Recovery Assistance), the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will undertake an 
assessment to determine the presence of IPs in the project locations within two months of 
the project. If there is presence of IPs, the guidelines in the draft S. Sudan ESAF will be 
applied and an IPDP prepared.   
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not anticipated   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
national draft framework for environment and social safeguard has been provided to 
the South Sudan Land Commission and the MEWCT. While this will bring about overall 
national coordination and oversight of the safeguard policy, the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Forestry has in place a designated Safeguard Officer.  
 
While the Ministry of Agriculture’s capacity to manage the safeguards is weak, it is 
committed under other similar projects funded by MDTF to enhance their capacity. To 
support the ministry in the assessment and implementation of social and environmental 
concerns, the World Bank environment and social staff has prepared a draft 
Environmental and Social Assessment Framework. It is realistic to assume that the 
consultation process led by the Ministry of Environment, Wildlife Conservation and 
Tourism will not be finalized by the time the project is implemented; in the interim, the 
draft ESAF will provide the designated Safeguards Officer in the ministry sufficient 
guidance for environmental and social assessments and mitigation. As part of the overall 
efforts to mainstream environment and social safeguard in the MAF’s program, training 
of the key staff and NGOs both at the national, state and locality level will be conducted.  
 
In parallel, set of Guidelines specific to the agriculture is in draft and will help the 
Environment Specialist in the MoAF apply more discrete guidance insuch areas as 
pesticide application.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/30/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/30/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
No 
Page  6
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Christine E. Cornelius 
08/28/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab 
08/28/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Colin P. Rees 
08/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/28/2008 
Comments:   
