Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3500 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/02/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sudan 
Project ID: P110588 
Project Name: Providing Better Incentives to Poor Gum Arabic Producers 
Task Team Leader: Assaye Legesse 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 5, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%);General education sector 
(20%);Animal production (20%);Other social services (20%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
3.00 
 
Multi-donor Trust Fund for North Sudan 
4.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project’s overall objective is to provide better incentives to poor small-scale gum arabic 
producers. Two specific objectives have been identified: a) to support the implementation and 
supervision of the export marketing decontrol process; and b) to demonstrate innovative ways to 
increase gum arabic production profitably, improve the efficiency of its marketing and combat 
environmental degradation through community and private sector-led activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will feature three main components:  
 
Component 1: Technical Assistance to Support the Decontrol Process  
 
The project will finance technical assistance to prepare Terms of Reference for the regulatory 
entity. This regulatory body would be independent of government; it would monitor the 
marketing decontrol process, foster private sector participation in the development of the 
industry and coordinate provision of public goods to support producers.  
Page  2
Additional technical assistance will be financed by the project to a) support the work of the 
regulatory entity once established (training and specific TA support); b) conduct studies aiming 
to improve gum arabic sector knowledge (on taxation, domestic market structure, gum 
promotion, exploration of new markets, research); and c) assist Government of National Unity 
(GNU) in accessing carbon finance funds (develop carbon finance proposals, evaluate project 
feasibility, measure baselines, establish the financial and administrative processes required to 
enter into carbon sequestration contracts, develop partnersh
ips between communities/producers’ 
organizations andthe private sector for the provision of technical assistance and the establishment 
of joint strategies).  
 
Component 2: Gum Arabic Development Investment Funds - A Pilot  
 
This component will aim to demonstrate innovative ways to expand gum arabic production 
base, and improve gum marketing through linking producers to the private sector. It will have 
two windows:  
 
a)  A community fund will provide matching grants to finance subprojects designedby 
community groups and small-scale producers’ associations to support gum arabic production and 
marketing (soil preparation, procurement of seedlings and tapping equipment, community 
nurseries, construction of storage capacity, transport, legal TA to prepare contracts with 
processors, marketing/management training).The project will finance technical assistance to 
mobilize communities and producers’ associations and help them identify and design 
subprojects;  
 
b)  A private sector fund: gum arabic traders, processors and/or exporters will have access to 
matching grants to procure technical assistance to a) conduct feasibility studies to develop gum 
arabic production projects (plantations, storage) with communities and/or producers’ 
associations, b) get trained on traceability, business certification, c) promote gum products on 
national, regional and international markets, and d) access carbon finance funds.  
 
In addition, direct basic support will be provided to FNC in selected States and Localities to 
support project implementation - including support to increase planting material production in 
Forest National Corporation (FNC) nurseries - and supervision.  
 
Because of the limited project total budget and the need to have a clear impact, the community 
fund will be implemented in selected Localities (see component 3) of North Kordofan, South 
Kordofan and Blue Nile. These gum arabic producing regions are among the poorest in Sudan; it 
is believed that improved and stable revenues from gum arabic would have an important positive 
impact on the food security level in these areas.  
 
Component 3: Project Implementation  
 
Given the nature of the program; i.e. activities will be implemented at the national level and in 
selected localities in three states, a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be formed and based 
Khartoum to coordinate project activities. Project execution at community level will be the 
responsibility of Locality Implementation Units (LIUs).  
Page  3
Within the three target states, the project will be implemented in Localities where the MDTF-
funded ‘Community Development’ and ‘Livestock Production and Marketing’ projects are 
active. These on going interventions finance primarily community-based interventions and have 
already established Locality Implementation Units. As much as possible, the project will benefit 
from the operational, procurement and financial management capacity developed in the existing 
LIUs.  
 
This project being partly of a pilot nature, the design features include innovative and flexible 
approaches to realizing the objective. Close monitoring, of both processes and impact of the 
program will have to be carried out so that the lessons are used to guide project implementation 
and possible project replication.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will primarily benefit poor gum Arabic producers in selected Localities of North 
Kordofan, South Kordofan and Blue Nile states. Pilot sites will be decided during the early 
stages of implementation.   
 
E.  B
orrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s capacity to implement social and environmental safeguards is very weak and 
will benefit from the application of guidance developed and used in earlier Bank-funded 
interventions, including the Community Development Fund and Improving Livestock Production 
and Marketing Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTCS) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will support both the production and marketing of gum Arabic, and aims at 
combating environmental degradation through community and private sector-led activities.  
 
Nevertheless, for the pilot sites an Environmental Management Framework will be used to 
enhance protection measures and sustainable practices (especially on fragile/traditional lands 
where there is potential for conflicts and to determine institutional arrangements).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/24/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Enivronment Management Framework (EMF) date is -4/30/2008.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Assaye Legesse 
04/02/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
04/02/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/02/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
