Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2165 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sudan 
Project ID: P099758 
Project Name: "NS: Public Service Reform, Decntralization and Capacity Building 
(PSCAP)                                         " 
Task Team Leader: Stephen N. Ndegwa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 23, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);Decentralization (P);Other public 
sector governance (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
16.00 
 
Multi-donor Trust Fund for North Sudan 
8.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
24.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the project is to improve administrative structures and processes in light 
of the decentralization policy, in order to yield measurable impact on provision of services to the 
citizens of Sudan. This is expected to be achieved through a phased approach actualized through 
sequenced short- and medium-term projects to strengthen cross-cutting public sector 
management systems 
–
particularly for human resources management and public financial 
management – following the principles of transparency, accountability and performance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The instrument is a two-year Technical Assistance Grant; this is appropriate for a number of 
reasons. At the moment, grants under a multi-donor trust fund (MDTF) established to help 
finance the reconstruction and development needs of post-civil war Sudan are the only facilities 
available for the World Bank to support capacity building in Sudan. Strategically, a two-year 
grant is preferred in order to test and rapidly build readiness for the Government to fully 
implement decentralization over a medium term, under programmatic support. This project is the 
Page  2
initial, short-term intervention to test the feasibility of such a support program and to lay a 
foundation for more ambitious reforms.  
 
The present project has four components, including support to a Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU), necessitated by low capacity in a post-conflict environment and the lack of complex-
project implementation experience:  
 
Component I: 
Restructuring and realigning ministries, and review and upgrading of 
human resource management policies and processes to align with decentralization;  
 
Component II: 
Support for the effective implementation of fiscal decentralization by 
enhancing the intergovernmental fiscal framework, practices and monitoring systems;  
 
Component III: Building the capacity of national public sector management training institutions 
to support skills-building consistent with required competencies; and,  
 
Component IV: Supporting the PIU to manage and monitor the project and to support the 
formulation of subsequent phases of the support program.  
 
The Task Team has spelt out which sub-components and activities would be in the first phase 
(this project) and a second (to be fully designed at mid-term). The team decided it is inadvisable 
to design in detail the next phase 
–
only broad outline for phases beyond the first are given. In 
phase one, the team will select a small number of items to focus on (e.g. for Component I, 
restructuring will focus on only one ministry and two service processes – with immediate 
appreciable impact by public – before scaling up in subsequent phases; and stabilizing 
andsecuring the current HR data system and upgrading HR policies and manuals before full-
scale computerization in follow-on phases). Phase I activities will be selected to have an 
immediate observable impact for citizens and firms in order to build greater demand for change.  
 
Projects in subsequent phases will be designed to build on results and lessons from this initial 
project, scaling up and out into areas that further improve broader public management (e.g. 
modernizing public finance management, re-sizing and re-organizing the public service, and 
enhancing policy analysis), and, eventually, consolidate decentralized governance (e.g. via 
strengthening local planning and budgeting, designing investment funds, etc.). These are critical 
and urgent yet beyond the current capacity, institutional capital, and revealed political 
commitment.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Khartoum, Sudan   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not applicable   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/05/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen N. Ndegwa 
03/05/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
03/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anand Rajaram 
03/05/2008 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
