Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2009 
Report No.:  AC4256
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Sudan 
Project ID:  P112096 
Project Name:  Basic Education Project 
Task Team Leader:  Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-Gammal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 6, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Multi-donor Trust Fund for North Sudan 
15.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project contributes to achieving universal basic education by 2015, one of Sudan’s 
main goals in the education sector. By providing direct support to four of the states with 
low enrolment rates in Sudan, the project contributes to moving the enrolment rates in 
these to close their gap with the national average. The Project also supports the capacities 
in these states by financing teacher training which contributes to the quality of education.  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to a) contribute to building the physical 
and human capacity that will contribute to closing the basic education enrolment gap in 
selected states in northern Sudan, and b) contribute to improving national effective 
learning in basic education.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will include overall system support, namely by supporting the process of 
updating the basic education curriculum and initiating a process to discuss the upgrading 
of a general framework for Faculties of Education (FoEs) curriculum. At the service 
delivery level, the project will work in four states to support the expansion and physical 
upgrading of basic education facilities in selected localities, support in-service teacher 
training for a selected number of teachers in the four states, and enhance the physical 
Page  2
capacity of the Teacher Training Institutes (TTIs). Training will focus on teachers of the 
first grades and aim at enhancing reading skills and basic numeracy. The project will 
have a three year implementation period and an estimated cost of US$15million.  
 
The project will include three components: a) increasing access to basic education in 
selected localities in the four states b) contributing to enhancing the quality of basic 
education in Sudan; and c) developing monitoring, evaluation and project management 
systems.  
 
Component (1): Enhancing Access to Basic Education (US$5.006 million) will support 
the rehabilitation and addition of classrooms, offices or teachers’ housing to existing 
schools, and the construction of new schools in selected localities in the four states. The 
component will focus on areas that will boost girls’ education by using criteria that favors 
areas where interventions will enhance girls’ access. The physical upgrading of these 
education facilities, as well as contributing to motivating teachers to stay in remote areas 
by constructing or upgrading some teacher housing facilities, should have a positive 
impact on retention rates in the medium and long term.  
 
Three localities in each state (except for North Kordufan where the component will 
work in only two localities) have been identified. The schools where the component will 
work have been finalized. The interventions will not necessarily be in the form of a full 
school construction.  In some cases, classrooms will be added, teachers housing, toilets 
etc. A full list of the types of interventions in every school has been compiled.  
 
Component (2): Contributing to enhancing the quality of basic education (US$ 7.49 
million). Under this component, the project will have three main sub-components:  
 
Component 2:1.  Curriculum reform (US$0.325million). The first sub-component of 
component two will support two activities. Firstly, funds will be provided for the 
evaluation of the basic education curriculum. The objective of assessing the basic 
education curriculum is to develop an initial draft of a national curriculum framework for 
discussion by both north and south Sudan. The basic education curriculum was developed 
in 1996. The quality and relevance of this curriculum is unclear especially in light of the 
CPA. This sub-component will support the evaluation of the existing curriculum by 
establishing subject specific committees and a steering committee to head this effort.  
 
Secondly, the sub-component will provide support for a forum to discuss the relevance 
of the pre-service teacher training curriculum. According to the policy introduced in the 
early 1990’s, primary school teachers in Sudan are expected to have a Bachelor of 
Education (B.ed) degree. The curriculum used by the Faculties of Education to train 
teachers in the B.ed program is unsatisfactory. The MoGE has been indicating that there 
is a lack of professional teaching skills amongst graduates of the FoEs. Finance will be 
provided for a multiday workshop to bring together deans of FoEs, professors in 
education and academic subjects, basic education experts, and teacher training experts. 
This group will discuss the perceived strengths and weaknesses of the curriculum of the 
Page  3
FoEs, its relationship with the basic education curriculum, and come up with a process to 
develop a new framework for this curriculum.  
 
Component 2:2  
In-service teacher training (US$3.097million).  The second sub-
component of the second component will provide in-service training in Arabic, English, 
mathematics, and core programs to about 12,300 primary school teachers in the four 
states. Training modules in the four subjects were developed by the “In-service Education 
Training Institute (ISETI)” of the MoGE. The modules are organized with about four 
hours of training per day. The purpose of the in-service training is to improve the 
knowledge and abilities of teachers to analyze the curriculum and to better instruct 
students in listening, reading, speaking and writing in the subject areas. Training is to be 
provided to teachers with only secondary education as their subject content knowledge is 
weak and to university trained teachers without significant exposure to instructing young 
children. The length of the training varies from 15 to 21 days across the states. A pre and 
post training questionnaire will be administered to understand and measure the 
effectiveness of the training.  
 
Component 2-3 
 Physical upgrading to a number of TTIs in the four states 
(US$4.067million) to increase the capacity of training and enhance the learning 
environment in these institutes. The TTIs to be supported by the project have been 
identified. Those are Al-Dalang TTI in South Kordufan (rehabilitations and additions), 
Ganoub Al-Roseirus TTI in Blue Nile (new), Al-Obied TTI in North Kordufan (additions 
and rehabilitation), and Port Sudan TTI in Res Sea State (new). These institutes are the 
main and only in-service teachers training in the states. They are usually staffed with a 
director and a teaching staff of around 6-8 trainers. The trainers’ force in each state 
includes more trainers who usually have other jobs in the education system (like 
instructors or head teachers). Those are normally mobilized whenever a training event is 
organized. These trainers are trained by the ISETI in Khartoum and are familiar with the 
training modules available, each in his/her subject matter.  
 
Component 3: Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management (US$2.35million). This 
component will support a mechanism to ensure that a baseline is collected in the areas of 
interventions, and project’s monitoring and outcome indicators are assessed. The 
component will also finance the project coordination teams at the central and states’ level 
as well as operational costs related project implementation.  
 
Operational Costs: The component will also finance the implementation structures at the 
central and states’ levels. Those financed will all be out of the public service and 
recruited on competitive basis. Each state has its share of the operations cost added to its 
total budget as presented in annex  
 
Operational costs will also cover the management costs of the CDF and the Engineering 
Office in Red Sea States, operational travel expenses and the costs of workshops during 
the project. A compensation structure for project staff will be developed as part of the 
OPM for the project. The OPM will also include all procedures regarding travel costs, 
workshops Â¦etc.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in selected communities in the four states of Red Sea, 
South Kordufan, North Kordufan, and Blue Nile.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hassan Mohamed Hassan (AFTCS) 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
BP4.01 is triggered because of the school construction component and the possibility that 
this component could cause negative environmental impacts.  
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been developed 
based on the Community Development Fund’s (CDF) Operations Manual. The OM will 
include the process and procedures for land acquisition and compensation agreement will 
be determined on a case by case basis between the communities and the government 
agency acquiring the land. The project staff will ensure that a “hand-over” note is in place 
prior to construction of any facility. The communities under the CDF will be responsible 
to manage the construction component in three of the four states. The same process and 
formats are now being introduced to the Engineering Office in the Red Sea State that will 
be assigned the responsibility to manage the infrastructure component for that state. The 
ESMF: (a) establishes clear procedures and methodologies for environmental and social 
assessment, reviews, acquisition of community land, approval and implementation of 
investments to be financed under the project; (b) specifies appropriate roles and 
responsibilities, and outlines the necessary reporting procedures, for managing and 
monitoring environmental and social concerns related to project investments; and (c) 
helps to determine the training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to 
successfully implement the provisions of the ESMF.  
Page  5
No resettlements (voluntary or involuntary) are expected under the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Government of National Unity's (GoNU) capacity to manage safeguard policies is 
relatively weak. However, under MDTF, other projects have developed systems and 
capacities to manage the environmental and social mitigations. During preparation the 
project built on experiences of the existing projects' interventions and has worked on 
developing needed and relevant capacities to the project staff.  As the construction 
component will be entirely delegated to the Community Development Fund (CDF) in 
three states, and to the Engineering Office (EO) in Red Sea, the project will utilize the 
experienced staff from CDF to support the emerging environmental and social 
interventions. The CDF has developed an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework which it is currently using in its operations. Assessment and support has been 
provided to the EO in Red Sea State to ensure the adaptation of the existing CDF system 
to identify and mitigate potential negative environmental and social impacts. To date no 
safeguards issues have been identified in the large number of schools that the CDF has 
supported.  
 
The project is supporting activities in existing schools, replacing makeshift classrooms 
and additional facilities with new construction.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/26/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/11/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/24/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  6
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  7
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-Gammal 
04/23/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hassan Mohamed Hassan 
03/25/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab 
03/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr John A. Elder 
04/17/2009 
Comments:   
