Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/04/2008 
Report No.:  AC3389
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Swaziland 
Project ID:  P095232 
Project Name:  Local Government Project (SLGP) 
Task Team Leader:  David G. De Groot 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: August 14, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
16.10 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
11.20
11.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity and resource 
mobilization of Swazi local governments, communities and other service providers to 
deliver and to sustain basic services for their residents.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1- Rapidly Growing Settlement (RGS) Grants (US$4.1 million):  
 
This component will provide financial resources to eligible communities in rapidly 
growing human settlements, including peri-
urban areas and “growth points,”for critical 
services and infrastructure and to create incentives for communities and their partners to 
improve their capacity to plan, implement and manage development projects.  
 
Component 2- Sustainable Local Government (SLG) Grants (US7.9million):  
 
To provide financial resources to eligible Town Councils and Town Boards to improve 
their capacity to plan, implement and sustain key public services   Upon achieving 
creditworthiness, qualifying local governments and sub-national entities may be eligible 
for larger matching loans provided under Component 3 of the Project. 
Page  2
Component 3- Municipal Finance Matching Loan (US$15.3 million):  
 
This component will provide matching loans to creditworthy sub national entities, 
initially expected to include the two cities (Mbabane and Manzini) and the Swaziland 
Water Services Corporation to raise debt finance on the domestic capital markets for 
capital investments and to facilitate the emergence of municipal/sub national finance in 
Swaziland with no recourse to central government guarantees. Assistance also will be 
provided to MOF in finalizing the inter-governmental fiscal transfer system and defining 
and implementing appropriate systems for monitoring sub-sovereign debt.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in urban areas with a focus on Rapidly Growing 
Settlements (RGS).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential adverse environmental and social impacts will only occur under component 1 
which will finance the construction of sub-projects such as neighborhood care points, 
roads, bridges as well as water supply and sanitation facilities. Potential adverse 
environmental and social impacts might include loss of vegetation, soil and water 
pollution, soil erosion, and spread of diseases such as HIV/AIDS and malaria (from 
standing water) and adverse health impacts on humans and animals due to poor waste 
management. None of these impacts will be irreversible.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect and/or long term impacts due to sub-project activities are not anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
This project has been prepared in the context of Swaziland's decentralization process, 
thus responding to those requirements. Any alternatives would be addressed in the 
context of the environmental and social screening process.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), including guidance on dealing with issues related to medical waste management 
and HIV/AIDS dated February 25, 2008; and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) dated December 2007. The project will make provisions for environmental and 
social management support to strengthen the capacity of the National Sub-Project Review 
Committees, RGS Sub-Project Review Committees; and RGS Community Development 
Communities as these are new institutional structures requiring training.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders consulted during the preparation of the ESMF included responsible 
ministries, the Swaziland Environment Authority, local Chiefs, the National Emergency 
Response for HIV/AIDS, and several town boards. Once the sub-projects have been 
identified, consultations will be carried out with the beneficiaries and potentially affected 
persons; the ESMF includes provisions in this regard.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/29/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/27/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/29/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  4
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David G. De Groot 
04/07/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
04/08/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
04/08/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
04/08/2008 
Comments:   
