Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3613 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P107790 
Project Name: Health Sector Strategy Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Pia Helene Schneider 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 5, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health 
(S);HIV/AIDS (S);Injuries and non-communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the project will be to improve the health status of the population through 
improvements in the performance of the health sector, focusing on financial sustainability and 
efficiency in health care financing and production. Indicators are to be developed during the 
project preparation. The specific objective of the project will be:  
 
Improved financial sustainability, efficient use of human resources and access to better quality 
health care   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The new Bank project will support the process of strategy formulation and the implementation of 
related sub-
strategies in line with the Bank’s comparative advantages as outlined in the new WB 
health sector strategy. The project would therefore finance a 5-year Program of Work designed 
around the objectives of the development and implementation of a comprehensive sector 
strategy, and an expected focus on three of the MoH six priority areas: (i) health financing 
Page  2
reform, (ii) hospital restructuring, and (iii) human resource reform.  A PHRD grant has been 
applied for to finance technical support to the comprehensive health sector strategy development.  
 
Component 1: Develop and implement sustainable health financing reforms: This component 
(US$4 million) will build up on financing reform started under the ongoing CBHP (hospital BBP 
and capitation payment reform). In close collaboration with USAID and other donors, it will 
support the scale up of reforms that have been proofed successful in pilot tests and support health 
financing reforms as outlined in the Government strategy. The focus will be on scaling up 
capitation payment for PHC, the benefit package in hospitals and formalizing informal payments.  
 
Component 2: Rationalize the hospital sector:  This component (US$5 million) will finance the 
development of a hospital rationalization plan (Masterplan) that improves the efficient allocation 
of modern hospital care across the country. Thereby, it will support the implementation of the 
2006 national program for strengthening primary health care, reducing the number of hospital 
beds and introduction of family physicians model with the latter being supported under CBHP. 
Building up on work started under the CBHP, a hospital Masterplan with detailed 
implementation plans will be developed to improve access to care and efficient allocation of 
resources. A selected number of hospitals will be restructured and modernized following the 
Masterplan recommendations.  
 
Component 3: Human resource reform in health sector: This component (US$1 million) will 
support an analysis of the current human resource allocation in the health sector and develop a 
sub-strategy for HR capacity improvement.  Implementation of action plans will support the 
ongoing public sector wage reform process, improve efficient allocation of staff and support the 
continuous education of medical personnel, including adherence to modern treatment protocols.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Various location in Tajikistan.  
 
No new construction is planned. A selected number of hospitals will be restructured and 
modernized.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not yet determined   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASDI) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP 4.01 is triggered because of civil works and possible disposal of medical wastes 
associated with modernization of selected hospitals.   A consultant will do the comprehensive 
assessment, Medical waste plan and the development of an action plan by November.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
n/a   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
n/a   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
n/a   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
n/a   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
n/a   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
n/a .  There will be no new construction or extension of facilities that could involve land 
acquisition   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
n/a   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
n/a   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
n/a   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/26/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
n/a   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Pia Helene Schneider 
09/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
09/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mamta Murthi 
09/23/2008 
Comments:   
