Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4169 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/10/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P097176 
Project Name: National Quality Education Project 
Task Team Leader: Scherezad Joya Monami Latif 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 9, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: February 18, 2010 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall project development objective would be to strengthen governance and management 
of the sector through the establishment of a national assessment center, promotion of monitoring 
and evaluation and development of an institutional framework for reform. This would lead to 
increased equity regarding access to higher education institutions and the development of tools 
which would better measure improvements in the quality of education in the country. The 
proposed program takes a sectoral view and would be a specific investment lending operation 
that finances key areas of management and reform laying the foundation for improved teaching 
and learning.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed new program would be aligned to the National Strategy for Education 
Development (NSED) and the Joint Country Support Strategy (JCSS) and focus on: (i) building 
on lessons learned in general education sub sectors in improving the quality of and access to 
schooling from Grades 1-11; (ii) improving management of the education system as a whole 
including the development of an institutional framework for reform. The proposed program 
would be a basic SWAp based on the NSED (government’s sector wide strategy) and adhering to 
Page  2
the joint donor Country Support Strategy (JCSS) and prepared and implemented side by side 
with the FTI activities. The program would also share the following: (i) a jointly costed Action 
Plan with separate budgets per financier; (ii) donor coordination facilitated by GoT; (iii) a shared 
framework for Key Performance Indicators (KPIs); and, (iv) the use of MoE departments (with 
TA support) for implementation and a focus on lessons learned from past programs in the sector. 
Program preparation of the proposed NQEP would be linked to the preparation for FTI -3 
funding (effective if approved by end 2009).  
 
Component 1. The National Testing Center (NTC). The objective of the NTC is to 
institutionalize fair and transparent assessments that will be used for improving learning 
outcomes and addressing issues of equity.  The main goals of the NTC will be to administer 
reliable and valid forms of assessment including: University admission tests, summative 
assessments at selected grade levels, and sample-based assessments.  These tests will be used to 
support the MoE's goal of improving the quality of teaching and learning and introducing more 
equitable mechanisms in the entrance to universities. In terms of funding, it was agreed that 
donors and the state budget would provide funding for the NTC establishment and its operations 
during the first 4 years on sliding scale basis. Testing fees for university entrance exams would 
be collected from the first year of test administration. Gradually, the collected fees would 
substitute donors and state budget funding. This would ensure that the NTC would gradually 
become financially independent. Its budget would be formed out of the test fees and payments 
for the additional services under the contracts with external agencies. NTC financial statements, 
regardless of the funding source, would be subject for the annual independent financial audit 
funded by the NTC. The NTC would be an activity that is multi donor funded with the Bank and 
GOT in the lead and the Open Society Initiative and UNDP as partners.  
 
Component 2. Monitoring and Evaluation The objective of the Monitoring and Evaluation 
component would be to establish a coordinated unit to provide reliable information and analysis 
to the education sector thus enabling national policy makers and educators to make informed 
decisions based on relevant and readily accessible information.  Special attention would be paid 
to providing research addressing the gender and urban-rural disparities within the education 
system.  
 
Component 3. Policy Reform. The objective of this component would be to strengthen the 
linkage between program implementation and policy development and to build the capacity of 
the MoE and its stakeholders for effective policy making ultimately resulting in more rational 
education policies. Experience in social sector contexts similar to that of Tajikistan has shown 
that it can be more difficult to implement consistently and effectively in an environment in which 
there is no government owned institutional framework for reform. The implementation of policy 
reform first requires the development of a reform strategy which is a medium term process that 
requires consultation and political vision and will. This component would support MoE in areas 
where there has been minimal policy reform and thereby expand the scope of the NSED to 
include more substantive country owned strategies. These would include (but are not limited to), 
school construction, technical vocational education and training and higher education.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ministry of Education, Government of Tajikistan   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/15/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Scherezad Joya Monami Latif 
03/09/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/09/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mamta Murthi 
03/10/2009 
Comments:   
