Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/16/2009 
Report No.:  AC4080
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P099840 
Project Name:  Public Financial Management Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Svetlana I. Proskurovska 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 9, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Managing for 
development results (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.33 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID) 
3.45 
 
EC: European Commission 
2.36 
 
Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund 
0.97
8.11 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the APL-1 is to establish basic processes for a more 
efficient and transparent management of public expenditures and develop adequate 
institutional capacity to support future implementation and sustained functioning of an 
automated financial management information system (FMIS).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have three components: Component 1. Building Capacity for Public 
Financial Management; Component 2. Streamlining Core Budget Management 
Procedures; and Component 3. Preparation for Automation of Core PFM Operations.  
 
The first component will (i) support to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) in managing PFM 
reforms at a strategic and operational level; (ii) help improve MoF’s institutional 
capacity, through optimizing its organizational structure in line with reformed business 
Page  2
processes; (iii) develop capacity for management of training, creating a training 
curriculum that meets the PFM capacity needs country-wide, and delivery of training to 
the core group of officials responsible for public financial management; and (iv) support 
effective Project fiduciary management and project audit.  
 
The second component will (i) support improvements of budget preparation; (ii) assist 
with developing and implementing the integrated chart of accounts and budget 
classification system aligned with international standards; (iii) help improve procedures 
for budget execution through the treasury system; and (iv) help review and improve 
primary and secondary legislation regulating PFM areas.  
 
The third component will (i) help establish and develop capacity of MoF’s IT Center; 
(ii) assist with modernizing the MoF's ICT infrastructure, including upgrades of the 
existing information systems and ICT equipment; (iii) help develop MoF’s IT capacity 
(technical training and study visits for the MoF, Treasury andITCenter staff); (iv) assist 
with preparation of technical requirements and bidding documents for a future FMIS; and 
(v) advise on establishment of a common ICT/network infrastructure.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of 
Tajikistan, in Dushanbe.  The project will not envisage constraction or rehabilitation, 
relocation of people or land acquisition. The main focus of the project is institutional 
reforms in the Ministry of Finance, Treasury and core budget organizations, as well as 
capacity building to operate the modernized and automated financial management 
information system. The Project will support some minor refurbishment of buildings in 
the MoF and the Training Center. The refurbishment will involve painting of walls and 
laying the cable. No other civil works are expected.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No safeguards will be triggered by Project activities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No adverse impacts are envisaged as a result of Project activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not relevant   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Page  4
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Svetlana I. Proskurovska 
03/10/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
03/11/2009 
Comments:   
