Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/27/2008 
Report No.:  AC3696
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P112157 
Project Name:  EMERGENCY FOOD SECURITY AND SEED IMPORTS PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Bekzod Shamsiev 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (65%);Animal production (35%) 
Theme:  Nutrition and food security (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to increase domestic food production and reduce the 
potential loss of livestock to help at least 28,000 of the poorest households in a timely 
manner to reduce the negative impact of high and volatile food prices.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will be composed of three components: (i) Support for Agricultural Inputs - a 
seed and fertilizer distribution component, (ii) Improvement of Livestock Health and 
Husbandry; and (iii) Project Management.  
 
•
Component A: Support for Agricultural Inputs (US$2.7 million equivalent). This 
component would support the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) administered program providing agricultural inputs in Tajikistan. The support 
would be provided in standard packages composed of high quality seed for winter wheat 
and fertilizer. These inputs need to be distributed at the latest by October of 2008, in time 
for the winter planting season. The import of higher yielding wheat varieties would help 
farmers to take advantage of fall rains in raising a successful winter crop. As 
demonstrated by the similar (drought) emergency package supplied back in 2001, it may 
Page  2
also help boost the country’s wheatyields and improve food security in the medium term. 
It is roughly estimated that an assistance package valued at some US$80 per household 
would be sufficient for supporting the winter wheat production of some 28,000 families. 
Eligibility for the assistance packages would be governed by criteria to be agreed among 
the Bank, the GoT and the FAO. The procurement, transport and distribution of the seed 
and fertilizer would be organized by FAO and contracted with international NGOs that 
have the logistics in place to deliver these packages to farm families.  
 
•
Component B: Improvement of Livestock Health and Husbandry (US$1.80 
million equivalent). As above, this component will support, through the provision of 
funding, the FAO administered program aimed at improving livestock health and 
husbandry. The funding would support the purchase of a package of veterinary services 
that would ensure that minimal vaccination and treatment of the most critical diseases 
and pests (worms) and the purchase of feed (mainly concentrates). As above, this aid 
would be targeted at the most vulnerable households based on criteria developed under 
the FAO program. It is roughly estimated that an assistance package valued at some 
US$250 per household would be sufficient and could be delivered for the livestock of 
some 7,000 families.  
 
•
Component C: Project Management (US$ 500,000 equivalent) will be allocated 
for project management costs incurred by FAO. This funding will also cover expenses 
such as program audit, the hiring of additional specialists, as well as training, monitoring 
and evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Tajikistan has an area of 143,000km2.  About 93 percent of the country is covered by 
mountains; the remaining 7 percent are available for arable crop production and represent 
about 960,000 hectares. Permanent pastures cover about 3.6 million hectares mainly in 
the piedmont areas of the country. Overall, arable land is in short supply with around 
0.15ha per capita, or 0.2ha per capita of the rural population. Much of the arable area is 
arid or semi-arid, and cropping is largely dependent on irrigation systems covering about 
720,000ha.  
 
Crops and Cropping patterns: Cotton is the dominant crop, contributing about 40 
percent of agricultural GDP, a quarter of export earnings, and one third of the State’s tax 
revenues. Following the collapse of other sectors as caused by the break-up of the former 
Soviet Union and the subsequent civil war; agriculture has played a vital role in providing 
the population with a social safety net of last resort.  
 
While the production of cotton has declined since Independence due, partly, to the 
switch by private farmers into grains, it continues to dominate arable cropping systems 
and is the major user of inputs. Wheat cultivation increased from an estimated 143,600 ha 
in 1991 to over 300,000 ha in 2002 and 320,700 ha in 2006, producing some 153,000 ton 
in 1991, 544,500 in 2002 and 640,000 ton in 2006, compared with over one million ton 
Page  3
annual requirements.   However, much of the cultivation of the wheat takes place on 
fairly steep hills that are unsuited for tillage which contributes to significant land erosion.  
 
Livestock: Livestock is the second pillar in the livelihoods of the rural population, 
especially small holders and landless households, both in terms of cash income and 
dietary needs. Reduction in the area of fodder crops, accompanied by the halt on import 
of feed grain and mixed fodder, is one of the main reasons for the very low productivity 
of livestock in the country. The rise in infectious diseases among the livestock population 
and absence of adequate animal health services, especially medication and vaccines, is 
further deteriorating the livestock sub-sector. While state farms have limited access to 
veterinary services, the private livestock sector has no access to such services. Although 
most of livestock production is now concentrated in private hands, pastures remain at the 
disposal of the state. Adequate arrangements to maximize the sustainable use of pasture 
are missing. The consequence is a significant overgrazing of pastures in proximity of 
settlements, while in more remote areas, pastures remain under used.  
 
Although most rural households have access to land, with an average plot size of 0.13 
ha per household, production provides only ab
out
50
percent of a family’sannual food 
needs. Food purchases made to supplement household production can consume up to 80 
percent of cash income of poorest households at the expense of other essential needs such 
as health care and education.  
 
The last detailed food security vulnerability study conducted in Tajikistan  identified 10 
percent of the rural population, currently estimated at around 500,000 people, to be 
chronically food insecure, subsisting consistently on a food intake lower than the 
minimum international standard of 2,100 kcal per person. Another 17 percent, or some 
850,000 people, are highly vulnerable to food insecurity, experiencing food gaps at 
different times of the year. Twenty seven percent, or 1.3 million, are classified as 
borderline cases, easily becoming food insecure when affected by shocks such as natural 
disasters, crop failures, debts, etc.  
 
The situation has grown worse with the drought of last summer and the very harsh 
winter of 2007/2008. The project will help provide added security for the production of 
wheat for the next winter crop. The ongoing FAO project supporting farmers with seed 
and veterinary services is nationwide. The project resources will be concentrated in areas 
where the remaining food stocks are most at risk and the vulnerability to another crop 
failure is thought of as being highest.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Activities under the project are not expected to generate significant and/or irreversible 
adverse environmental impacts and the project is therefore classified as Environmental 
Category B. Project components only involve the distribution of seed, fertilizer and 
livestock support assistance packages. In addition, the project will not involve any earth 
works, concrete works or construction of any sort.  
 
An Environmental Management Plan (OP4.01) will be prepared by FAO within two 
months of project effectiveness.  The EMP will be disclosed locally and in Infoshop, it 
will be discussed with stakeholders involved in the distribution of the packages under this 
project. The EMP is expected to address the following potential, but manageable risks:  
 
(i) 
Given that most wheat is currently grown on steep lands, the additional sowing of 
wheat on these lands may potentially increase soil erosion as opposed to leaving them in 
pasture.  
 
(ii) 
The provision of improved seed varieties, while having a beneficial impact on 
production, may potentially lead to less seed diversity which may displace local genetic 
diversity (adapted landraces of crops) and potential increases in susceptibility to pests and 
diseases.  
 
(iii) 
Support to livestock production and the resultant decrease in mortality rates may 
increase grazing intensity and add possibly exacerbate overgrazing of pastures near 
settlements after the project intervention.  
 
Other potential environmental risks under OP4.01 that were reviewed, but considered 
not to be raised by the project were:  
 
(i) 
The provision of high yielding seed varieties may lead farmers to adopt or 
increase their use of pesticides. However, this is considered highly unlikely given very 
limited access to pesticides in the local market and the inability of the poor farmer groups 
Page  5
to afford them even if available. In addition, the seed to be provided is for winter wheat, a 
crop which is much less at risk to pest infestation.  
 
(ii) 
The amount of vaccines/medicines to be provided is insufficient to raise issues of 
medical waste disposal. In addition, topical pesticides will not be provided in the support 
packages and therefore do not present the risks associated with this form of pesticide.  
 
The EMP will be disseminated to NGOs and beneficiary communities, and main issues 
related to the risks of ingestion of seed material, will be integrated in the overall training 
that is to be provided to the communities.  
 
With regard to social safeguards, the project is expected to have only positive impacts.  
The provision of the assistance packages to the most vulnerable groups, using an 
established implementation practice similar to other poverty alleviating initiatives, will 
enable project benefits to be delivered to the intended project beneficiaries. Initial criteria 
for the identification of eligible beneficiary households are provisionally the following:  
 
-
Female-headed; with no formal employment;  
 
-
Ownership of 0.20 ha or less of Presidential, or other lands;  
 
-
Ownership of less than five heads of livestock;  
 
-
Families with six or more children;  
 
-
Families with cash income of less than 25 Somoni per month or $7.20 (or five 
Somoni per family member)  
 
In addition to the undertaking of an environmental assessment (EA) and the introduction 
of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), the potential adverse environmental 
impacts of the project are lessened by the involvement of the FAO. The FAO is aware of 
the environmental issues described above and is taking measures to address them in the 
context of its ongoing agricultural inputs program. The WB team will work with FAO to 
ensure that the program fully complies with WB environmental and social Safeguards 
policies. The EA to be completed will determine whether any measures beyond those 
already being taken by the FAO are required. All mitigation measures will be laid out in 
the EMP, which will be agreed upon by the Government, FAO and WB.  
 
The component activities, in funding the assistance packages, will greatly improve 
household food security by (i) reducing adverse social consequences in terms of 
aggravating poverty and relying excessively on relief food supplies in 2008-2009; (ii) re-
allocating cotton land to cereal production would also help restore soil fertility thereby 
reversing a trend caused by over-cropping cotton; and (iii) minimizing the scope for the 
continuing distress sales of livestock by the poorest households. Emergency support for 
livestock production is also consistent with this objective if it allows farmers to preserve 
their existing livestock resources until current feed resources improve. Cereal production 
will increase farm incomes considerably, alleviating rural poverty and enhancing ability 
to produce food.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental concerns with distribution of the seed material and fertilizer are related to 
the possibility that the seed material might be used for consumption. The seed material 
procured under this trust fund will be in accordance with International Maize and Wheat 
Improvement Center CIMMYT quality standards for grain seeds. Seed material that has 
been treated with agro-chemicals will be dyed and will contain a repellent and/or emetic 
to prevent use of the seed material for consumption . The training (which will be 
provided as part of the assistance packages) will ensure that local populations are 
informed of the meaning of these dyes, and the repellents to avoid ingestion of possibly 
treated seed material.  
 
The distribution of seed material and fertilizer will be accompanied by a series of farmer 
trainings that will include the demonstration of proper seeding and fertilization 
techniques and proper seed bed preparation. These training have the objective of 
maximizing the impact of the packages and to ensure that there is no waste, that transport 
and handling, as well as application, are made in a safe and effective manner. The volume 
of seed to be provided will not represent any varietal risk, since the area sown from these 
seeds will represent less than 10% of irrigated areas.  
 
The environmental impact of the livestock support package will help reduce disease 
incidents within domestic livestock and may also slightly reduce the spread of brucellosis 
instance among wild ruminants that regularly get in contact with the domestic livestock 
population. The treatment of worms and common livestock pests will be undertaken 
using safe and widely accepted types of vaccines and medication in line with WHO 
guidelines.  
 
The livestock package will ensure minimal vaccination and improve control of the most 
critical diseases and pests affecting livestock. This package will also include the 
provision of feed, mainly in the form of concentrates that would complement the current 
ratios. Because of the poor production of adequate quantities of livestock fodder, typical 
winter rations are essentially composed of dry matter, missing crucial oligo-elements, 
minerals as well as proteins. Since the dry rations are typically short of minimum 
volumes required for the proper sustenance of the animal itself, pregnant heifers and 
cows emerge from wintering in a state of emaciation. Consequently, rates of early 
abortions are high and, if born, the offspring are weak and prone to disease and high 
mortality in the first month of life. These deficiencies are made worse by the high 
infection rate with Brucellosis. The simple proposed assistance package is likely to have 
a
dramatic effect on both adult animals and offspring at birth.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project team has analyzed several alternatives in the project design, including that of 
no intervention. Just as with the project, the alternative of “no project” would not have 
significant environmental impacts. The social risks, however, could be significant, 
especially for those most exposed to low food stocks. The project takes advantage of the 
Page  7
field expertise FAO has gained worldwide with similar operations. In its current design, 
the potential risks involved are mitigated by the implementation of the activities by a UN 
agency with years of experience in delivering advisory services, as well as seed material 
and livestock services to rural populations.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An exemption under 4.01 was approved regarding the timing of the environmental 
assessment. As required by the Trust Fund Grant Agreement and in line with World Bank 
Safeguard Policies and Procedures, an Environmental Assessment will be carried out by 
an independent local consultant within two months of the Trust Fund Grant Effectiveness 
Date. The consultant will prepare a brief Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which 
will include steps to mitigate any potential impacts identified, together with the 
respective monitoring plan, budgets, responsibility and schedules of execution. Potential 
adverse impacts will be mitigated primarily through capacity building and avoidance, 
rather than compensatory actions after the fact. In this regard, the EMP will contain an 
outline of a training program on sustainable land use practices, including information 
about full implications of mono-culture on soil fertility, land degradation and quality and 
quantity of crops. This training will be part of the overall training that farmers will 
receive as beneficiaries to maximize the impact of the seed and fertilizer package.  
 
In addition to the above measures, the inspectors from the national Ecological 
Inspection Service (which is responsible for enforcing the national regulations) will be 
included in the beneficiary training activities and will be consulted with regard to the 
development of training materials and guidelines.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary project beneficiaries will be small farmers and farm workers who, as a result 
of the drought last summer and the harsh winter of 2007/2008, find themselves 
precariously close to a food crisis should the current cropping season bring another shock 
to crops and livestock. The situation is well known and the project is in part a response 
the Flash Appeal made by NGOs and UN agencies in March and May of this year.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
An exemption under 4.01 was approved regarding the timing of the environmental 
assessment.  
 
As required by the Trust Fund Grant Agreement and in line with World Bank Safeguard 
Policies and Procedures, an Environmental Assessment will be carried out by an 
independent local consultant within two months of the Trust Fund Grant Effectiveness 
Date.  
 
The EMP will be disclosed locally and in Infoshop, it will be discussed with 
stakeholders involved in the distribution of the packages under this project.  
 
The EMP will be disseminated to NGOs and beneficiary communities, and main issues 
related to the risks of ingestion of seed material, will be integrated in the overall training 
that is to be provided to the communities.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Page  9
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bekzod Shamsiev 
05/26/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
05/27/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
05/27/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
05/27/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Holger A. Kray 
05/27/2008 
Comments:   
