Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4307 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/23/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tajikistan 
Project ID: P115953 
Project Name: ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOOD SECURITY AND SEED IMPORTS 
Task Team Leader: Bekzod Shamsiev 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (80%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
7.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed operation would have the following combination of objectives to: (i) increase 
domestic food production to help at least 18,000 poorest households; (ii) improve the ability of 
poor households to deal with seed shortages due to bad crops; and (iii) promote private 
commercial farming in order to increase food production and diversification.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A 
–
Support for Agriculture Inputs.  Up to additional US$1.8 million financing will 
be included to finance the cost of imports of high quality seeds and fertilizer in time for 2009 
plantings in the severely food insecure areas identified by WFP Food Security Monitoring 
System.  It is estimated that a package valued at about US$80-100 per household would be 
sufficient for supporting food grain production for at least 18,000 families.  The selection criteria 
for project beneficiaries will remain the same: female headed households, and households with 
children under 5 years old.  Jamoat and district officials will compile beneficiary lists on this 
basis and these lists will be displayed publicly at Jamoat offices.  Local NGOs will be used to 
check the compliance with project selection criteria based on 5% sample of the beneficiary list in 
Page  2
each Jamoat, and will have to report acceptable levels of compliance before seed and fertilizer 
distribution.  A second check will be conducted after the aid distribution, on the same basis, to 
monitor the effectiveness of distribution.  Monthly pulse reports will be prepared to monitor aide 
disbursements and to note any ongoing problems with project implementation.  
 
Component D 
–
Community Seed Groups (Up to US$2.85 million).  This component will 
support institution building of about 65 Community Seed Groups (CSGs) for the benefit of, and 
to be run by, the rural poor located in the selected districts.  The project will set up women’s 
groups to engage them in growing cereals, as well as vegetables and other cash crops on the 
household plots for sale and own consumption.  The component will finance procurement of: (i) 
technical services to establish and maintain a revolving seed bank facility (with a subsequent 
sustainability benefit); (ii) purchases of quality seeds and fertilizer (with a subsequent increase in 
yields); and (iii) technical assistance to help CSGs market their surplus seeds (creating additional 
sources of income) in selected villages.  
 
Component E – Agro-Input Supply Market Development (Up to US$1.65 million). This 
component will attempt to develop a private network of agro-input dealers to supply Tajik 
farmers with quality inputs and technical knowledge that would increase farm incomes and 
reverse the low-input, low-output spiral.  This component will finance the following set of 
activities: (i) assessment of the needs of farmers and the agro-input demand and supply situation; 
(ii) identification of potential agro-input dealers and their training; (iii) organization of field 
demonstrations with improved technologies; (iv) production of technical brochures and conduct 
of public outreach to increase production and stimulate farmer demand for inputs; and (v) help to 
dealers to find supplies and credit, expand business, and provide extension services.  The dealers 
will be better trained and better equipped to improve the availability of quality inputs, 
technology and value-added services for farmers.  
 
Component F – Project Management.  Up to additional US$0.7 million financing will be 
included to help coordination of the new activities and the fiduciary functions of the Center for 
Managing Projects on Cotton Farm Debt Resolution and Sustainable Cotton Sector Development 
(PIU).  The PIU will require some additional staff and equipment and financing of additional 
operating expenses to carry out these additional activities.  The project will finance incremental 
staff, consultants, operating costs, technical assistance and training, M&E activities, special 
studies and impact assessments, information dissemination and annual audits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The project will be implemented by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
(FAO) and Center for Managing Projects on Cotton Farm Debt Resolution and Sustainable 
Cotton Sector Development (PMU).  The FAO has experience in implementing the initial project 
EMP and is going to be responsible for the safeguards issues for the project AF. Before appraisal 
the Bank team will conduct an environmental supervision mission on the implementation of the 
EMP for the initial project and to evaluate their safeguards capacities, deciding if further TA is 
needed.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Asyl Undeland (ECSSD) 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The existing EMP for the initial project was reviewed and updated, including safeguards 
issues for the new project activities. The revised EMP includes: steps to mitigate identified 
potential adverse impacts; respective monitoring plan; budgets; responsibility and schedules of 
execution.  Environmental impacts will be mitigated mostly through capacity building and 
avoidance activities. In this regard, the EMP contains information dissemination and a training 
program on sustainable land use practices, on basic requirements on pesticides and fertilizers 
handling and storage, Integrated Pest Management, as well as field demonstrations with 
improved crop production and agrochemicals usage technologies.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The project triggers OP 4.09 because Component E has implications for the purchase and 
greater use of pesticides by Tajik farmers (the project will not directly support purchase of 
pesticides).  Among other activities, the Component E supports training for agro-input dealers in 
the safe use of pesticides, integrated pest management, and agrochemical usage technologies.   
Thus the EMP was revised so as to contain a new chapter on pest management.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
There will be no expropriation or acquisition of land, and concomitantly no involuntary 
resettlement of persons. The project therefore does not trigger OP4.12.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/24/2009 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The relavant studies have now been completed   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bekzod Shamsiev 
03/25/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/23/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
04/23/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
