Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/12/2009 
Report No.:  AC4250
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P115801 
Project Name:  Community and Basic Health Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Pia Helene Schneider 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Nutrition and food security (S);Population and 
reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original Project Development Objective would remain the same, i.e. to increase 
access to, utilization of, and patient satisfaction with health services in project-supported 
areas, and to build capacity and efficiency at national, oblast and rayon levels in 
administering a basic package of health benefits and introducing financing reforms in 
primary health care.  
 
Progress towards the development objectives supported by the additional financing 
would be monitored according to the following key performance indicators:  
 
•
Share of health in household expenditure (overall and by household wealth 
quintiles)  
 
•
Number of visits per capita per year to PHC facilities  
 
•
Number of doctors and nurses trained in family medicine in the project area   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing is intended to: (i) enable the Ministry of Health to finance the 
completion of the original project investments and activities which otherwise could not 
Page  2
be completed due a financing gap resulting from higher than expected construction and 
operational costs; and (ii) scale up and expand activities to maximize the development 
impact of the project.  At the same time, the Environmental Category Rating for CBHP is 
being upgraded from C to B, in order to address safeguards issues arising from 11 
Primary Health Care Centers built outside the original building footprint.  The new B-
rating will also apply to the AF.  
 
The additional grant funds would finance:  
 
a) 
Implementation of originally planned activities, including: (i) under Component 
A,  the conduct of surveys (household and meta-analysis), workshops and seminars, and 
communications campaign to inform the population about reforms, (ii) under Component 
B, investment into the health management information system (HMIS) to support 
capitation payment reforms including hardware, servers and connectivity based on the 
experience of PHC centers that were equipped under the CBHP; (iii) under Component 
C, the procurement of radio communication systems, medical furniture and equipment 
and solar voltaic panels (instead of generators) in PHC centers that have been renovated 
under the CBHP; and (iv) continuous support to project implementation.  
 
b) 
Scale up activities started under CBHP to ensure that  reforms are sustained, 
additional financing is required to finance goods and services for supporting:  (i) under 
Component A, technical assistance for the development of National Health Accounts 
(NHA) to monitor and evaluate the flow of health funds through the sector; and sub-
strategies to support the health sector strategy development, including the health sector 
masterplan to guide future infrastructure investment in health facilities and rationalize the 
health sector, and the Human Resource strategy to correct for current misallocation of 
staff; (ii) under Component B, scale up of capitation to all 41 rayons in two oblasts 
through additional investment in HMIS, and provision of IT assistance to Oblast Health 
Departments (OHD), MOH and hospitals; (iii) under Component C, repair of Sughd 
Oblast Health Department premises, renovation of 2 PHC facilities including local 
technical assistance for infrastructure, and scale up of family medicine training to staff of 
at least two additional rayons; and (iv) under Component D, fiduciary capacity building 
in financial management and procurement at the MOH and in two oblasts in accordance 
with recommendations of the Health Sector Fiduciary Assessment Report as well as 
repairs at MOH to create space for the fiduciary team.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Civil works envisaged under the Additional Financing will be limited to renovation and 
repairs of PHC centers in Khatlon and Sughd oblasts and offices for administrative staff 
working at the Oblast Health Departmetn and at the Ministry of Health.  It will be 
implemented according to the updated project-wide Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) and site-specific EMPs in the form of EMP Checklists.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The main complementary change is a change in environmental safeguard rating from 
Category C to B of CBHP for the construction of 11 PHC centers built outside the 
original footprint, as these buildings had to be vacated.  Under CBHP, 36 PHC centers 
underwent construction work:  
 
•
9
PHC centers were built within the existing building footprint,  
 
•
16
were constructed outside the previous building footprint, but within the same 
gated/fenced compound/territory and did not require new land acquisition,  
 
•
11
were built on new sites, because the old sites were located in rented premises 
of other facilities (schools, utility rooms, etc) that needed to be vacated.  The new sites 
were previously approved by the local authorities in compliance with the Oblast 
Development Plans, environmental evaluation and in accordance with the legislation of 
the Republic of Tajikistan.  According to the local authorities, no resettlement took place, 
construction was on territory that has not been populated before, was free of settlement, 
greenery or buildings and any economic activity. The land for these 11 new sites was 
allocated by the Decision of the Khukumats of the Rayons, based on four legal 
documents: (i) the Resolution of the Sate Sanitary and Epidemiological Supervision 
Center of the MOH; (ii) Proposal of the Environmental Protection Committee; (iii) 
Resolution of the Service for State Control over Environmental Projection and 
Management; and (iv) Siting Acts.  
 
The Khathlon Training Center was built in two existing buildings that used to be a large 
Rayon Health Center/Hospital that had been empty for several years.  The Training 
Center was not originally planned in the CBHP PAD. However, in 2006, the MOH 
decided to renovate the buildings and create a Regional Training Center for Family 
Medicine including classrooms, library, a smaller Rayon PHD center, and lodging for 
doctors and nurses who attend classes. All construction was done within the same 
footprint.  Based on a detailed review and legal assessment the Bank provided No 
Objection on Dec 1, 2006 to fund this Training Center under the CBHP. The 
Page  4
rehabilitation of the Training Center has been completed and it was officially opened by 
the Minister of Health in December, 2008.  
 
The safeguards change focuses on the 11 PHCs built on new sites which are about 
halfway completed.  Consequently, the Environmental Category Rating for the 
undisbursed portion of the CBHP will be upgraded to a rating of B.  The proposed 
Additional Financing (AF) will be an Environmental Category Rating of B.  The 
upgrading to a B rating includes a revision of the EMP to be in line with current 
Safeguards policies for a B-rated project, and will apply to the 11 PHCs with construction 
in progress being built outside the original building footprint in new sites, as well as to 
any and all civil works envisioned under the AF (repairs of OHD and MOH offices, and 
rehabilitation of 2 PHC centers).  The revised EMP in line with the B rating will be 
publicly disclosed before appraisal.  
 
In addition to the re-assurance of the local authorities on the land acquisition process for 
the 11 PHC centers, an independent analysis (social screening) is being conducted to 
determine whether any land acquisition involving resettlement (physical or economic 
displacement) took place in association with initiating the construction of the above-
referenced 11 PHCs.  If so, a Resettlement Action Plan (most probably an Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plan or “ARP”) will be prepared, prior to the restructuring, covering any of 
the sites where this was the case.For each such site, the  ARP will describe  the land 
ownership and/or any legal or illegal occupancy or use of the sites for residential or 
livelihood purposes before the project, the individual people/households affected, the 
transaction process followed to acquire the site for the project, and, if applicable, any 
compensation (in cash or in kind) or resettlement assistance  required in accordance with 
OP 4.12.  Any compensation or assistance required will be provided prior to resuming 
construction at site(s) in question   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Only minor environmental impact is envisaged under the Additional Financing since civil 
works will be limited to renovation and repairs of PHC centers in Khatlon and Sughd 
oblasts and offices for administrative staff working at the Oblast Health Department and 
at the Ministry of Health.  It will be implemented according to the updated 
Environmental Management Plan.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The counterparts have good experience with CBHP (and the previous Bank-funded health 
project) having undertaken rehabilitation and reconstruction work on PHC centers in the 
two oblasts.  The project-wide Environmental Management Plan and site specific EMP 
Page  5
checklists have been updated and upgraded and will guide any future civil works under 
the Additional Financing.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the MOH, local communities in pilot rayons in two oblasts, 
engineers, and architects.  
 
Prior to Appraisal of the AF project, the updated project-wide EMP will be disclosed 
nationally (on Ministry of Health website) and locally at each investment site (hard copy 
in a publicly accessible place).   There will be notices in local media indicating that the 
document is available, where interested people can go to see/review it, and where and 
how they can pose questions or make comments. During Appraisal the project team will 
confirm that this was done and determine whether any questions/comments were 
received, and if so how they were addressed.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/12/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/12/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
We expect to receive the EMP today and it will be disclosed in the Country by March 6, 
2009 and submission to infoshop by March 4, 2009.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Pia Helene Schneider 
03/03/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Brian Yates 
03/03/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/05/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abdo S. Yazbeck 
03/04/2009 
Comments:   
