Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/16/2009 
Report No.:  49610
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P112157 
Original Project Name: EMERGENCY 
FOOD SECURITY AND SEED 
IMPORTS PROJECT 
Country:  Tajikistan 
Project ID:  P115953 
Project Name:  ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOOD SECURITY AND SEED 
IMPORTS 
Task Team Leader:  Bekzod Shamsiev 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 31, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (80%);Agricultural marketing and trade (20%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (67%);Other rural development (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.10 
 Special 
Financing 
6.25 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.35 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original project development objective of the EFSSIP is to increase domestic food 
production and reduce the loss of livestock to help at least 28,000 poorest households in a 
timely manner to reduce the negative impact of high and volatile food prices.  More 
specifically, the project provided agricultural production inputs and critical livestock-
related inputs to the poorest farmers and female#headed households, to support their 
immediate food security as well as to recover their production losses and livelihoods.  
 
Through restructuring of the project, the original development objective would be 
changed to: (i) to increase domestic food production and reduce the loss of livestock to 
help at least 55,000 poorest households; (ii) to improve the ability of poor households to 
deal with seed shortages due to poor crops; and (iii) to promote private commercial 
farming in order to increase food production and diversification.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
To achieve the above additional objectives, additional financing will be allocated for the 
existing project Component A "Support for Agricultural Inputs" and Component C "FAO 
Project Management" and two new components would be included in the EFSSIP for 
"Community Production Groups" and "Agro-Input Supply Market Development".  
Managing these additional activities will also require some additional financing for the 
PMU through the PMU Project Management component.  There will be no changes to 
Component B "Improvement of Livestock Health and Husbandry" of the original EFSSIP 
design, except for modest reallocation of project savings from this component to 
Component A  
 
Component A - Support for Agriculture Inputs (originally US$2.7 million).  Additional 
US$1.65 million financing (for a total of US$ 5.15 million including reallocation of about 
US$800,000 of uncommitted funds from Component B) will be included to finance the 
cost of imports of high quality winter wheat seeds and fertilizer in time for autumn 2009 
plantings in the severely food insecure areas identified by WFP Food Security 
Monitoring System.  It is estimated that a package valued at about US$60 per household 
would be sufficient for supporting winter wheat  production for at least 27,000 families.  
The selection criteria for project beneficiaries will remain the same: female headed 
households, and households with children under 5 years old. Jamoat and district officials 
will compile beneficiary lists on this basis and these lists will be displayed publicly at 
Jamoat offices. Local NGOs will be used to check the compliance with project selection 
criteria based on 5% sample of the beneficiary list in each Jamoat, and will have to report 
acceptable levels of compliance before seed and fertilizer distribution. A second check 
will be conducted after the aid distribution, on the same basis, to monitor the 
effectiveness of distribution.  Monthly pulse reports will be prepared to monitor aide 
disbursements and to note any ongoing problems with project implementation. These 
pulse reports will be based on Jamoat level information on beginning and ending stocks 
of project aid, the volume of aid distributed, and the numbers of beneficiaries receiving 
aid.  Trends in food prices will also be summarized and reported based on available data 
from WFP and the State Statistical Agency, together with any actions associated with 
environmental compliance.  
 
Component B - Improvement of Livestock Health and Husbandry (originally US$1.80 
million).  No additional financing is required for this Component.  Due to difficulties in 
securing veterinary supplies and animal feed for component B it was decided to change 
this component to the provision of fodder (alfalfa) seed and fertilizer for beneficiary 
households.  The cost savings of about US$800,000 created by these changes, together 
with a fall in the prices of seed and fertilizer have been reallocated to Component A.  
Locally produced alfalfa varieties were procured due to the difficulty of procuring small 
quantities of seed internationally. Delivery of alfalfa seed and fertilizer in the Rasht 
Valley took place on April 10-12, 2009.  More than 7,000 beneficiaries in 4 districts and 
15 Jamoats received their inputs, with distribution problems reported in only one Jamoat.  
 
Page  3
Component C - FAO Project Management (originally US$0,5 million).  Additional 
US$0.165 million financing will be allocated for project management costs incurred by 
FAO.  This funding will also cover expenses such as program audit, the hiring of 
additional specialists, as well as training farmers, and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Component D - Community Production Groups (US$3.235 million).  This new 
component will support the formation and functioning of groups of poor rural households 
at the community level to help them improve their food security and nutrition and 
simultaneously diversify their production away from the predominant, but unprofitable 
cotton crop.  This program will be implemented with the involvement of local grassroots 
NGOs, who will help identify eligible group members, assist in the formation of the 
groups, provide basic training, and help monitor program implementation and impact.  
Well-established international and/or national NGOs operating country- or region-wide 
will be contracted to mentor and oversee the work of the grassroots NGOs and to provide 
crucial linkages to other support service providers such as rural extension services, agro-
input suppliers and marketing outlets.  The Community Production Groups (CPGs) will 
be formed within the communities and will consist initially of between 10 and 20 
members, selected from among the poor households as identified by the local Mahalla 
Committees and CBOs/NGOs.  Specific eligibility criteria will include considerations 
such as size of household land (kitchen garden and private use-right land), income level, 
etc., with priority given to families with the poorest endowment of land and other 
resources per capita, families with a large proportion of economically inactive members 
(children and elderly) and female-headed households.  
 
Members of potential CPGs groups will receive intensive initial information about the 
program and the conditions and requirements of participation.  Grassroots NGOs will 
take the lead in community and group information and mobilization and in facilitating the 
formal constitution of the CPGs.  The CPGs will have simple, locally appropriate, 
governance arrangements to ensure transparency, probity, inclusion, and accountability. 
Several types of CPGs are envisaged, differing in terms of the primary focus of 
agricultural production they wish to pursue.  The CPGs will be able to choose the 
commodities they wish to produce.  Production itself will be managed by the individual 
households, but access to initial inputs, to training and to output markets will be provided 
at the group level (and in some cases for clusters of CPGs).  Three major categories of 
CPGs are envisaged: (i) crop CPGs (wheat, fodder crops, oilseeds), (ii) vegetable and 
fruit CPGs (potatoes, vegetables, spices, soft fruits), and (iii) small livestock CPGs 
(poultry, rabbits).  The principles of project support and CPG operation will be similar, 
but there will be some differences in specific implementation arrangements and 
associated support services.  
 
Component E - Agro-Input Supply Market Development (US$0.9 million). The 
component will attempt to develop a private network of agro-input dealers to supply 
Tajik farmers with quality inputs and technical knowledge that would increase farm 
incomes and reverse the low-input, low-output spiral.  This component will finance the 
following set of activities: (i) assessment of the needs of farmers and the agro-input 
Page  4
demand and supply situation; (ii) identification of potential agro-input dealers and their 
training; (iii) organization of field demonstrations with improved technologies; (iv) 
production of technical brochures and conduct of public outreach to increase production 
and stimulate farmer demand for inputs; and (v) help to dealers to find supplies and 
credit, expand business, and provide extension services.  The project would also 
demonstrate to farmers the profitable return from investing in improved inputs and 
farming techniques.  
 
The dealers will be better trained, better equipped and motivated to improve the 
availability of quality inputs, technology and value-added services for farmers.  The 
project will collaborate with other donor projects, including ACTED, Swedish 
International Development Agency (SIDA), EU, German Agency for Technical 
Cooperation (GTZ), Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and Swiss 
Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO).  Given better access to seasonal finance from 
other sources farmers would seek other suppliers in order to obtain better input prices and 
more reliable delivery. The resultant increase in competition would strengthen the non-
cotton investor component of the input supply market and create a more level playing 
field, to the benefit of farmers and overall sector output.  Similar interventions have 
worked very well in Albania, Kosovo, Afghanistan and the Kyrgyz Republic.  This 
initiative support will complement expected policy changes related to resolution of the 
cotton debt crisis and improved access to credit for non-cotton farmers - two formal 
structural performance criteria under 3-year PRGF approved by the IMF Executive Board 
on April 21, 2009.  The relevant outputs would include: (i) fertilizer and seed related 
workshops and seminars for dealers, farmers, and agricultural experts; (ii) yield increases 
in project areas; (iii) introduction of new products such as complex fertilizers and 
significant increases in legal imports of fertilizer and sales of certified seed; and (iv) a 
comprehensive training program for dealers and progressive farmers in vegetable and 
fodder crop cultivation and orchard management.  
 
Component F - PMU Project Management (US$0.3 million).  This component will 
finance coordination of the new activities and the fiduciary functions of the Center for 
Managing Projects on Cotton Farm Debt Resolution and Sustainable Cotton Sector 
Development (PMU).  The PMU will require some additional staff and equipment and 
financing of additional operating expenses to carry out these additional activities.  The 
project will finance incremental staff, consultants, operating costs, some technical 
assistance and training, M&E activities, special studies and impact assessments, 
information dissemination and annual audits.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Component A will be implemented in Khatlon oblast (19 districts) while component 
B
in Rasht Valley (5 districts). Components D, E and F will be implemented nationwide.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea (ECSS3) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Activities under the project are not expected to generate significant and/or irreversible 
adverse environmental impacts and the project is therefore classified as Environmental 
Category B. Project components involve the distribution of seeds and fertilizers as well as 
capacity building activities and would have both positive and adverse environmental and 
social impacts. From the assessment, the identified positive impacts of the project 
include: (a) increased food security and household income for the smallholder farmers, 
due to higher agricultural productivity; (b) improved nutritional status of the farmers due 
to increased agricultural production; (c) improved farmer skills from trainings in 
technologies, seed breeding, fertilizer use and land conservation; (d) improved soil 
fertility due to fodder crop sowing (enrichment by nitrogen), use of phosphorus-
potassium fertilizers; (e) increased opportunity for engagement in other income 
generating activities or small scale businesses by smallholder farmers due to increased 
food security for the households; and (f) increased employment in rural areas.  
 
The potential negative impacts that may result from implementation of the project   
include the following: (a) increased pollution of ground and surface waters pollution due 
to soil erosion and use of fertilizers and pesticides; (b) threats to human health and 
wildlife due to poor handling of treated seeds, fertilizers and pesticides; (c) increased 
siltation of water bodies due to soil erosion. Most of these potential environmental 
impacts are minor and could be easily managed during the project implementation by 
applying a set of preventive measures and avoiding activities with could raise 
environmental issues.  
 
As application of the seeds and fertilizers will be done within existing agricultural lands, 
the additional financing will not have an impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus 
OP/BP 4.04 "Natural habitats" is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact 
on physical cultural resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of 
agricultural lands. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural Resources" is not triggered.    
Also, the project beneficiaries will not acquire land for the needs of activities to be 
Page  6
supported with the project proceeds through a process which involved and/or would 
involve officially supported expropriation and thus the project does not trigger OP/BP 
4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement".   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The expected cumulative impact of the activities proposed under additional financing are 
mostly positive and include improved knowledge on best agricultural practices, with 
consequent improvements in the status of water and soil conservation in the country.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The task team has analyzed the possible implications of a "no project" scenario and 
concluded that in the absence of the additional financing there is a probability for an 
elevated scale of food insecurity associated with negative economic and social 
consequences leading to increased poverty, especially in rural areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Management Plan, prepared for the First Phase of the project, was 
reviewed and updated in February-March, 2009. Per ISDS Concept Stage review 
meeting, the review provided an update on agriculture pest management issues. Based on 
that review, the revised EMP contains new provisions on pest management, including 
guidance on all issues that will be covered in the pest management training sessions and 
field demonstrations, including good practices in the use of pesticides, integrated pest 
management, the list of permitted pesticides, and existing regulations for pesticide use. 
Public consultations and a disclosure process were undertaken in accordance with World 
Bank policies and guidelines.  
 
A
review of the status of the EMP for the first phase of project implementation was 
carried out by the WB in March, 2009.  
 
Overall, the conducted assessment shows that the EMP provisions are being 
successfully implemented. There have been no environmental complaints related to the 
project implementation. The PIU has broadly disseminated the EMP to all key 
stakeholders, - the Ministry of Agriculture and the Committee of Environmental 
Protection and Forestry,  the Ministry of Finance, Hukumat of Khatlon oblast and of 
Rasht valley districts for its further dissemination to participating Jamoats. Furthermore, 
the PIU also prepared, in A4 format, about 80,000 copies of (a) Safety measures for 
mineral fertilizers usage and handling; and, (b) Safety measures for treated seed usage 
and handling for further dissemination among all project beneficiaries. These two 
documents specify the basic rules and procedures for safe handling of treated seeds and 
mineral fertilizers and their rational usage, and, respectively ensure prevention of their 
potential adverse impacts in the case of inappropriate usage. In order to improve farmers 
knowledge on sustainable land management the PIU has also prepared and printed 85,000 
Page  7
leaflets as a guiding material for seeds planting and fertilizers applying according to the 
nationally established requirements and norms for grain production.  
 
All these information materials were disseminated to about 72,000 of project recipients 
in the project area. They will be further disseminated in March-April 2009 whilst 
distributing treated seeds and fertilizers in the districts of Rasht valley. It is necessary to 
also acknowledge that the seed material was procured in accordance with International 
Maize and Wheat Improvement Center CIMMYT quality standards for grain seeds. 
Similarly, the PIU has procured internationally approved fertilizers as of Urea (2,102MT 
and 70MT), SSP (210MT), and Potassium Chloride (70MT). The supervision of the 
inputs distribution is done by selected local NGOs. Their tasks include monitoring of 
distribution of seeds and fertilizers to only eligible households, dissemination of 
information materials as well materials on  compliance with environmental/health safety 
requirements. The findings of these monitoring activities are reflected in quarterly and 
annual progress reports.  
 
While most of EMP requirements were fulfilled, it is necessary to mention the 
following: (a) due to the time constraints and lack of relevant funding, the fall  2008 
distribution of inputs were done by workers without wearing special individual protective 
equipment. In order to avoid any potential harm to the workers which distribute treated 
seeds and fertilizers, it is necessary for the FAO to ensure such equipment for the second 
phase of project implementation during the spring, 2009; (b) although the PIU has 
prepared and disseminated mentioned above information materials, there is still a need 
for further additional activities in this regard, including need for farmers training and of 
demonstrational activities on sustainable land and water use as well as on application of 
agrochemicals in agricultural production. For that purpose it is necessary to allocate 
special financial resources, within the project financing, to carry out those activities-these 
activities and their financing are proposed to be included in the project additional 
financing.  Finally, as no special sections in the progress reports were particularly 
devoted  to the implementation of EMP activities, it is proposed that the progress reports 
for the next phase of project implementation have such sections. It is also recommended 
that the supervising NGOs provide relevant guidance to site supervisors in this regard.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The EMP for the project AF was discussed with a number of stakeholders from the State 
Committee for Environmental Protection and Forestry, the Ministry of Agriculture, local 
authorities, NGOs and farmer organizations, and disclosed in-country. Minor comments 
were received, and incorporated into the final document. The final version of the revised 
EMP was disclosed in-country on April 30, 2009 on the web-site of the Tajik Branch of 
the Regional Environmental Center for Central Asia (www.cerecnet.org) and in the WB 
Infoshop on June 2, 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/27/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/02/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/27/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/02/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Page  9
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bekzod Shamsiev 
05/15/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
05/18/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Arcadie Capcelea 
05/18/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/16/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
06/05/2009 
Comments:   
