Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3725 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/18/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P111155 
Project Name: Zanzibar Urban Services Project 
Task Team Leader: Barjor E. Mehta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 2, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (45%);Solid waste 
management (45%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (S);Other urban 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.00
3.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective of the ZURP is to strengthen institutional and fiscal capacity 
for urban management in Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba), develop municipal infrastructure and 
enhance the physical cultural heritage at one public location within Stone Town.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will have three components:  
 
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening and Infrastructure Development in the Zanzibar 
Municipal Council (ZMC) Area.  This component will assist the Zanzibar Municipal Council in 
the following areas: (i) Institutional strengthening; (ii) development of surface drainage in the 
Na’gambo areas of ZMC, solid waste management and street lighting; (iii) Preparation of the 
Physical Development Plan for the ZMC and its immediate periphery; (iv) Preparation for Road 
Works within the ZMC and immediate periphery (limited to engineering designs and 
construction documents); and (v) Rehabilitation and construction of Mizingani Road Sea Wall in 
Page  2
Stone Town which has a strategic sea side location on the edge of the World Heritage City of 
Stone Town.  
 
Component 2: Support to Town Councils on Pemba Island.   This component will assist the 
three town councils on the island to implement appropriate municipal revenue and expenditure 
management systems and will provide assistance in the design and implementation of select 
municipal infrastructure (surface drainage and solid waste management).  
 
Component 3: Project Management. This component will provide support to the Ministry of 
State, Regional Administration and Local Government to establish project management, 
monitoring and reporting systems. It will also allow the other two participating Ministries 
(Construction and Communications) to implement and coordinate their respective components.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
On Unguja Island the project will concentrate on the areas under Zanzibar Municipal Council 
and its immediate periphery. On Pemba Island, the project will concentrate only on the Town 
Councils of Mkoani, Chake Chake and Wete.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Overall institutional capacity to implement safeguard policies is weak. Considerable mentoring 
and training will be required during and through project preparation. Project implementation will 
require enhanced supervision and hand holding throughout the project period.  
 
However, the Drainage and Solid Waste Management Division of the Zanzibar Municipal 
Council which will be responsible for the implementation of the planned surface drainage has 
long-standing experience of working with the German agency KfW and therefore has developed 
the institutional awareness and some expertise in dealing effectively with environmental and 
social safeguards. The same is not true for the three Town Councils on Pemba Island. The 
borrower will conduct a social and environment assessment prior to appraisal to identify 
potential impacts and capacity gaps for implementing the proposed mitigation measures and for 
managing chance finds, and where appropriate, recommend capacity building measures.  
 
In addition, the Stone Town Conservation and Development Authority which deals with the 
World Heritage City of Stone Town and which will oversee the implementation of the sea wall 
has the experience in implementing safeguards policies established by UNESCO and the Aga 
Khan Trust for Culture
’s Historic Cities Programme. Considering the nature of the site, physical 
cultural heritage safeguards will require enhanced attention during preparation and supervision.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is located on the Zanzibari islands of Pemba and Unguja. Investments under this 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
project will focus on: (a) construction of surface drains; (b) solid waste management; street 
lighting; and (c) the construction of a sea wall. The types of investments are common to urban 
areas and their potential environmental and social effects are well understood. Category A is 
chosen considering the island location and the need for active community involvement in 
building consensus on issues.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
The physical cultural resources component of the EA will include: (a) an investigation and 
inventory of physical cultural resources likely to be affected by the project; (b) documentation of 
the significance of such physical cultural resources; and (c) assessment of the nature and extent 
of potential impacts on these resources.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project intervention triggers OP 4.12, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy. An 
appropriate resettlement framework for infrastructure development and a RAP for component 1.4 
will be prepared for Bank review and clearance. Land acquisition is not envisaged under this 
project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/26/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
comprehensive EA of project components dealing with infrastructure implementation such 
as surface drainage, solid waste and street lighting as well as the rehabilitation and 
construction of the sea wall will be required with an EMP that establishes: (a) design and 
mitigation measures (e.g. construction environmental clauses) where the specific works are 
already reasonably well-known; (b) prescriptions for more specific EA/EMP work during 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
project implementation where they are not (e.g. solid waste management); and (c) 
institutional arrangements, including training and capacity-building, for implementing the 
above.   The EA team will require substantial expertise for addressing physical cultural 
resources issues.   Enhanced supervision and hand-holding throughout the project period will 
be required.  
 
For Component 1.4, the Zanzibar Transport Master Plan aims to identify several critical 
urban links which need to be developed to serve the outer areas of ZMC and its immediate 
periphery. These are also the areas with a predominance of very poor urban residents. The 
Ministry of Communications and Transport will be assisted in the preparation of resettlement 
action plan as part of the engineering and implementing design work of roads which are 
required to complete the road network within ZMC and its immediate periphery. The actual 
implementation of the roads will be financed under a proposed World Bank operation.  
 
The EA/EMP and RPF will be prepared, approved and disclosed prior to appraisal in 
Tanzania and at the World Bank’s Infoshop.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Barjor E. Mehta 
06/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
06/18/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
06/18/2008 
Comments:   
