Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/27/2009 
Report No.:  AC4314
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P115952 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Tanzania Second Social Action Fund (TASAF 
II) 
Task Team Leader:  Ida Manjolo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of TASAF II is to improve access of beneficiary households to enhanced 
socio-economic services and income generating opportunities.   
 
3. Project Description 
In line with the original Project’s components, the additional financing will include the 
following:  
 
(i) 
Component I: The National Village Fund Component (US$ 25.5 million) will 
support the Food Insecure households through financing small scale public works 
community subprojects for enhancing livelihoods and risk reduction.  The menu of 
service packages to be financed will remain the same as the original Project, but priority 
will be given to conservation and restoration of natural resources which communities 
depend on for their food or livelihood like water shade restoration, reforesting degraded 
areas, setting wind breaks, stabilization of gullies, construction of dykes to protect homes 
in flood prone areas, water retention structures like earth dams, valley tanks, fish ponds 
for fish breeding/farming and minor irrigation schemes. The Additional Financing will 
Page  2
also support Vulnerable Groups through livelihood and risk reduction subprojects by 
financing the implementation of small scale community subprojects that lead to 
livelihood restoration and income generating activities, as well as moderate scaling up of 
the conditional cash transfers pilot. The subproject menu for the Vulnerable Groups 
includes poultry and livestock keeping, fish breeding/farming, vegetable growing, 
handicraft making, and moderate scaling up of conditional cash transfers. The component 
will not support subprojects belonging to individuals or households and those considered 
well-off by the community.  
 
(ii) 
Component II: Capacity Enhancement Component (US$ 4.5 million) will support 
project management including development communication, technical assistance and 
capacity building, participatory monitoring and evaluation, transparency and 
accountability, which includes social accountability and demand governance issues in the 
targeted districts on Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in targeted districts (initially 40) on Mainland Tanzania 
and Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba), which have been identified as vulnerable to food 
insecurity on the basis of a Rapid Vulnerability Assessment that was conducted in 2008. 
These areas are prone to degradation of natural resources leading to environmental 
degradation and a vicious cycle of poverty.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTCS) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social impacts resulting from this project are moderate due to the 
nature and size of the community based subprojects. Under the National Village Fund 
Page  3
component, sub-projects that cannot develop mitigation measures that are acceptable to 
the community and are not in line with the National Environmental Management Act and 
Guidelines cannot be funded by the Additional Financing. The intervention through 
Additional Financing is intended to mitigate the impacts of weather and market shocks 
through selected public works interventions targeted at food insecure and vulnerable 
groups of the population in the targeted districts of Mainland Tanzania and Zanzibar. The 
Additional Financing will also support Vulnerable Groups through livelihood enhancing 
and risk reduction subprojects by financing small scale community subprojects related to 
restoration of natural resources and livelihoods and income generating activities, as well 
as moderate scaling up of conditional cash transfers.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The original Project is rated as Category B. It has many localized subprojects which 
could have a negative cumulative impact on the environment. To mitigate this, 
environmental mitigation measures have been mainstreamed in each subproject 
management stage, starting from the planning stage.  Sub-projects to be financed will be 
small scale, community and location-specific with insignificant impacts.  The menu of 
service packages to be financed will remain the same as the original Project as described 
in the above Section I Paragraph 3.(i).  However,  priority will be given to conservation 
and restoration of natural resources which communities depend on for their food or 
livelihoods like water shade restoration, reforesting degraded areas, setting wind breaks, 
gullies stabilization, construction of dykes in flood prone areas, water retention structures 
like community earth dams, fish breeding/farming and minor irrigation schemes.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In the context of the original Project, the Government of Tanzania  had prepared and 
disclosed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to meet the requirement of the World Bank and 
the Government of Tanzania. The Task Team has reviewed the ESMF and RPF and 
hereby confirms that they are adequate in terms of its scope and content to capture the 
issues associated with this Additional Financing operation.  
 
The original Project established sufficient environmental and social operational 
procedures and mechanisms for managing safeguards including training provided at local 
government and community levels. The Project Operational Manual details the 
environment and social issues and ensures that they are mainstreamed into the subproject 
implementation cycle at each critical juncture. Extended-Participatory Rural Appraisal 
takes place to facilitate the screening process, which is carried out at community level 
during the planning stage. Potential environmental and social impacts are identified and a 
Limited Impact Assessment (LIA) is conducted by Local Government Authority (LGA) 
Page  4
staff trained in environmental and social issues. The costs of the mitigation measures are 
included in the subproject budget. At subproject appraisal stage, the appraising officer 
confirms that the LIA has been conducted for subprojects.  Where no negative 
environmental and social impacts are identified, the LGA officer signs off on the 
subproject. Subprojects that require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) are 
expected to be sent to the National Steering Committee for evaluation by the Sector 
Expert Team which will supposed to assign environmental specialists to conduct the full 
EIA. Given the small size of the community subprojects and in light of the due diligence 
process of  scoping and screening, to date, none of the community subprojects supported 
by the TASAF II were referred to the national level for an EIA.  
 
As mentioned above, the Additional Financing that will be allocated for public works 
will be targeted towards subprojects that are aimed at enhancing communities’ natural 
resources management and to redressing the negative impacts of environmental 
degradation on food security and vulnerability, leading to a sustainable positive impact 
on the environment.  This approach will also enhance the building of a critical mass of 
people in communities that are environmentally and socially aware and can therefore 
monitor compliance of the subprojects with the relevant safeguards instruments.  
 
During subproject implementation, supervision is carried out by the LGA staff, which 
follow up with communities to find out and assess if they are implementing the 
mitigation measures as planned.  Based on experience, while most communities are in 
compliance, some subprojects had budget overruns due to the rising cost of materials, and 
have been unable to complete implementation of the planned mitigation measures.  The 
Additional Financing will support communities in the targeted districts to complete 
implementation.  Moreover, not all the LGAs have district environmental and social 
officers in place.  In this regard, TASAF, under its Capacity Enhancement component has 
facilitated training on environmental and social safeguards for LGA staff designated as 
focal points for the implementation of the ESMF.  This has been done to augment 
Government’s capacity at the LGA level.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in this project are the communities in the 40 districts of Mainland 
Tanzania and Zanzibar (Unguja and Pemba), local authorities and civil society. 
Consultations with the key stakeholder groups continues from the initial TASAF II and 
was undertaken for the preparation and disclosure of both the ESMF and the RPF. These 
two documents outline the consultation processes that will continue during 
implementation of the safeguards instruments working together with the affected local 
authorities, communities and individuals.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Page  5
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  6
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ida Manjolo 
04/14/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa 
04/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Naima A Hasci 
04/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher D. Walker 
04/24/2009 
Comments:  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities. 
