Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC2846
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P105093 
Project Name:  TZ-Health Sector Development II Scale-Up 
Task Team Leader:  Julie McLaughlin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 26, 2007 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (80%);Non-compulsory health finance (10%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Other communicable diseases (P);Health system performance 
(P);Decentralization (S);Nutrition and food security (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
This Additional Financing supports the original Project Development Objective which 
was "to assist the Borrower in continuing to improve the quality of health services and 
the management of resources allocated to the health sector through the expansion of the 
health sector policy and institutional capacity building reforms carried out during the first 
phase of the Program".   
 
3. Project Description 
The Additional Financing will continue to support the Second Health Sector Strategic 
Plan (HSSP) which was appraised and endorsed by Partners in May 2003.  
 
At District Level  
 
o
Quality of health services will be addressed through integrating HIV/AIDS 
activities at all levels, improving service agreements (contracts) with non-governmental 
providers, employing incentives to increase staff motivation, increasing accountability by 
publishing annual district health budgets and performance data, using client satisfaction 
tools to assess quality of service delivery, developing in-service training plans, 
Page  2
implementing the health care waste management plan, and ensuring that adequate 
technical and support capacity is available to councils.  
 
o
Necessary household and community-based actions will be addressed through 
scaling-up to nation-wide level and institutionalizing preventive actions such as ITN 
promotion (and subsidizing nets), Vitamin A supplementation, community-based growth 
promotion, promotion of exclusive breast-feeding and the seventeen community IMCI 
practices.  
 
o
The financing gap in the health sector will be reduced through strengthening the 
management of user fees, community health funds, the drug revolving fund, and health 
insurance.  
 
o
Equity of access to health services will be improved through addressing the 
exemption system for the poor and vulnerable; monitoring the impact of fees on the poor; 
and devising new resource allocation formulas for block grants to districts.  
 
At Secondary and Tertiary Hospital Level  
 
o
Hospital management will be improved by developing a hospital manager cadre, 
mandating Hospital Strategic Plans and operational plans, establishing Hospital Boards, 
and strengthening hospital financial and management.  
 
o
Quality will be improved through repairs to facilities and preventive maintenance; 
and enhanced performance audits including monitoring of service delivery outputs.  
 
o
The impact of HIV/AIDS epidemic on hospital staff will be mitigated through 
human resource development strategies and integrating AIDS care at all levels.  
 
At the Regional Level  
 
o
Quality will be improved through the provision of managerial and technical 
support to districts; strengthening the inspectorate function; performance audits, 
introducing a quality assurance program (including client satisfaction assessment); 
supporting districts in data collection, data management and decision-making; 
strengthening district capacity for supportive supervision; and intensifying inter district 
exchange of experiences.  
 
At the Central Ministries  
 
o
Health financing will be improved through improved  budgeting and advocating 
for increased government allocation for health; pooling external finances; improving 
contract management and enhancing community voice and ownership in cost 
sharing/CHF/insurance.   
 
o
The Human Resource crisis will be addressed through long-term manpower 
planning; innovations to address distribution, motivation and retention of staff; and the 
more strategic use of Zonal Training Centers.  
 
o
Quality will be improved through Medical and Clinical Audits; harmonizing 
technical management guidelines; standards for service agreement and contracting; 
accreditation of health institutions (public and private); consultations/collaboration with 
civil society; and the development of comprehensive integrated sustainable quality 
assurance schemes at health delivery points.  
Page  3
o
The consequences of HIV/AIDS on skilled human resources will be addressed 
through the integration HIV/AIDS into existing services; and the introduction and/or 
strengthening of PMTCT and HAART.  
 
o
Monitoring and evaluation will be strengthened through investing in minimum 
information package at district and facility levels and assessing health sector performance 
based on PRS indicators and health sector performance profile indicators.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This Sector-wide program covers the Tanzania mainland.  Per the descriptions above, 
implementation will be within the Central Ministry, at referral and district hospitals, at 
district offices, at health centers and at the community level.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The safeguard issues relate to the content of the original project/program. Health care 
waste is generated by medical facilities, and needs to be properly managed and disposed 
of in order to avoid public health hazzards. Insecticides used to treat bednets need to be 
properly managed and disposed of. There is no use of IRS in the Program.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no anticipated long-term impacts other than those stated above.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Medical care services cannot avoid producing medical waste, and there are no cost-
effective alternatives to insecticide treated nets. There were therefore no alternatives 
considered.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
Health Care Waste Management Plan (MWMP)was produced under preparation of the 
Tanzania MAP in 2003 when this project was appraised. It was disclosed again in 2004 
when this project went to the Board. Reporting upon its implementation annually at the 
Joint Health Sector Review was a requirement for shifting financing to the PRSC (a 
desire by the GOT). However, as its implementation was only budgeted for in the current 
fiscal year (with assistance from the Bank's environmental and health staff), its 
implementation status will only be assessed at the September 2007 Review.  
 
Insecticides for bednets are managed under the  Programmatic Environmental 
Assessment for Insecticide-Treated Materials in USAID Activities in Sub-Saharan Africa 
(Jan 2002). It provides guidelines and a suggested list of insecticides for treating bednets 
consistent with the guidelines of WHO. Population Services International has managed 
the insecticide distribution on behalf of GOT. They produced and field tested materials 
which describe in Swahili and in picture how to use the insecticides for treating nets. All 
insecticides are sold bundled with an insecticide tablet, gloves and clear instructions 
(including how to dispose of residual insecticide after treating nets). Measurements are 
calculated to avoid residual liquid after treating a net. Since the start of the bednet 
program in 1998, there have been no incidences of poisoning, paresthesia or theft of 
insecticides ever reported.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Ministry of Health & Social Welfare's environmental health unit (under the 
Directorate of Preventive Services) is responsible for the implementation of the MWMP, 
together with all health facilities (particularly hospitals). Stakeholders are both patients, 
staff and those residing near health facilities. The improved education of practitioners, 
and the posting of information at facilities has been the most effective way to 
communicate safeguard policies to stakeholders.  
 
The National Malaria Control Program's bednet "cell" (supported with external long-
term TA by the Swiss) is responsible for oversight on the insecticides used to treat nets.  
The key stakeholders are households who treat bednets. They receive information 
through the instructions which accompany each sachet.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  5
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/01/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/10/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  6
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Julie McLaughlin 
03/15/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
03/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dzingai B. Mutumbuka 
03/22/2007 
Comments:   
