Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2015 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/03/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P096302 
Project Name: Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources. TAL 
Task Team Leader: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: COCPO 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme: Administrative and civil service reform (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Decentralization (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00
6.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objectives of the proposed operation are to:  
 
1.
Increase the long-term institutional and technical capacity of the Government to manage 
the mineral resources of Tanzania in a sustainable manner; and  
 
2.
Support poverty reduction and stimulate economic growth in selected rural areas of the 
country, through development of non-farm income generating opportunities based mainly on 
artisanal and small-scale mining activities and improving the linkages of mining to the local 
economy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project includes four components:  
 
A. Component I 
–
Improving the Benefits of the Mineral Sector for Tanzania: Small-scale and 
Artisanal Mining, Local Economic Development and Skills Development  
 
Page  2
Further to the recommendations of the Mineral Policy Review Committee, the Ministry of 
Energy and Minerals (MEM) is preparing and implementing programs to modernize and improve 
the formalization and promotion of artisanal and small-scale mining. In addition, efforts will be 
made to improve the local and regional development benefits of mining for Tanzanians. These 
actions aim at having positive impacts and benefits to the mining industry and mining 
communities.  
 
A.1 Baseline Studies. This sub-component would support: (a) updating artisanal and small-
scale mining baseline studies, including rapid assessment and mapping exercise to determine the 
extent of artisanal and small-scale mining activities and its impacts, and the poverty/income 
levels of mining communities; (b) a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of 
the sector; (c) benefits studies of each of the large-scale mines to determine the current level of 
benefits (economic, social and infrastructure) generated by the mines, to serve as a baseline for 
measurement of results under the project and as input for project communications activities. The 
benefits study will build on the example of the North Mara mine benefits study by the 
International Council of Metals and Mining and use the existing Resource Endowment 
methodology.  
 
A.2 Extension Services and Coordination and Training for Artisanal and Small-scale Mining. 
This sub-component will provide technical assistance to support the design and implementation 
of the pilot sub-projects, training, extension services, and good practice manuals for artisanal and 
small-scale miners.  Extension services involve strengthening existing regional or district offices 
to build trust with artisanal mining communities and provide extension services, demonstrate 
different strategic and technical approaches in a holistic manner to stimulate legal and 
responsible artisanal mining activity, associated economic development and favorable impacts 
on community conditions, and to address specific artisanal mining-related issues, including 
mining and processing technology, management, health, and formalization of artisanal mining 
activities. This sub-component would support the strengthening of a few regional centers of 
excellence for training and outreach in the area of small-scale and artisanal mining, building on 
previous initiatives and current projects, such as activities in Arusha, Geita and Mwadui; it 
would not involve the acquisition of new land or engagement in actual mining activities, but 
rather would promote training and technical skills enhancement. The project would support 
related diversification and training initiatives for Tanzanians, including short-term courses for 
small entrepreneurs and work with educational institutions, including vocational and technical 
schools, and training authorities.  
 
A.3 Targeted Programs for the Development of Specific Industrial Minerals and Value-added in 
Gemstones. This sub-component will support technical assistance programs for domestic 
entrepreneurs to further develop the production and marketing of industrial minerals, importantly 
construction materials.  It will also support the manufacturing of value-added in gemstones and 
semi-precious minerals and the establishment of an integrated pilot breeder for downstream 
products, which would serve as training, industrial and marketing center, with the aim to develop 
a
competitive small-scale industry for stone carving and lapidary, and gold based jewelry. 
Training and support will enable Tanzanian’s to work independentlyin value added activities and 
become investors in this sector.  
 
Page  3
A.4  Small Grants Program. Matching grants will be used to provide individual businesses with 
financial skills to manage self-employment and micro-enterprises; training and assistance to 
engage marketing and advisory services, and to select and purchase equipment; and help 
communities in selecting community-level investments in productive infrastructure, including 
hubs for marketing and/or mineral transformation, processing and downstream production, and 
businesses to supply mines and miners with goods and services.  
 
A.5 Local and Regional Economic Development Planning for Mining Regions. In order to help 
improve the development impact and benefits of large and small-scale mining to Tanzania, the 
proposed project will support government in strategic planning for local and regional economic 
development with the participation of the miners, mining companies and communities in the 
planning process, in three to four selected mining areas. Through this process the local and 
regional economies are expected to take advantage of mining investment as a catalyst for broader 
development in the region including links to infrastructure, supply chain opportunities, skills 
transfer and diversification.  
 
A.6  Technical Skills Development for Large Scale Mining. This sub-component will support 
vocational and technical training of Tanzanians to develop their skills for employment in large 
scale mining technical positions and to provide services to mines. The component will benefit 
Tanzania through increases opportunities for Tanzanians in higher value occupations, increasing 
the benefits to Tanzania and building the skills base for the future. The project will work closely 
with the large mining companies in such a program.  
 
B. Component II - Strengthening Governance and Transparency in Mining  
 
B.1 Legal and Fiscal Reform.  This sub-component will build on the previous studies and 
experience such as the Mineral Policy Reform Report (2004), the Bomani Report (2008) and 
government negotiating team, and support the review and updating of the legal, fiscal and 
regulatory frameworks for this sector; and the preparation of an updated statement of 
Government objectives and policy to promote mineral development, covering both small-scale 
and large-scale mining. These would incorporate international best practice, adjusted to the 
conditions of Tanzania, and they would follow a participatory approach including stakeholders, 
other Government institutions and agencies, the private sector and civil society. Particular 
attention will be devoted to the roles and responsibilities of central and regional/district 
authorities, and sharing of benefits from mining with local governments and communities, and 
resettlement and compensation framework, by applying adequate governance and transparency 
approaches. Support for Tanzania to implement the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative 
(EITI) will also be included.  
 
B.2 Institutional Capacity Building. This sub-component will support an institutional analysis 
to identify any gaps and assess the needs for capacity building. It will support the strengthening 
of the central and regional/district mineral administrations and mineral right registries through 
training; and modernizing working tools and equipment to be capable of employing state of art 
technology/cutting edge technology.  It will support the clarification of their roles/mandates. The 
need to strengthen the auditing and inspection functions of MEM has also been identified, 
including in the areas of (i) environmental impact assessment review and compliance 
Page  4
monitoring; (ii) mine occupational health and safety; and (iii) technical audits for royalty 
payments and fiscal issues. The staff under these units shall be provided with necessary skills 
and equipments to execute their functions at international standards and in undertaking necessary 
legal measures. The project will also strengthen the Communications Unit to raise awareness of 
the minerals sector, its issues and benefits for Tanzania including development of a 
communications strategy and related information materials.  
 
B.3 Mining Cadastre. This sub-component will build on the new mineral cadastre currently 
under development with support from the Nordic Development Fund.  It will support the 
incorporation of cadastral aspects and operations into mineral law and regulations, and support 
the independence of regular control/monitoring work from the cadastre/registry activities. It will 
also support the full incorporation of the small-scale mining sub-sector into the cadastre and 
provide required technology, skills and equipment to the regional offices. Finally, it will support 
the examination and revision of the currently employed geodetic network so as improve the 
currently employed algorithmic formula for conversion of geographical coordinates between two 
geographical projections. The task shall be coordinated with the Ministry of Lands, and Human 
Settlements Development, which has the jurisdiction of administering the geodetic networks 
infrastructure.  
 
B.4. Environmental and Social Management. Based on the findings of the Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) to be undertaken as part of project preparation and the SESA 
to be undertaken under the project, this sub-component will support (i) the updating of the 
existing environmental policy, law, regulations and relevant standards in order to reflect the 
actual conditions identified from the large-scale mines in Tanzania and its expanding small-scale 
and artisanal mining sub-sector; (ii) establishment of an environmental management section for 
MEM; (iii) the preparation of a comprehensive guidelines and codes of practice for permitting, 
managing, monitoring, compliance and enforcement, inclusive consultation (including gender) 
and communication and information access; and (iv) establishment of environmental database to 
compile environmental analyses and assessments for mining activities, linked to mining cadastre 
and Geological and Mineral Information System (MIS).  It will also support an assessment of the 
past environmental legacy of mining, which would include a prioritized inventory of abandoned 
sites, the environmental legacy of “unauthorized” artisanal (larger impacted areas, e.g. gold and 
gem rush areas) and small-scale mining, and the legacy of closure of past state-owned mining 
operations. Mine closure policies and procedures including requirements for mine closure 
planning and financial surety mechanisms will be considered, and capacity for reviewing of mine 
closure plans will be built.  
 
C. Component III – Stimulating Mineral Sector Investment  
 
C.1 Strengthening of the Geologic Infrastructure.  This component would support the provision 
of basic and reliable geological information necessary to facilitate the promotion of private 
investments in explorations and mine development, to foster future small-scale and artisanal 
mining, and to support adequate planning of the socio-economical development of the country.  
This includes (i) completing the regional airborne geophysical coverage of selected areas; (ii) 
completing the update and publication of the existing coverage of geological maps for selected 
sub-areas; (iii) upgrading and computerizing existing MIS; (iv) restructuring and strengthening 
Page  5
the Geological Survey of Tanzania and the Dodoma laboratory; (v) completing/establishing map 
archives, and core and rock archives; and (vi) making geological data readily accessible to 
investors.  
 
C.2. Future Role of State Mining Corporation (STAMICO). This sub-component will finance a 
strategic assessment of STAMICO, exploring existing institutional capacity and options for self-
financing, as a pre-condition for its future role with the private sector for both, large-scale and 
small-scale opportunities.  
 
C.3. Mineral Sector Investment Information and Promotion. This sub-component will 
strengthen the Promotion and Statistics Unit of MEM to carry out sector promotion and provide 
investors with all necessary information for investment in the mineral sector.  The unit will link 
with information from the Geologic Survey of Tanzania and the mineral rights registry and 
licensing unit.  
 
D. Component IV - Project Coordination and Management  
 
Project implementation, including coordination, procurement, financial management and 
disbursement, will be managed by the existing unit at MEM. Additional staff may be hired to 
join the unit, but, as with existing unit staff, they will be MEM staff paid by the Ministry in 
accordance with applicable Ministry standards.  A project steering committee will also be 
formed, consisting of the Commissioner of Minerals, the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Geological Survey, the Director for Administration and Human Resources, the Director of 
Planning under MEM, the Director of the Department of Environment, and other representatives 
from major stakeholders within Government.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
There are various locations for different project components as follows:  
 
Artisanal and Small Scale Mining  
 
(i) Extension services will provide training and support to
 each of the Government’s eight 
Zonal and fourteen regional offices.  
 
(ii) Centre’s of excellence will be focused on the Lake District gold mining, the existing facility 
in Chunya District and Arusha for the gem centre. Government advises there are no known 
indigenous communities or national parks in the area of impact however this will be confirmed 
through the ESIA.  
 
Local Economic Development  
 
Working with local government, communities and mining companies/organizations in three to 
four pilot areas - Kahama (gold mining area), Shinyanga (diamond mining area), and possibly 
Mererani (tanzanite mining area, and/or Kabange (future nickel mining area).  
 
Geological Survey  
 
Airborne geophysics will be flown in three regions – Lake Zone (northwest), Rukwa (southern) 
and Dodoma (central). No national parks or game reserves are to be included in the areas to be 
flown.  
Page  6
Other components will be conducted primarily in Dar es Salaam or Dodoma (at the Geological 
Survey Dept.)   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While the institutional capacity of the Borrower is considered weak at this stage, one of the 
components of the project will be designed to build up the capacity needed for adequate 
implementation. Specifically, the environmental safeguard will be triggered and component B.4 
will support the establishment of an environmental management unit at MEM, and preparation of 
environmental guidelines and codes of practices.  In addition sensitivity as to when social 
safeguards may be triggered will be developed within the Government’s project implementation 
teamand supported closely by the Bank.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
It is expected that the project will have moderate impacts on the environment. Proposed 
category is B - Partial Assessment.  Within the partial assessment, the team will pay special 
attention to environmental hazards linked with small-scale and artisan mine development (such 
as possible mining sites abandonment, usage of poor equipment by miners, sanitation problems, 
use of mercury) as well as social impacts such as potential spread of HIV/AIDS.  The project is 
also expected to yield positive environmental impact through the development of regulations and 
guidelines as well as a code of practice for responsible mining; it will provide capacity building 
for environmental monitoring and compliance with enforcement. Some positive and negative 
environmental impacts will result through the implementation of small grants component and 
targeted programs for development of specific commodities. Therefore, the Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will outline possible impacts and mitigating measures to be 
incorporated into the project design and provide a scoping of broader issues to be included in the 
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to be done under project 
implementation.  .   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Although not expected to be triggered, this safeguard may be triggered depending on the 
location of the activities that will be supported under the small grants component.  ESIA will 
provide guidance in making this judgment.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
Although not expected to be triggered, this safeguard may be triggered depending on the 
location of the activities that will be supported under the artisanal and small scale mining, 
geological survey work or small grants component.  ESIA will provide guidance in making this 
judgment.   
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Involuntary resettlements are unlikely. However, dealing with migrating populations related 
to artisanal and small-scale mining might require addressing resettlement situations. The team, 
during preparation mission, will investigate possible impacts of acquisition and loss of economic 
activities and influx of migrant workers.  In addition, activities under small grants and the 
development of specific commodities (e.g. stone carving) may trigger increase in quarrying for 
the industry to produce the raw materials thus implying land acquisition.  Therefore a 
resettlement policy framework is being prepared in case of such circumstances.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/02/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The preparation of the ESIA and a Resettlement Policy Framework will be completed at the 
end of February 2009, prior to project appraisal, and disclosed in country and at the Bank 
Infoshop. Should other safeguard reports be required, they would be prepared, consulted and 
disclosed also prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher Gilbert Sheldon 
12/19/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/03/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
01/29/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
