Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC2854
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P103633 
Project Name:  Second Central Transport Corridor Project 
Task Team Leader:  Dieter E. Schelling 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: April 8, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General transportation sector (47%);Roads and highways (38%);Aviation (15%) 
Theme:  Regulation and competition policy (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
32.00
42.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development ob
jective (PDO) is to support Tanzania’s economic growth by 
providing enhanced transport facilities which are reliable and cost effective, in line with 
MKUKUTA and the National Transport Policy and Strategy. Following are the key 
monitoring indicators for the achievement of the PDO: (i) reduction of rush hour travel 
time of public transport users between Ubungo and the Central Business District (CBD) 
in Dar es Salaam; (ii) reduced average vehicle operating cost on the Korogwe to Same 
trunk road; and (iii) satisfactory rating of Zanzibar airport facilities by both airlines and 
passengers.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Second Central Transport Corridor Project (CTCP2) has three components: (A) the 
Dar es Salaam Urban Transport component; (B) the Korogwe-Mkumbara-Same Trunk 
Road component; and (C) the Zanzibar airport component. It is a follow-on to the Central 
Transport Corridor Project under which components A and B have been prepared. 
Page  2
Component C commenced under the Second Integrated Roads Project (IRP2), however, 
the contractor charged with the works failed to perform and his contract was cancelled. 
The IRP2 credit closed on December 31, 2006, and it was decided to finance this 
component under CTCP2.  
 
(A) Dar es Salaam urban transport component: A concept study for the entire Dar Rapid 
Transit (DART) system was financed under CTCP and it included the detailed design of 
phase one of the system, including the preparation of bidding documents for 20.9 
kilometers of separate bus-ways, 5 terminals, 29 stations, 6 feeder stations, two bus 
depots, as well as the improvement of the upcountry bus station at Ubungo which will be 
integrated with the DART system. The entire trunk system of 20.9 kilometers will be 
provided with tree shaded bicycle and pedestrian ways on both sides of the road.  The 
average distance between bus stops will be 500 meters and system users will be 
encouraged to either walk or bicycle to the bus stops (privately operated bicycle parking 
facilities are planned at each bus stop). The system provides for integration with other 
public transport services such as daladalas , the Kivukoni ferry and the up-country buses 
at terminal stations. Articulated trunk buses with a capacity of 140 passengers will 
provide both normal (stopping at all stations) and express services (stopping only at 
connector stations). A system of feeder buses with a capacity of 50 passengers will 
transport passengers to the trunk system through feeder stations. Trunk buses will be 
accessed at level which will enhance system capacity and comfort. It is proposed to 
finance the infrastructure of phase one of DART under CTCP2.  
 
(B) Korogwe-Mkumbara-Same trunk road rehabilitation/upgrading component:  The 
Korogwe-Mkumbara-Same trunk road (172 kilometers) forms part of the North-East 
Corridor of the Tanzanian trunk road network that connects the main commercial centre 
of the country, Dar es Salaam, with the major tourist destinations in northern Tanzania. 
The road is also part of the main link between Dar es Salaam and Nairobi, the major trade 
center of Tanzania and Kenya respectively. The road currently is in fair to poor condition 
and its width is not commensurate with trunk road standards. TANROADS therefore 
plans to rehabilitate the road, provide it with a 50 mm AC (asphalt concrete) surface and 
to widen it to trunk road standards from the current six meters carriageway and one meter 
shoulders to 6.5 meters carriageway width and 1.5 meter shoulders. Furthermore, for 
safety reasons, it is necessary to eliminate some at-grade crossings with the Tanga 
railway, some sections prone to flooding need to be elevated and some bridge decks need 
replacement/widening. The design has been submitted to a road safety audit and 
appropriate speed reducing measures within villages and town, including rumble strips, 
speed pumps and raised pedestrian crossings are part of the design.  Design and bidding 
documents for this road section were prepared under CTCP, and it is proposed to finance 
these works under CTCP2.  
 
(C) Zanzibar Airport component: the Zanzibar airport has experienced spectacular 
growth with more than two-fold increase of passenger traffic between 2001 and 2005, 
namely from 198,000 to 415,000, and aircraft movements grew from 16,800 to 27,800.  
The runway of the airport is 2462 meters long and 45 meters wide. Its surface is in poor 
condition and needs urgent rehabilitation/strengthening. Additionally, the runway is 
Page  3
relatively short and does not provide an adequate security margin for large airplanes 
(such as Boeing 767). Furthermore, the airport security fence is not encompassing the 
entire airport and needs extension. Hence, the project finances the 
rehabilitation/strengthening of the runway, its extension by 560 meters to about 3 
kilometres length and the completion of the security fence.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Dar es Salaam, Tanga and Kilimanjaro Regions and Zanzibar.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin P. Rees (AFTTR) 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTEN) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The details on alternative designs are described in the EAs. The following environmental 
and social impacts were identified:  
 
Component A  
 
-
General increase in traffic congestion during construction  
 
-
Loss of employment in adjacent commercial activity during construction  
 
-
Risk of construction related accidents  
 
-
Increased noise and vibration levels along construction fronts and routes to support 
areas  
 
-
Public utility service interruption during construction  
 
-
Expropriation  
 
-
Disturbance of architectural land marks and other cultural property  
Page  4
-
Reduction in the availability of external parking spaces  
 
-
Re-routing and rationalization of daladala lines  
 
Component B  
 
-
Dust/air pollution from operation of vehicles and construction equipment along the 
road and borrow pits  
 
-
Noise and vibrations from operation of vehicles/equipments/machinery along the road 
and borrow pits  
 
-
Soil and water pollution from accumulation of solid wastes and uncontrolled discharge 
of liquid wastes in construction camp site may cause contamination of both ground and 
surface water sources.  
 
-
Destruction of /river banks vegetation due to the movement of heavy machinery and 
trucks close to the river bank this could lead to a increased river bank erosion and 
sedimentation of river bed  
 
-
Destruction of adjacent land use and properties from changes in drainage patterns 
which may result into concentration of water flow leading to flooding and soil erosion.  
 
-
Increased traffic related road accidents from over speeding due to improved road 
pavement causing increased risk to livestock and pedestrians.  
 
-
Increased incidence of HIV/AIDS and STI from interaction between the construction 
workers and the local causing transmission of the diseases from one party to another.  
 
-
Creation of breeding sites for mosquitoes and other water borne vectors from 
accumulated water in the borrow pits.  
 
-
Disruption of traffic flow during construction due to movement of heavy machinery 
and construction vehicles resulting in traffic congestion during construction.  
 
Component C  
 
-
Loss of vegetation and landscape effects due to required substantial amount of 
excavated construction materials like sand, gravels and aggregates for earth fill, sub 
grade, gravel surfacing and drainage structures.  In the process of excavating these 
construction materials, the contractor will affect the landscape of the sites where these 
materials area taken from.  
 
-
Disease (HIV/AIDS, STI) infection and transmission due consistently association and 
interaction of construction workers with the local people.  
 
-
Abandoned pits filled with rainwater harbor disease vectors responsible for malaria, 
schistosomiasis, cholera, dysentery etc which may bring threats to the communities.  
 
-
Waste Production at the campsite and batch plant  
 
-
Threats of encroachment due to human settlements near the airport  
 
-
Occupational health and safety during construction phase  
 
-
Increased noise and vibration during construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Component A  
 
Page  5
Positive Impacts: Reliable and comfortable public transport provided, reduced green 
house gas emissions, reduced accidents and air pollution-related illnesses, increase civic 
pride and sense of community, reduced noise levels, enhancement of non motorized 
transport, more sustainable urban form and city beautification.  
 
Negative Impacts: Jobs will be lost in the current daladala system, while a similar 
amount (about 3000) will be created by the DART system. There will, however, not be an 
automatic transfer and skill needs in the new system will be somehow more demanding. 
There will also be loss of employment in adjacent commercial activities.  
 
Component B  
 
The potential positive indirect and/or long-term impacts are: decreased vehicle operating 
cost, increased economic activities in the area including increased tourisme in the 
Usambara mountains.  
 
The potential incirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the 
project area are: increase road accidents due to higher vehicle speed (mitigated against 
through speed reduction measures such as speed bumps at village entries and protected 
pedestrain crossings), and increased agricultural activies using unsustainable methods.  
 
Component C  
 
The potential positive indirect and/or long-term impacts anticipated are: increased use of 
larger and more modern (less polluting)planes, increased tourism and related economic 
activities, increase air cargo that could reduce the congestion at the seaport, and increased 
attractiveness of the airport for future public-private partnership arrangements.  
 
Identified negative potential indirect and/or long term impacts are increased air traffic 
noise, and negative impact on the island's value systems due to excessive tourism.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Component A  
 
The design alternative chosen for DART minimizes the need for resettlement, that is 
system cross-sections were, as far as possible, adjusted to fit with the available space.  
 
Buses operating with natural gas with potentially lower emissions were considered for 
DART but not chosen due to operational issues (heavy gas tanks and need for frequent 
refill). The chosen alternative is diesel engines that fullfil Euro II emission standards.  
 
Component B  
 
A
bypass was considered at Mombo town since the existing cross-section can not be 
expanded. The realignment option was not chosen due to high cost involving 
compensation and building of a new bridge over the Mombo river.  
Page  6
Component C  
 
There were no project alternatives considered for the Zanzibar Airport runway 
rehabilitation/extension.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Assessments were prepared for each of the project components to 
identify, assess and mitigate the potential environmental and social impacts.  The 
Government has also prepared a Sectoral Environmental Assessment for the Transport 
Sector as well as EA Guidelines. The EAs were prepared on the basis of these guidelines.  
 
The design and bidding documents for the works under this project have taken the 
recommendations of the EA into account including, soil erosion control measures, 
requirements for the handling of waste materials, mandatory HIV awarness campaigns, 
road safety measures, etc.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)was prepared for the urban transport 
component and was cleared in February 2007. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the 
urban transport component was prepared in two stages. Phase 1a was cleared and 
disclosed on July 30, 2007, and phase 1b was disclosed on December 5, 2007. No RAPs 
were required for components B and C.  
 
The RAP includes compensation for the loss of employment in adjacent commercial 
activities through indirectly affected commercial relocation assistance,relocation 
assistance for informal users of the right of way and income restoration assistance as per 
RPF requirements.  
 
Besides the measures taken under the RAP for project affected people there will be a 
special program, once operations of the system commences (planned for July 2010, for 
the compensation of people involved in daladala operations with the objective of 
providing affected daladala owners, drivers and conductors with opportunities in the new 
system once it commences to operate. Owners will be given preferential access to shares 
that will be made available by the future bus compagny (as mandated in the operator's 
contract agreement). Also, affected daladalas will be allocted to new routes in hiterto 
underserved areas. Daladala drivers and conductors that are affected by the DART 
system will be given training opportunities for the enhancement of their skills which 
would increase their chances to be engaged by the new bus operator. The mitigations 
measures for the dalalada operators are described in detail in the RAP and the ESIA 
prepared for this component.  
 
For the Zanzibar airport component, in order to address safety and security concerns, it 
was agreed that the completion of the airport fencing will be accelerated during 
Page  7
construction and the contractor will be required to finalize the enclosure after 7 months of 
works (after 50% of the total contract duration).  
 
Under the proposed additional financing to this credit it is planned to construct an 
additional bus depot at the Jangwani area. For this a special EA is currently being 
conducted. This area was not among the areas proposed for depot location in the original 
ESIA prepared.  
 
The borrower has shown to have adequate capacity to plan and implement the measures 
described in the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments of the Project. 
Institutional arrangements for environmental and social management are included in 
relevant safeguards documentation.  Each of the executing agencies under this project has 
an environmental and socil unit (the one of the DART agency is only in the process of 
being created and once created its capacity will be assessed and necessary action will be 
taken to develope its capacity).   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Component A  
 
Extensive consultations were conducted during ESIA preparation. This included a wide 
variety of stakeholders, including public entities with direct or indirect involvement with 
the project, as well as residents and businesses located along the corridor, and also those 
that will be directly affected by expropriation.  
 
The main public entities / public officers consulted during ESIA preparation include:  
 
Vice President's Office (VPO)  
 
Prime Minister's Office (PMO)  
 
National Environnent Management Council (NEMC)  
 
Tanzania Electricity Supply Company (TANESCO)  
 
Dar Es Salaam Water and Sewage Corporation (DAWASCO)  
 
Tanzania Telephone Communication Limited (TTCL)  
 
Tanzania Railways Corporation (TRC)  
 
Dar Es Salaam City Council (DCC)  
 
The Municipalities of Temeke, Kinondoni and Ilala  
 
Ward Executive Officers along the alignment  
 
Further to public entity consultation, several local experts and university professors 
specialized on transportation planning, urban planning, environmental management and 
other pertinent skills were contacted and contributed with their views toward adjustment 
of the DART project to better meet local needs. Similarly, a representative sample of 
project affected peoples (PAP) including Daladala operators was interviewed in order to 
obtain an idea of expectations on the project and other information useful for planning of 
future project disclosure.  Also add after this sentence:  Consultation of all PAPs and all 
relevant stakeholders is an interactif process and will continue during project 
implementation, per the RAP consultation/participation framework.  
Page  8
Component B  
 
The consultation process involved various stakeholders at national, regional, district and 
community levels during the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
studies. The important stakeholders include professionals from relevant institutions such 
as NEMC, TANROADS Regional Managers, District Councils (DED, District Land Use 
Planners) and Ward Executives Officers and Local Community members from several 
Wards. Other consultation was carried out with existing local Non-Governmental 
Organization NGOs such as the Same Agricultural Improvement Programme (SAIPRO) 
and the Same - Mwanga Environmental Conservation Advisory Office (SMECAO).  
 
Component C  
 
Relevant local authorities in Zanzibar were consulted during the assessment exercise.  
 
The reports for all the three components were disclosed by advertising in news papers 
informing the public where they can find the reports. The reports can be accessed in at 
least one location and stakeholders, including the community at large have been 
encouraged to access the report as the disclosure enhances transparency and 
accountability in the implementation of the project. The reports for all the three 
components were disclosed by advertising in news papers informing the public where 
they can find the reports: TANROADS HQ offices, DART Agency Office, Konondoni 
Municipal council, Illala Municipal council.  
 
During preparation, the EAs and RPF and RAPs were advertised on July 30, 2007 in the 
local papers and were available for review in various locations. During appraisal, public 
meetings were held on October 18, 24, 29, 30 2007, and on November 3, 2007 to present 
the final reports.  Other meetings will be held during implementation as needs arise.  
Through the meetings and media coverage, the Project expects that the general public and 
the PAPs in particular will understand their rights and the applicable procedures.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/30/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/05/2007  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/05/2007 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/05/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dieter E. Schelling 
12/05/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Nina Chee 
12/05/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
12/05/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/05/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
 
Comments:   
