Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3063
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P098496 
Project Name:  Science & Technology Higher Education Program (Phase 1) 
Task Team Leader:  Arun R. Joshi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to increase the quantity and quality of higher 
education graduates, with special emphasis on science, technology and education, 
through an improved learning environment.   
 
3. Project Description 
1.  The long-
term Program Purpose is to enhance Tanzania’s capacity to apply knowledge 
to economic activity by building and strengthening its higher education system. A 
capacity to access progress and to monitor labor market outcomes of higher education 
graduates will be developed.  
 
2.  The Project will invest in two broad areas: (a) capacity to deliver specific degree 
projects of high priority; and (b) institutions and systems to support higher education 
generally.  
 
3.  Component 1A – Investments in Priority Disciplines for Economic Growth 
(US$47.36 million).  This component funds subproject proposals from higher education 
institutions to increase access and improve their capacity to deliver quality education/ 
Page  2
training in the science and technology priority fields (see complete list in Annex 4).  
Investments will include expanding and upgrading physical facilities, procuring relevant 
‘quality enhancing inputs’, training, and technical assistance.  The selection of 
subprojects has been based on a negotiated but competitive process between Government 
of Tanzania officials, led by the MHEST, and the university community.  Each Proposal 
identified a problem to be addressed, and described the background, outputs, and 
expected inputs from the requested grant. Proposals requested support in the specific 
areas of: (i) curricula and organization of instruction (ii) staff and human capital 
development (iii) student selection - especially related to projected demand for degree 
projects (iv) physical infrastructure and equipment (v) relationship to the overall mandate 
of the requesting institution.  
 
4.  Approximately 60 proposals were submitted during Project preparation.  Proposals 
were evaluated by a Technical Committee appointed by MHEST, and were also reviewed 
by the World Bank staff.  Selection depended on the extent to which: (i) additional 
numbers and improved quality of human resources and knowledge in the area might lead 
to an acceleration of growth in a vital sector of the Tanzanian economy; (ii) new 
knowledge generated would likely address key development problems such as addressing 
Tanzania’s energy problems, increasing value-addition in agriculture etc.; (iii) additional 
investment could overcome obstacles to growth of other disciplines; (iv) additional 
investment might encourage more students to pursue studies in the critical disciplines.  
On the basis of this process, 24 proposals with a total cost of $45 million were accepted 
for financing under the project.  
 
5.  Grants will fund equipment, staff development, visiting professorships, and limited 
civil works.   The subprojects will be reviewed by an independent advisory team, which 
can provide guidance and oversight on the general direction of the Program over its 
lifetime.  
 
6.  Under the project, technical assistance will be provided to design the Flexible 
Financing Facility (FFF), planned for implementation under APL2.   The FFF will be a 
continuing institutional mechanism to make available public funds to higher education 
institutions on a competitive basis, using high standards to solicit, peer review, select and 
monitor proposals.  Design of the FFF will require considerable dialogue among 
stakeholders, and some parts may benefit from technical assistance.  
 
7.  Component 1B - Expanded capacity for teacher preparation and for graduate studies 
in education (US$ 35 million). As noted in above, Tanzania faces a serious deficit in the 
supply of degree-holding secondary school teachers, especially for mathematics, science, 
and languages.  The Project will support the preparation of degree-holding teachers, 
particularly in mathematics, science and languages. Specifically, the Dar es Salaam 
University College of Education (DUCE), the Mkwawa University College of Education 
(MUCE), and the State University of Zanzibar (SUZA) will be assisted with equipment, 
library materials, staff development, and ICT, and relevant technical assistance in order 
to expand the number of graduates and improve quality.  The Project will also enhance 
Page  3
the capacity of the Open University of Tanzania (OUT) to provide distance education 
courses for up
grading of “A” level graduates employed as secondary school teachers.  
 
8.  The Project will provide technical assistance in support of the development of 
graduate studies in education at two Faculties of the University of Dar es Salaam: the 
Faculty of Education, and the Faculty of Science (for “science with education”).  The 
projects to be supported include preparation of new graduate projects, training teacher 
trainers for mathematics, science, and languages; life-long education and guidance and 
counselling projects. The support will consist of equipment, staff development, and 
visiting lecturers.  
 
9.  Component 2A: Strengthening Key Higher Education Agencies and Institutions. 
(US$ 8.5 million). This component will strengthen the Ministry of Education and the 
other sub-sector agencies through provision of relevant equipment and software, training 
and staff development, and relevant technical assistance.  The agencies to be supported 
include:  
 
•
The Tanzania Commission for Universities (TCU) is responsible for accreditation of 
projects and quality assurance functions  
 
•
The Higher Education Students Loans Board (HESLB), responsible for policy 
andimplementation of the main student financing mechanism.  
 
•The National Council for Technical Education (NACTE), responsible for 
qualityassurance and labour market responsiveness for non-university tertiary 
institutions.  
 
•The Tanzania Education Authority (TEA), the main agency for the selection 
andallocation of capital improvement projects and infrastructure funding for the 
Tanzanian education system.  
 
•The Tanzanian Commission for Science and Technology (COSTECH), responsible 
forresearch funding and science and technology policy.  
 
•The Ministry of Education (MoE) responsible for policy formulation and monitoring 
and evaluation of the implementation of policies, in collaboration with THEDC and other 
relevant national institutions.  
 
10.  Rapid assessments of the capacity of these institutions have been conducted.  
Capacity-building would be designed to reinforce specific capacities required by each 
agency to best fulfil its mandate. MoE, for example, will benefit from well-qualified 
consultancy services with international experience for sub-sector financial modelling, and 
to support adoption of formula-based funding, among other needs.  A new system of 
national assessment of the learning of science and technology students will be 
established.  In the case of the HESLB, for example, capacity-building and technical 
assistance activities would revolve around improvement of tracking and recovery of 
students’ debts, targeting of assistance to needy students, and identification of efficiency 
gains through modernization of record keeping. Activities for the TCU would reinforce 
its capacity to carry out the academic audits that form the core of its program 
accreditation function. Other support would increase its in-house capacity for budget and 
Page  4
resource allocation analysis at the systems level.  Similarly, mandates and needs have 
been assessed for the other institutions as well.  
 
11.  Additionally, during the APL2 Phase, training will be developed and provided to 
managers of higher education institutions.  
 
12.  Component 2B: Investments in System-wide ICT and Libraries (US$7 million).The 
objective of this component is, as the education sector expands, to better manage the 
increasing numbers of students; improve the quality of data used in decision making and 
resource management; enhance knowledge sharing; improve transparency; and improve 
classroom, e-learning, and increase research capability.  Investments will include 
equipment, training, and technical assistance to prepare the groundwork for laying the 
network.  Design and piloting will take place under this project, and network will be 
implemented under APL2.  The ICT investment component will include four areas:  
 
(i)  Provision of high-quality connectivity to research and higher education institutions 
(HEIs), as well as MoE, MSTC, and other sub-sector agencies, through a National 
Research and Education Network (NREN) ;  
 
(ii)  Higher Education Management Information System (EMIS). The EMIS will be 
deployed on the one hand in the Ministry of Education and affiliated parastatal bodies to 
manage the higher education sector and, on the other hand, in the HEIs to manage the 
financial, personnel, and general administration functions.  
 
(iii)  Electronic support to libraries in the HEIs and research institutions. A library 
management system or a few different systems, along with a meta-layer for information 
exchange, will be deployed in the HEIs and research institutions for more efficient library 
management. Efforts will also be made to link with the ongoing ENASP. In addition, 
provision will be made for gaining access to science and research databases. Efforts will 
be made to link with ongoing projects on electronic support to libraries.  
 
(iv)  E-learning resources for teachers and students in the HEIs.  Provision will be made 
for HEIs to acquire networked computers and multimedia devices and tools to enhance 
the efficiency and quality of classroom teaching and learning, and to give students and 
teachers access to network-based electronic resources.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Tanzania: This is a national program that will focus on higher learning Institutions.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Minor construction and/ or rehabilitation of exisiting facilities are envisaged. As a result, 
minor environmental impact is expected. An ESMF has been prepared by the 
Government. No new land is expected to be acquired for major construction and no re-
settlement is expected.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An ESMF has been prepared and the Government has agreed to implement it during 
project implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Ministry of Education, Ministry of Science & Technology, and participating higher 
education Institutions.  No major environmental issues are foreseen.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/26/2007 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/26/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/26/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Arun R. Joshi 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
 
Comments:   
