Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4146 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/11/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tanzania 
Project ID: P111598 
Project Name: Backbone Transmission Investment Project 
Task Team Leader: Pankaj Gupta 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: December 24, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Analysis of economic growth (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
African Development Bank 
50.00 
 
KOREA, Rep of: Economic Development Cooperation Fund 
50.00 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
75.00 
 
JAPAN: Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) 
75.00
250.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve sufficiency, security and reliability of grid 
based power to business enterprises, households and large industrial customers by increasing the 
capacity of the transmission system to supply power to Northwest Tanzania.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The current 220 kV backbone transmission line is not capable of handling the current and 
growing load in the north of the country. Hence, the project proposes to construct a new 400 kV 
AC (high voltage) backbone transmission line from Iringa to Shinyanga via Dodoma and Singida 
in order to reinforce and enhance security of power supply in north-western Tanzania.  
 
Two project components are proposed:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: 400 kV Transmission Investments (US$390 million)  
 
It is proposed that this component supports the hard investments related to the backbone 
transmission line.  Three sub-components have been identified on a preliminary basis. These 
include:  
 
(i) Component 1.1 will support the construction of a new backbone transmission line between 
Iringa and Shinyanga:  This component includes the construction of an approximately 650 km 
HVAC 400 kV line which will have a total transmission capacity of 2000 MW (after completion 
of both phases) from Iringa via Mtera, Dodoma and Singida to Shinyanga.  Although the 
transmission line would be designed as a double circuit line, only one circuit would be strung 
initially as the first development phase under the project with a transmission capacity of 1,000 
MW. There will be 400/220 kV substations installed in Iringa (2- 3x75MVA), Dodoma (1x100 
MVA by 2020), Singida (1x150 MA) and Shinyanga (2x250 MVA), including reactive 
compensation equipment. The 400 kV substations will be built next to the 220kV existing 
substations.  Where possible, the access roads for the 220 kV line will be used for construction of 
the new line, in an effort to minimize any negative impacts on communities and physical assets. 
There are alternative routes which will help to minize negative impacts communities and 
physical assets.   Some of the roads are in bad condition and will require restoration.  Some new 
roads will be required, mainly for segments of the 400 kV line that diverge from the existing 
line. An estimated 1300 households will be affected.  The project design at this preliminary 
stage, however, anticipates that alignment alternatives still under consideration would probably 
reduce this number to an estimated 800.  
 
This subcomponent is expected to cost US$370 million.  
 
(ii) Component 1.2 will support the construction of associated facilities, to enable the provision 
of rural electrification along the new transmission line:  This subcomponent will finance the 
investment option that is identified to support electrification in rural areas along the proposed 
transmission line.  This subcomponent is expected to cost US$5 million.  At present, different 
options for rural electrification are being investigated.  These include, medium voltage 
distribution, Single Wire Earth Return (SWER), and Shield Wire Systems using Insulated 
Overhead Earth Wire (IOEW), capacitive coupling, capacitive transformer substations, single-
phase voltage transformers or a combination thereof.  
 
(iii) Component 1.3 will support the construction of Optical Fiber composite overhead ground 
wires: TANESCO has currently in service about 2,050 km Optic Fiber Communication Network, 
equipped with transmission equipment based on Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing 
(DWDM) and as service layer Synchronous Digital Hierarchy (SDH). The Optic Fiber 
Communication Network covers the Northern ring of Tanzania, from Dar es Salaam, Morogoro, 
Kidatu, Kihansi, Iringa, Dodoma, Singida, Arusha, Mashi, Tanga to Chalinze. In line with the 
requirements and industry practices for such transmission lines, it is proposed that this 
subcomponent supports the installation of Optical fiber composite overhead ground wire 
(OPGW)  on the proposed line, including an optical terminal and access equipment at Shinyanga.  
This subcomponent is expected to cost US$15 million.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Technical Assistance to TANESCO (US$10 million)  
 
It is proposed that this component consist of two key themes: (i) to support the implementation 
of the hard investments considered in Component 1; and (ii) to support technical assistance to 
TANESCO to improve its capacity in designing, developing, executing and monitoring 
investment projects, including environmental and social capacities,  both in the public and 
private sector.  
 
(i) Component 2.1 will support the consultancy services to assist TANESCO with project 
management and supervision of design, construction and preparation for operation and 
maintenance of the investment undertaken in Component 1.  The services will include 
certifications for contractor payment, supervision during construction/implementation and 
preparation of reports required by IDA and TANESCO, know how transfer and training for staff 
as well as ensuring that environmental and social safeguard policies are being adhered to with 
due diligence and other related issues.  It is expected that TANESCO will also need to purchase 
service vehicles, such as stations wagons and/or light trucks to carry out these operations.  This 
subcomponent is expected to finance US$3 million of technical assistance to TANESCO.  
 
(ii) Component 2.2 will support capacity building for TANESCO.  A detailed design of this 
component will be carried out to ensure that a complete TA package is available to TANESCO.  
At present it is expected assistance will be provided to support technical, legal, financial, 
environmental, and social advisors to support TANESCO in developing and implementing 
greenfield or existing public or private transmission, distribution, and generation projects.  This 
subcomponent is expected to finance about US$7 million of technical assistance to TANESCO.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The transmission line will follow a trace of approximately 680 km from Iringa to Shinyanga.  
Alternative alignments for some sections are still under review, but it’s anticipated that much of 
the alignment (approximates 92 percent) will beadjacent and parallel to an existing 220-kV line.  
Divergences from the existing line are to avoid or minimize adverse impacts, mainly 
resettlement. The design will avoid any negative impacts on national parks or game reserves.  
It’s expected however, that the line will cross Forest Reserves for 40 km of its length, closed 
woodland or closed bushland for 92 km, seasonally inundated land for 24 km, and settled areas 
for 34 km.  For the remainder of its length, it will pass through open bush and grassland.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
TANESCO has an Environment and Social Unit headed by a Chief Research Environmental 
Engineer, with two environmental engineers, one investigative engineer, and a Social Scientist 
(recruited as a condition under TEDAP and recommended earlier under Songo Songo) as its 
professional staff. The unit has demonstrated experience in the preparation of safeguards 
documents for transmission lines and in implementing environmental and social impact 
management measures. However the unit would need to intensify its supervision activities and  
make use of  further technical assistance for monitoring the project.  Given the recent recruitment 
of the social staff (only
 one), there’s a need for further training in social safeguard policies and 
their implementation.  Given the scope of the work it’s also important that the unit avail itself of 
Page  4
technical assistance both in the area of training as well as use of consultancy services, 
particularly in support of its supervision activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTU2) 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) applies because the investments will be in power 
transmission line and substations. Impacts are being minimized by paralleling and existing 
transmission line for 92 percent of the route and planning new construction at substations to be 
within existing substation boundaries.  TANESCO is preparing an ESIA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
According to the preliminary alignment, the line will pass through Forest Reserves and other 
woodland and bushland. Whether any of this would be considered critical natural habitat and the 
extent to which construction and operation of the line will cause conversion or degradation of 
any natural habitat will be considered in the ESIA and assessed in the field during the next 
preparation mission.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).  The applicability of the PCR policy will be 
determined in the ESIA.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Where the line parallels the existing 220-kV line, the additional ROW to be acquired will be 
70 m wide.  Where the line diverges from the existing line, a 90-m ROW will be acquired.  
Preliminary indications are that an estimated 1300 houses may be affected. The following is a 
rough breakdown of the numbers at various sites:  366 between Iringa and Dodoma, 366 between 
Dodoma and Singida and 586 between Singida and Shinyanga.  These are only estimates and 
design alternatives are being explored to reduce the number of affected households. The RAP is 
under preparation. A socio-economic survey of the affected households would need to be 
prepared in order to have a more definite indication of the nature and scope of the Resettlement 
Action Plan and to adequately inform its implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/05/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguards instruments for BTIP will be an ESIA and a RAP.  Both are already in 
preparation by Decon, a German firm, and the Institute of Resource Assessment, a Tanzanian 
organization.  Neither of these companies is responsible for engineering design of the line.  
Completion of the first draft ESIA occurred in January 2009.  It has been sent to the National 
Environmental Management Council (NEMC) and the Bank for review and clearance prior to 
public disclosure in Tanzania.  The draft RAP is expected later in 2009.  It will be sent to the 
Ministry of Lands and Human Settlement Development and to the Bank for review and 
clearance prior to public disclosure in Tanzania. Both the ESIA and RAP will be disclosed in 
country and in the Bank’s InfoShop before appraisal. The SMU has agreed to accept transfer 
of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pankaj Gupta 
02/11/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/11/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
