Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/28/2009 
Report No.:  AC4153
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P114291 
Project Name:  Tanzania - Accelerated Food Security Project 
Task Team Leader:  Madhur Gautam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTAR 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (100%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
160.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to contribute to higher food production and 
productivity in tar
geted areas by improving farmers’ access to critical agricultural inputs 
over the next three years. The proposed instrument for the project is the Emergency 
Recovery Operation processed under the Global Food Crisis Response Program (GFRP) 
and OP 8.00. The project will support measures to mitigate or avert the potential impacts 
of imminent or future emergencies in Tanzania.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Accelerated Food Security Project is proposed to have three main components: (i) 
improving the access to agricultural inputs (fertilizers and seeds); (ii) strengthening input 
supply chains; and (iii) project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This 
project is designed to promote a quick supply response and to avert a potential emergency 
situation of food shortages in an environment of continued food and input price risk 
globally and in Tanzania.  As such, the design tries to balance the inherent risks of in 
working in such emergency situations, including the lost opportunities associated with a 
delayed response, with the need for speed and flexibility to ensure an effective rapid 
response.  It also builds on the lessons from the implementation of the National Input 
Voucher Scheme (NAIVS) in 2008/09 and similar programs in other countries such as 
Page  2
Malawi. The design also recognizes the critical importance of carrying out public 
awareness campaign and other supporting activities within and outside the 
project.Descriptions of the three components are:  
 
Component 1 "Access to agricultural inputs (fertilizers and seeds)" will support (i) the 
scaling-up the on-going NAIVS and put the scheme on a more sustainable footing and (ii) 
improving farmers’ awareness, information and participation inNAIVS. The scheme will 
be scaled up to 53 districts in Tanzania’s high potentialzones for maize and rice in the 
first year and eventually to 65 districts in the country. The NAIVS provides vouchers to 
maize and rice producing farmers carrying a 50% subsidy on the price of a one acre 
package of improved seeds and fertilizers.  
 
Component 2 "Strengthening of input supply chain" will support farmers access to 
improved agricultural inputs by: (i) strengthening and widening of the agro-dealer 
network through training and capacity building; and (ii) strengthening national seed 
systems to improve the availability of quality seeds for maize, rice and other  crop 
species.  
 
Component 3 "Project management and monitoring and impact evaluation" will support 
the program management, regular monitoring of its progress and rigorous impact 
evaluation of its outcomes.  
 
This project, the Accelerated Food Security Project (US$160 million) is one of three 
proposed operations under the Accelerated Food Security Program. The other two 
operations, being processed simultaneously but separately, will support complementary 
investments and initiatives to enhance food security in Tanzania.  These are (a) 
Additional Financing (US$30 million) for Agriculture Sector Development Program 
(ASDP)to scale up small-scale irrigation investments and improve soil fertility 
management services, and (b) Additional Financing (US$30 million) for the Second 
Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF II) to scale-up the rural safety net for the poor and 
vulnerable groups through provision of public works program and direct support for the 
most vulnerable groups.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project will be implemented initially in 53 districts and eventually in a total 
of 65 districts in the main maize and rice growing areas of Tanzania. The NAIVS is 
expected to reach a total of 2.5 million farmers over the duration of the project. Each 
participating farmer will receive vouchers for a 50% subsidy for the purchase of a 
package of improved seeds and fertilizers sufficient for application on one acre of land. 
The target crops are maize (85% of recipients) and rice (15% of recipients). Maize will be 
primarily targeted in high potential maize zones (which have reasonably assured rainfall) 
and rice will be targeted primarily to farmers with access to irrigation. The project will 
also support strengthening of input supply chains by providing training for agro-dealers 
for the supply of seeds and fertilizers, and to strengthen the national seeds systems.  Part 
of the investment under Component 2 will help rehabilitate two Foundation Seed farms 
Page  3
under the management of Agriculture Seeds Agency, including rehabilitation of irrigation 
infrastructure at these farms to help foundation (basic) seeds production on a total of 
about 200 hectares. It will also support investments in irrigation equipment for the 
production of pre-basic seeds on a total of 25 hecatres spread out over three Agricultural 
Research Insitutes (Ayole-Mbeya, Ilonga-Kilosa and Salian-Arusha).  Given the project 
objectives of increasing food production and productivity, for the proposed activities 
issues of soil fertility and water availability would be key determinants in understanding 
potential safeguards issues. Since the complementary investments for small scale 
irrigation development are financed under the companion operation, Additional 
Financing for ASDP, the associated safeguards issues are addressed in that project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTCS) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will help farmers purchase seeds and fertilizers by providing a 50% subsidy 
through the use of vouchers.  With increased production through the increased use for 
better seeds and fertilizers, it is possible that some farmers will also increase the use of 
other agricultural inputs such as pesticides. Part of the scheme will be targeted at rice, 
which is becoming increasingly popular but is also a water intensive crop; it is likely that 
the project will encourage the use of water and stimulate an increase in the demand for 
irrigation investments.  
 
The environmental and social impacts of the project are associated with the increased 
use of agricultural inputs, both as a direct result of the promotional subsidies provided by 
the voucher, and eventually through sustained increase in the use of such inputs over the 
long term as farmers start to reap the benefits of higher productivity.  
 
Page  4
The impacts from the use of fertilizers, and potentially from the increased use of 
pesticides, are both local and widespread, spread over short, medium and long-term:  
local in the sense that these substances have a direct impact on the soil ecosystems 
around the immediate vicinity of their use and widespread from non-point source 
pollution effects on ground and surface water resources. Increased use of chemical 
fertilizers, improved seeds and irrigation facilities could also cause an increase in pest 
pressure (new pests and upsurge of historically minor pests) which in turn may lead to an 
increase in the use of synthetic pesticides, with associated potential human and 
environmental hazards.  
 
The impacts from increased water use will affect mostly surface water availability from 
Tanzania’s many lakes and rivers through mostly small (less than 500 acres) district level 
irrigation schemes. For these to be set up, however, they have to follow the ESMF, RPF 
and IPMP documents that have been prepared and are in use under the ASDP. Many of 
these rivers and lakes are riparian sources and with cyclical water stress issues in terms of 
medium term availability. These concerns of water availability on existing resources pose 
an additional concern on the quality of the water at these sources. Therefore, increased 
use of water for agricultural purposes has concerns for potential quantity and quality of 
the surface water sources; these concerns are being addressed in the Strategic 
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) being undertaken as part of the ASDP 
based on a broader context of a sub-regional integrated water use and management 
approach to fully understand and address these concerns. Letters of notification of the 
proposed increased use of water from the affected international waterways were sent to 
the riparian countries on April 21, 2009.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
On pesticides and fertilizers, the potential indirect impacts are expected to be the 
following: (i) creation of a market for use of harmful chemical substances due to 
increased demand, which could either be made locally or smuggled in, and (ii) increased 
pressure on already stretched local institutions to implement an integrated management 
approach. The long-term impacts potentially are: (i) damage of soil ecosystems, possible 
development of pesticide resistant pest species, upsurge of traditionally minor pests, and 
potential elimination of useful fauna and flora species; (ii) inappropriate contact with 
human and animal populations; and (iii) entry of residues of these substances into the 
food chains creating food and environmental safety issues.  
 
Regarding water, the physical impacts on quality and quantity are direct and immediate. 
Long-term potential impact is added stress on weak local and regional institutions to 
increase capacity to manage water resources in an integrated approach, using more 
effective rights allocation, monitoring and surveillance systems.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Government, through the ASDP Additional Financing, will link soil fertility and 
water availability information to the distribution of vouchers to better ensure sought after 
Page  5
productivity and production gains are achieved. This means that targeting of the vouchers 
would be undertaken using a strategic approach that will include consideration of these 
issues. Integrated pest management (IPM) will be emphasized in all the target areas. 
Baseline data on farmer knowledge, practice, attitudes, pest pressure and types, and 
environmental health biological indicators should be established for all irrigation projects 
for M&E purposes. This would enhance opportunities for the optimum use of the inputs, 
meaning that areas of low soil fertility and low irrigation potential may not be targeted 
due to the likelihood that productivity and production gains can be realized in other areas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The World Bank and the Government are working to address these issues by developing 
an appropriate environmental and social management system that will comply with the 
World Bank’s safeguards policies, the Government’s own requirements andrelevant and 
appropriate international best practice.  
 
Therefore in compliance with the World Bank’s Environmental Assessment OP4.01 and 
the Governments own national requirements, the Environmental Assessment consists of a 
package of stand-alone documents which are: ( a) the ESMF developed and in use in the 
existing ASDP to manage investments in Component 2.2, (b) an INMP to be developed 
within 3 months of the project approval date to manage the use of the inputs (fertilizers 
and seeds) that will be purchased using the voucher scheme and (c) a revised and updated 
IPMP of the ASDP to manage the use of pesticides. These are described in more detail 
below.  
 
A. For the use of Seeds and Fertilizers: The Government will develop an Integrated 
Nutrient Management Plan (INMP). This plan will be completed after World Bank 
approval of this project in line with emergency provisions under OP8.00. The exact date 
for its completion will be agreed with the Government during project negotiations.  
 
B. For the use of Pesticides: The Government has proposed to the Bank that it wants to 
adopt and mainstream the original Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) prepared 
under the Agriculture Sector Development Program (P085752) in August 2004, for use in 
Tanzania more generally, but also for activities covered under this operation in particular.  
The Task Team has agreed to this approach and has:  
 
1. Reviewed the overall comprehensiveness of the original IPMP; the Government is in 
the process of updating it to ensure it captures all of the activities being funded in this 
project thereby  ensuring compliance with OP4.09 and the Government’s own 
requirements.  
 
2.
Reviewed the Government’s performance in implementing the original IPMP in the 
ASDP which has been effective since 2006 to draw lessons from that experience.  
 
3.
In so doing, the Task Team has identified capacity gaps in the institutional and 
regulatory framework.  In response to this, the Government is finalizing a stand-alone 
Page  6
Integrated Pest Management Capacity Building Plan to ensure effective implementation 
of the IPMP that is sustainable beyond the life of the project.  
 
C. For increased Water Use: This project will not finance irrigation other than on the 2 
ASA farms and 3 ARIs under Component 2.2 as stated earlier. However, the increased 
demand for water induced by the voucher scheme is likely, and this will be provided 
through irrigation services financed through the ASDP. The Government has asked the 
World Bank for Additional Financing (AF) for the ASDP to increase the area under 
small-scale irrigation which is being contemporaneously prepared with this project. 
About 95% of the additional funds would be earmarked for district irrigation schemes in 
the ASDP.  
 
The increased demand for water require that the Government send out new Riparian 
Notification Letters to cover the proposed additional/new areas and water abstraction 
quantities, which exceed the quantities stated in the original notification letters sent out 
by the World Bank on behalf of the Government on April 4th, 2006. The Government has 
again requested the World Bank to send out the new riparian notification letters on their 
behalf in a letter dated April 2, 2009. The notification letters, for investments under this 
project as well as AF-ASDP, were sent on April 21, 2009.  
 
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) being prepared under the 
current ASDP which will adequately cover the irrigation issues in this project as well as 
in the agriculture sector broadly in Tanzania.  The SESA will cover the country’s national 
irrigation policy, national irrigation master plan and will provide specific guidance for the 
preparation of Environmental Assessments (EA) for individual national level irrigation 
projects. The contract to engage a private consulting firm for the preparation of the SEA 
was signed by the Government in March 2009.  
 
Component 2.2 will finance rehabilitation of two seed farms’ irrigation facilities to 
irrigate 200 ha for foundation (basic) seed production and 25 ha of land on three ARIs for 
the production of breeder (pre-basic) seeds.  The Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), prepared and being used for ASDP will cover the safeguards 
management of these investments. The ESMF requires preparation of the EMP’s for 
these investments in Component 2.2. These EMPs will be prepared prior to 
implementation of the works when the engineering designs for these works are being 
prepared.  
 
D.Cumulative Impacts  
 
During the third year of project implementation and no later than three months before 
the project is closed, the Government has agreed to complete a Cumulative Impact 
Assessment (CIA) report to determine the cumulative impacts of this operation.  This will 
allow a better appreciation of the issues involved as well as to determine the effectiveness 
of the various plans (e.g. SEA, IPMP, INMP, ESMF, etc)  
 
E. Capacity Assessments  
Page  7
With regard to the Government’s capacity to plan and implement these measures, 
substantial progress has been made over the years in a number of Bank funded operations 
in this sector, such as PADEP and ASDP. Nevertheless, substantial room for 
improvement remains as institutional and technical capacity for environmental and social 
management at the district and lower levels is still extremely weak.  This remains a cause 
of concern for the Task Team. This is being addressed in detail in the individual plans 
and reports noted above, and will be adequately funded in the project. These plans 
have/will have undertaken substantial capacity assessments in the key implementing 
institution, and will develop the requisite capacity building plans to address the gaps. The 
annexes in the project paper will provide greater details on capacity issues.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the farmers to whom the vouchers would be targeted, their 
associations and farmer groups, the agribusiness dealers, national research and extension 
service providers, national and local institutions such as the water boards, border customs 
agents, etc., depending on the plan in question. The preparation and/or revision of the 
various plans and documents detailed above is expected to be an on-going process and 
will involve participatory and meaningful consultations on a regular basis. As the process 
evolves, the respective stakeholders will be consulted to ensure the plans are relevant and 
responsive to their needs. Once completed, the plans will be disclosed both at the World 
Bank’s INFOSHOP and locally in Kiswahili in Tanzania. The plans would also be made 
available at the district level and in the offices of the relevant agencies.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
08/09/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  8
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/09/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/09/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/09/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This Project is using the ESMF document that was prepared and disclosed for the existing 
ASDP( ie. 8/11/2005). The ESMF does not need to be revised.  
 
This project will use an updated and revised IPMP previously prepared and disclosed 
for the existing ASDP. The revised and updated version has been submitted by the 
consultant to the Government (on 3/30/2009) who are in the process of reviewing it. The 
cleared verison will be disclosed as soon as it is available, but no later than 3 months after 
project approval. The dates noted above are "expected dates" of disclosure.  
 
Finally, an INMP, consistent with OP8.00 will be prepared and disclosed within three 
months of World Bank approval of this project.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Page  9
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Madhur Gautam 
04/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
04/27/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Jane A. N. Kibbassa 
04/08/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Naima A Hasci 
04/09/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
04/27/2009 
Comments:   
