Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2009 
Report No.:  48431
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tanzania 
Project ID:  P096302 
Project Name:  Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources. TAL 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher Gilbert Sheldon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 16, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  COCPO 
Lending Instrument:  Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector:  Mining and other extractive (100%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (23%);Regulation and competition 
policy (22%);Participation and civic engagement (22%);Decentralization 
(22%);Environmental policies and institutions (11%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the Government's capacity to 
manage the mineral sector to improve the socio-economic impacts of large and small 
scale mining for Tanzania and Tanzanians and enhance private local and foreign 
investment. This objective has three main aspects: (i) socio-economic impacts; (ii) 
Government capacity; and (iii) investment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises four components: (a) Improving the Benefits of the Mineral Sector 
for Tanzania: Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining, Local Economic Development Planning 
and Skills Development; (b) Strengthening Governance and Transparency in Mining; (c) 
Stimulating Mineral Sector Investment; and (d) Project Coordination and Management 
and Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 
Component A. Improving the Benefits of the Mineral Sector for Tanzania: Artisanal and 
Small-Scale Mining, Local Economic Development and Skills Development.  The 
component's main objective is to improve the benefits of mining for Tanzania and 
Page  2
Tanzanians by implementing the national ASM development strategy, to strengthen links 
between the mineral sector and the local economy, with emphasis on skills development 
required for the mineral sector.  
 
Component B. Strengthening Governance and Transparency in Mining.  The four sub-
components under Component B will support (i) strengthening MEM's legal services 
unit; (ii) reviews of the Mineral Policy, the Mining Act, and related laws with emphasis 
on harmonization of laws; (iii) establishing a legal and regulatory framework on value 
addition activities; (iv) creating public awareness on the  Mineral Policy and legal and 
regulatory frameworks, and on the fiscal regime; (v) activities related to the 
implementation of EITI;  (vi) an institutional analysis to identify needs for capacity 
building and strengthening linkages and coordination with other government institutions 
that take part in the administration of the mineral sector; (vii) strengthening the new 
mining cadastral information management system (MCIMS) by improving its hardware, 
software, and human resources and by formulating mechanisms to sustain the system; 
(viii) government's efforts to address environmental and social aspects of mining based 
on the baseline survey's findings and recommendations for artisanal and small-scale 
mining and the SESA studies.  
 
In addition, the Government and the Bank will dialogue on possible support for the 
Government to develop a legal and regulatory framework for radioactive minerals, which 
are currently being explored by investors. Before such support would be provided, the 
Bank would require clarity on the expected end-use of the mined product, assurance of 
Tanzania's compliance with International Atomic Energy Agency norms, and additional 
World Bank approval.  
 
Component C. Stimulating Mineral Sector Investment. The Component has three 
subcomponents that include activities (i) strengthening the Geological Survey of 
Tanzania (GST) and updating, maintaining and developing geoscientific data and 
products; (ii) financing a strategic assessment of STAMICO, the state-owned mining 
company, exploring existing institutional capacity and options for self-financing, as a 
pre-condition for its future role with the private sector for both large- and small-scale 
opportunities; (iii) strengthening mineral resources promotion, statistics development and 
communication.  
 
Component D. Project Coordination and Management. Component D will support 
project management costs including but not limited to (i) project management; (ii) 
procurement; (iii) monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) coordination of project exit studies 
to evaluate the overall performance of the project, in particular achievement of project 
goals, strengths and weaknesses, and the way forward.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The exact location of physical project activities will be determined during 
implementation.  
 
Page  3
However, it is known that under Component A(2), demonstration centers for small-scale 
miners (in terms of training, etc.) will be set up in eight selected mining centers: Chunya, 
Mpanda, Morogoro, Manyoni, Geita, Bukombe, Mirerani, and Mbinga.  
 
Additional Project locations that are salient to the safeguard analysis include:  
 
Regions: Arusha, Manyara, Coast, Kilimanjaro, Tanga, Bukoba, and Mbeya.  
 
Districts: Kiomboi, Mbulu, Hanang, Babati, Singida, Kondoa, Kiteto, Handeni, 
Manyoni, Dodoma, Kongwa, Mpwapwa, Bagamoyo, Mvomero, Kilosa, Mbarali, 
Ludewa, Kyela, and Chunya.  
 
District Authorities: Geita, Kahama, Tarime, and Biharamulo.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Naima A Hasci (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
As a technical assistance project most of the activities have no physical "footprint" and 
the project is not anticipated to have any large scale, significant adverse or irreversible 
impacts.  Rather, the project effort to promote sustainable management in the mining 
sector, including environmental and social management, is anticipated to yield positive 
environmental and social impacts.  
 
The project physical activities - (i) establishment of stationary and mobile 
demonstration units to promote progressive mining technologies, (ii) rehabilitation of the 
existing gemstone carving center building in Arusha, (iii) small grants program to 
promote mining or alternative livelihoods, and (iv) airborne geophysical survey and 
geological survey - may have limited and localized adverse impacts (noise, dust, mining 
Page  4
waste disposal, water pollution, occupational health and safety impacts, etc) and are not 
expected to result in relocation of people or displacement of livelihoods. These activities 
will be screened and their potential impacts managed through implementation of an 
ESMF.  
 
There is no expectation that the minor civil works envisioned by this project will impact 
natural habitats, physical cultural resources, or indigenous peoples that may be found in 
various locations in Tanzania, and these Safeguards policies therefore are not triggered 
by the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to strengthen Tanzania's capacity to address environmental and 
social impacts of mining through improving the policy/regulatory framework and 
enhancement of institutional and human resource capacity to implement the policies and 
regulations. Although the proposed project includes support to artisanal and small scale 
mining activities, the actions aim at having positive impacts to the environment by way 
of implementing programs to modernize and improve the formalization and promotion of 
artisanal and small-scale mining (at the moment, such activities are often undertaken 
informally, and thus environmental and social standards of good practice are difficult to 
impose). Interventions will focus on mitigating negative impacts of artisanal and small 
scale activities on the environment and social impacts, paying particular "hot spot" areas, 
such as the Lake Victoria basin. Further, the project seeks to complement ongoing 
initiatives on mercury abatement in artisanal and small scale gold extraction.  
 
It is expected that improvement of the regulatory environment in the mining sector will 
lead to increase in mining investments in sustainable mining operations.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In designing the project, certain activities were considered but eventually excluded (e.g., 
construction of new offices) due to their potential adverse environmental and social 
impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project has been rated environmental category B under the Bank's 
Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01). An environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) was prepared by the Government to screen future 
project activities for their environmental and social impacts, and guide design and 
implementation of mitigation measures. The ESMF includes:  
 
-Examining the project's potential negative and positive environmental and social 
impacts, and recommend measures to prevent, minimize and mitigate for adverse impacts 
and enhance positive impacts.  
 
Page  5
-Initial scoping of the sector's environmental and social issues to guide preparation of an 
in-depth Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) during project 
implementation.  
 
In accordance with the Bank's Involuntary Resettlement Policy, OP/BP 4.12, the 
Government also prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). While no 
resettlement is envisaged or planned under the project, the RPF will be available should a 
resettlement situation arise.  
 
During project implementation, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment of the 
mining sector (SESA) will be undertaken. It will be complemented by a Poverty and 
Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) to assist the decision-makers to make informed policy 
choices in these and other areas covered by the project.  
 
The Ministry of Energy has established and staffed an Environmental Management Unit 
(EMU) mandated under the National Environmental Policy, and formed an Artisanal and 
Small-scale Mining Unit to improve the socio-economic situation in the small scale 
mining sector. The Ministry is committed to proper oversight and management of 
environmental and social issues in the project and in the mining sector.  
 
The project will further enhance the government's capacity to address safeguard issues 
in the mining sector, particularly supporting (a) strengthening of EMU; (b) preparation 
and updating of environmental guidelines and codes of practice with regard to mine 
closure, small-scale mining, and resettlement based on internationally accepted best 
practices; (c) establishing an environmental database linked to mining cadastre; (d) 
coordinating collaborative environmental and social management programs between 
small scale mining, large scale mining, local government authorities (LGAs) and other 
stakeholders in major mining centers; and (e) strengthening environmental and social 
monitoring capacity at headquarters, Resident Mines Officer, Zonal Mines Officer, and 
LGAs through training and technical support. The SESA and PSIA planned under the 
project will also identify areas where capacity enhancement is needed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the ESMF process, key stakeholders in potential project affected areas are 
being consulted.  The ESMF and RPF and their summaries in Swahili were disclosed in 
Tanzania on April 2, 2009 at a Disclosure Workshop and via the World Bank InfoShop 
on April 16, 2009, in accordance with World Bank policy and the Government of 
Tanzania's law.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2009 
 
Page  6
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/16/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/02/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/16/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  7
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher Gilbert Sheldon 
04/30/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Martin Fodor 
05/04/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Naima A Hasci 
04/30/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Paulo De Sa 
05/04/2009 
Comments:   
