Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4433 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/15/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Thailand 
Project ID: P112918 
Project Name: Additional Financing - Highways Management Project 
Task Team Leader: Zhi Liu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 17, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 18, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
75.00
75.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
With Additional Financing, the development objective of the Highways Management Project 
(DOH) will remain unchanged, namely, to assist the Borrower in enhancing the efficiency, 
productive use, and management of the road network, through: (a) the commercialization of the 
road sector by introducing better business principles and increased private sector participation in 
the construction and maintenance of roads; (b) the strengthening of institutional capacity and 
modernization of the DOH; (c) sustainable road maintenance programs to preserve road assets; 
and (d) the enhancement of road safety aimed to reduce traffic fatalities and injuries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Additional Financing will finance the following civil works and consultant services:  
 
1. Widening of five selected sections (216 km in total) of the national highway network from 
two to four lanes:  
 
(i) Route 408: Section from Amphoe Ranot to Amphoe Sathing Phra, 36 km.  
 
Page  2
(ii) Route 4: from Krabi to Ao Luk, 30 km.  
 
(iii) Route 24: Amphoe Nangrong to Amphoe Prasat, 67 km.  
 
(iv) Route 201: Amphoe Sikhio to Ban Nongbuakhok, 58 km.  
 
(v) Route 331: from Route No 36 Intersection to Amphoe Sattahip, 26 km.  
 
2. Engineering supervision of the widening civil works.  
 
3. Public-private partnership financing transaction advisory for the proposed motorway from 
Bangpa-in to Nakhon Rachasima.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The five national highway sections to be widened are located in the northeastern region (Routes 
24 and 201), southern region (Routes 4 and 408) and Eastern Seaboard (Route 331), respectively.  
Since the widening will only be carried out within the established Right of Way (RoW), no 
significant acquisition of private assets and displacement of population, including any impact on 
ethnic minorities and indigenous peoples in the northeastern region are foreseen.  Only limited 
resettlement impacts would be involved, which include 21 temporary shops operating within the 
RoW, and 2.4 hectares of land areas being farmed within the RoW. The background of the 
project area and potential stakeholders are briefly given in the paragraphs below.  
 
Thailand is a tropical country with a total land area of 514,000 sq km, a 3,220 km of coastline, 
and a total population of nearly 65 million.  Seventy-five percent (75%) of the population are 
Thai, 14% Chinese, and 11% other nationalities.  The country comprises 76 provinces and can be 
divided geographically into four regions, i.e. the Central, the North, the Northeast and the South.  
The central region including Bangkok Metropolitan Region and the Eastern Seaboard is 
characterized by a flood plain and coastal area where the major land uses include relatively large 
urban and industrial development, rice paddy fields, fisheries, and aquaculture.  The northern 
region comprises a combination of flat land and mountainous areas and the major land uses are 
agriculture and forest.  The northern region is also home for a number of ethnic minority groups.  
The northeastern region is considered the poorest region in the country.  The area is 
characterized by a high plateau (Khorat Plateau) with flat land and rolling terrain inclining 
towards the Mekong River.  The major land use is agriculture (low value crops mostly).  The 
south region is located along a coastline and the major land uses are urban development, rice 
paddy, aquaculture, and tourism.  
 
The widening of the five selected sections will contribute to the improved efficiency and safety 
of road transportation.  During construction phase, some negative impacts on the local 
environment and communities are inevitable, but most of these impacts would be temporary and 
could be reduced through adaptive engineering design, careful planning, good management 
practice, and close supervision of the contractors.  The major environmental impacts of the 
project will include vegetation clearing, dust, noise, and traffic during construction and vehicular 
emissions and noise due to increased traffic flow.  The impacts after completion of the 
construction would be mostly positive since the safety problems and traffic congestion due to 
Page  3
capacity constraints would be alleviated.  However, increasing traffic volume and speed may 
cause negative impacts to local communities, but the impacts should be mitigated through other 
Government policies and programs.  The DOH institutional capacity and awareness on social and 
environmental issues of road construction and operations have been increased continuously and 
this will contribute to reducing the negative impacts during the operation of the roads.  
 
The local authorities and communities would be the key stakeholders for the project.  The DOH 
has made socio-economic surveys along the sections selected for widening, and found that the 
project would not involve any indigenous people or cultural heritage sites.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
DOH is responsible for ensuring the effective implementation of safeguard measure of the HMP 
and the additional financing project. Experience has demonstrated that DOH has adequate 
capacity to undertaken this task.  Preparation of the impact assessment, including consultation 
and disclosure of safeguard documents, is the responsibility of the Environmental Unit (EU) of 
the Planning Bureau and the Regional Offices responsible for the subprojects, in close 
cooperation with the International Cooperation Division and the other units of the Planning 
Bureau.  
 
The safeguard planning and implementation capacity of the DOH, especially on the 
environmental aspect, has been established for ten years.  It was agreed in 2002 that under the 
HMP a safeguard capacity building action plan be implemented using the government budget.  
The action plan comprised four tasks: (a) ensuring effective implementation of mitigation 
measures, (b) mainstreaming of safeguards, (c) building EU capacity on the social aspect, and (d) 
building the safeguard capacity for the regional offices.  At present, EU has a few social 
safeguard staff who can take the lead in the area of public participation and social assessment.  
EU has also made an effort to secure government budget for the implementation of safeguard 
activities.  In 2005-07, a consultant service was engaged to facilitate the mainstreaming of 
safeguards into the normal operations of the planning and design bureaus and units.  In 2006, 
with the World Bank technical assistance, an effort was made to assess the effectiveness of the 
people participation methodology for the DOH projects and the review confirmed that the DOH 
procedure and capacity is acceptable.  In 2007, a consulting service was initiated to assist the 
DOH in social assessment, and this effort is on-going.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah (EASRE) 
Ms Manida Unkulvasapaul (EASRE) 
Mr Zhefu Liu (EASCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Widening of existing highways will create negative impacts during construction and 
operation phases.  The DOH prepared the Environmental and Social Safeguard Assessment 
Report (i.e. Initial Environmental Examination, or IEE) and an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) for each of the five subprojects, and carried out public consultation with local 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
communities and local authorities.  The negative impacts during construction will be mitigated 
through the use of good engineering practices and a set of specific mitigation measures will be 
included in the civil works contracts.  The EMP identifies specific parameters to be monitored by 
the field engineers and for the reporting requirements.  This practice has been applied 
successfully in the on-going project (i.e. HMP).  Safeguard management capacity of the DOH is 
adequate.  Safeguard capacity building, especially on the social aspect and public participation 
process at the regional offices, will be continued using the Government budget and with Bank 
supervision. Capacity building on social assessment (which is part of the on-going safeguard 
action plan) will also be continued. The Environmental and Social Assessment Report and the 
Environmental Management Plan for each of the five road subprojects will be submitted to the 
Bank for review and clearance.  Only after Bank clearance of these documents, investment 
activities of the respective road will be initiated.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
All five road widening subprojects will not have adverse impacts on protected areas, known 
habitats, or critical natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
The project will not involve logging or large scale forest clearing as defined by the policy.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will not involve procurement of large scale pesticides as defined in the policy.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The subprojects are not located in any known archeological sites.  However, chance finds 
procedures will be included in the contractors' contracts.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The subprojects are not located in the areas where ethic minority groups are known to reside 
in Thailand.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Since the widening of selected road sections will only be carried out within the established 
Right of Way (RoW), no land acquisition and demolition is required.  The DOH conducted an 
initial assessment of social impacts of the proposed subprojects, and carried out public 
consultation with local communities and authorities.  According to impact survey conducted by 
the DOH, two types of limited resettlement impacts are involved within the RoW.  The first 
impact includes 21 temporary shops located within the RoW, which are used for commercial 
purpose such as selling grilled chicken and foods.  The second impact is temporary use of 2.4 
hectares of land areas by 3 households for planting paddy and sugarcane.  For such limited 
impacts, following the Bank policy on involuntary resettlement, a Resettlement Mitigation Plan 
has been prepared by the DOH, which summarizes the in-kind rehabilitation measures to be 
provided to the 24 affected households.  The Resettlement Mitigation Plan for all five road 
subprojects will be submitted to the Bank for review and clearance.  Only after Bank clearance 
of the document, investment activities of the respective roads will be initiated   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not involve any dam safety.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
The project will not involve international waters.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
All subprojects are not in disputed areas.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/30/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The DOH has completed the Environmental and Social Safeguard Assessment Reports (i.e. 
Initial Environmental Examination) and socio-economic surveys for all five subprojects, and 
drafted the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Resettlement Mitigation Plan 
(RMP).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Zhi Liu 
06/04/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
06/15/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joel J. Maweni 
06/08/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
