Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.
44811
:
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 
June 9, 2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Thailand 
Project ID: P110040 
Project Name: Sapthip Wastewater Biogas Project 
Task Team Leader: John Morton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 2008  
Estimated Board Date: N/A 
Managing Unit: EASRE  
Lending Instrument: Carbon Offset  
Sector: Agro-Industry, Environment  
Theme: Climate Change 
Carbon Fund Amount (US$m.):US$15 million 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Private Company    US$40 million 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The project development objective is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by recovering methane 
from the wastewater treatment system of a cassava-based ethanol plant and by replacement of 
fossil fuel use through the utilization of renewable energy in the plant.  
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The project has two main components including the wastewater treatment and methane capture 
system; and the renewable energy facilities that will utilize biogas and biomass for fuel.  
 
·
The project has the following components:  
 
(a)
 
Wastewater System with Biogas Collection
.
The system would treat the wastewater 
(“slops”) from the ethanol distillation columns using a commercially available 
technology that is widely adopted internationally. The system separates the solid 
“wet cake” from the ethanol plant for use as fuel for one of the boilers. The 
remaining wastewater is then treated in stages in an Upflow Anaerobic Sludge 
Blanket (UASB) reactor and a series of covered anaerobic lagoons (the main 
systems where methane is generated and collected for use as a fuel supplement in 
the boiler). The wastewater is then sent through aerobic treatment lagoons and 
polishing ponds before discharge.   The treatment plant is designed to accommodate 
the anticipated wastewater flow (1,589 m3/day and concentration from the ethanol 
plant (133,000 kg of chemical oxygen demand (COD)/day) while meeting national 
environmental standards. 
Page  2
(b) 
Renewable Energy Use.  
Two boilers would be used in the ethanol plant.  The 
boilers would primarily rely on biogas and wet cake (biomass residues from the 
ethanol plant).
 
A
portion of the biogas would be used for on-site electricity 
generation using a standard gas-fired generating set.  
 
(c)
 
Purchase of Emission Reductions
.
It is estimated that the project will reduce 
204,626 tCO
2
-e per year of greenhouse gas emissions. The Bank acting as Trustee 
of the Netherlands CDM Facility would finance the purchase of Emission 
Reductions (ERs) resulting from the two project components.  The purchase 
would be a performance-based contract under which payments are triggered by 
successful verification by an accredited operational entity (Designated 
Operational Entity under the Rules of the Kyoto Protocol) of the reduction of 
emissions from the collection of methane released by wastewater treatment and 
from substitution of fossil  fuel by renewable biogas and biomass energy.  The 
quantity of ERs to be contracted, the length of time over which the purchase will 
be made, and the price paid will be agreed between the Bank and the project 
proponent.  The estimated value of the purchase is between US$10 and US$20 
million. 
 
D.  Project Location (if known) 
 
The project site is in Lopburi Province located about 150km north-east of Bangkok.  The site is 
on former agricultural land and is surrounded by agricultural area cultivating cassava, sugar 
canes, rice and others.  The water for the ethanol processing is proposed to be taken from Pasak 
River, which is located 2 km away from the project site.   The plant site shares its north border 
with a railway line and south border with No. 205 road.  There is a starch plant adjacent to the 
east boundary, and Ban Koang Rotfai Village at the northwest corner.  The wastewater treatment 
facilities and boilers will be located at the northeast part of the site.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The project entity, Sapthip Co. Ltd., and Biofuels Co. Ltd., the technology provider hired by 
Sapthip, have no experience in working with the Bank and are 
not
familiar with the Bank’s 
Safeguards Policies.  Therefore, the project entity will hire the same EA consulting firm which 
did the EA work for the ethanol plant, and detailed guidance based on the Bank’s experience in 
other similar projects has been provided to the project entity and EA consultant to ensure 
producing a good quality environmental and social assessment and meeting Bank policy 
requirements. 
 
In terms of the technical and environmental management capacity, Sapthip has a contract with 
Biofuel Co, Ltd, stipulating that Biofuel Co. Ltd. is responsible for the designing, construction 
management, start-up and the first 3-5 years of operation of the wastewater treatment system as 
well as the provision of training to Sapthip staff during that period.  At present, Sapthip does not 
have a formalized internal environmental management system, although it is apparent that many 
Page  3
of the basic procedures are in place as part of construction of the ethanol facility.  Sapthip will 
establish its own environmental management system in line with the EMP for the CDM project 
prior to the commencement of construction work in consultation with the EA consultant.  This 
would include the arrangements for supervision and monitoring of the contractor and the EMP. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Mr Hiroshi Ono (EASRE) 
Ms Victoria Florian Lazaro (EASSO) 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This Policy is triggered because adverse environmental impacts are anticipated due to the 
application of finished wastewater effluent to a plantation; handling and treatment of sludge; air 
pollution from the boilers; and civil works associated with the construction of the wastewater 
treatment and other facilities.  However, these impacts are expected to be site-specific and could 
be well mitigated with readily available control measures so that the EA category of B is 
proposed.  
 
The project boundary would include: (i) the wastewater treatment system and biogas capture 
equipment; (ii) the boilers that will utilize biogas from the wastewater treatment system and 
waste biomass for fuel; and (iii) the electricit
y
generating equipment that will utilize the biogas.  
A
site-specific EIA report will cover these elements and an EMP will be developed to mitigate 
adverse environmental impacts associated with the project. 
 
The initial screening exercise identified that: (i) the project site is on degraded or converted 
agricultural land and does not involve any important natural habitats; and, (ii) no physical 
cultural resources were found during the construction of the ethanol plant or at the site of the 
wastewater treatment and other project facilities.  These issues will be verified in the EIA report. 
 
The ethanol plant itself is not a project component, however, it should be considered linked 
activity because it produces the wastewater and provides the energy demand for the CDM project 
components and therefore it is directly and significantly related to the CDM project and 
necessary to achieve its objectives.  The Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) report for the 
ethanol plant was already approved by the Department of Industrial Works and the construction 
of the ethanol plant has almost completed.  Therefore, it is proposed that the existing IEE for the 
ethanol plant be reviewed for due diligence and the EIA for the CDM project only look into 
issues not fully covered in the IEE.  In addition to this review, several things will be undertaken 
as part of preparation of the CDM project that have broader implications for the ethanol plan.  In 
particular, to help ensure there is adequate capacity to implement the environmental aspects of 
the project Sapthip will develop an environmental management system for its company and as 
part of the design of the WWTP several approaches to recycling water from the ethanol plant 
will be considered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
There are no protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural 
habitats as defined under the policy in the project area. 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
The project will not involve significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or 
related critical natural habitats as defined under the policy. For the purposes of treatment of the 
final effluent, a 90 ha plantation will be created adjacent to the plant site and owned by the 
project entity.  A possibility of community participation in tree planting and the operation of 
plantation area is being sought.  
 
It is proposed that t
he 
EIA would examine 
the appropriateness of water storage capacity and 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
plantation area to meet the no-discharge regulation including possibility of groundwater 
contamination and over flow from the site; selection of tree species and its ecological 
implications; and usage of harvested trees and its environmental implications for due diligence. 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will neither procure pesticides nor will result in an increased use of pesticides 
including for the operation and maintenance of plantation area. 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
There are no above-ground physical cultural resources in the project area.  Appropriate clauses 
will be included in construction contracts regarding the procedures to be followed in the event of 
chance find of culturally significant artifacts or sites. 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
It has been validated that there are no indigenous peoples affected by the  construction of the 
proposed project nor are there any IP legacy issue in the existing Ethanol Plant that will produce 
the wastewater and biomass. 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The land requirement for the proposed facility has been acquired from private land owners. For 
due diligence, it has been validated that there there are no occupants in the subject properties and 
in the access roads(right of way) to the project site, nor are there are any legacy issue on IR from 
the Ethanol Plant, being a linked project. It was also established that land acquisition was done 
using the willing buyer/willing seller scheme. 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction of any dams nor does it depend on the performance of 
an existing dam. 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Proposed Environmental Category:
 
B
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  September 2008  
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed 
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
·
A
draft EIA report in Thai will be submitted to the World Bank by July 31, 2008, and a 
draft EIA report in English by August 31, 2008. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr John Morton 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam  
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
