Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4438 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/18/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Timor-Leste 
Project ID: P116520 
Project Name: Timor-Leste Second Chance Education Project 
Task Team Leader: James A. Stevens 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 5, 2010 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Adult literacy/non-formal education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1.  The development objective of this intervention would be to increase the number of youth who 
have completed recognized primary, pre-secondary and secondary degree programs.  The main 
performance indicators would be the absolute numbers of youth who acquire equivalency 
degrees, who would have not had the chance to acquire such a credential in the absence of this 
program.  Specific baselines and targets will be established for these program goals.  
 
2.  Intermediate objectives will be defined during preparation and appraisal.  These are likely to 
be objectives such as improving the quality of the equivalency curriculum, improving the quality 
of assessing student performance, and introducing new technologies (computer-based modules, 
communication technologies, etc.) aimed at improving efficiencies and reducing costs.  
 
3.  Secondary objectives would include (a) contributing to labor productivity by increasing the 
stock of job seekers with recognized degrees and proven basic skills (reading and numeracy); (b) 
contributing to social and cultural development by increasing the number of youth who have 
basic reading and numeracy skills; (c) providing opportunities for the masses of disaffected 
youth, which is an urgent problem in both countries; and (d) contributing to the development of 
Page  2
standards-based curricula, teacher training improvements and standards-based assessment in the 
formal education system.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
4.  Project design would be kept as simple as possible.  The aim of the project is to help the 
Directorate of Adult and Non-Formal Education improve its service delivery, increase its 
efficiency and, eventually, to expand its programs to the pre-secondary and secondary level.  The 
investment would not require major systemic reforms, difficult policy changes or significant 
changes in the basic operational approach.   The Directorate would continue to register out-of-
school youth, test their skill levels, deliver a prescribed, mostly classroom-based curriculum and 
test progress against that curriculum.  The project would help to improve the quality and 
efficiency of these steps, and thereby improve the success rate of the government#s equivalency 
programs.  Project funding is expected to be disbursed over a four year period.  
 
5.  The Directorate of Adult and Non-Formal Education lacks both management and technical 
capacity.  It will require technical assistance support in the areas of program management, 
curriculum design and testing, teacher training and program evaluation. However, to the extent 
possible, technical assistance hired under the project will be expected to be short-term externals 
experts (1-3 months) or Timorese nationals.  The project is likely to fund a single, full time 
external consultant advisor who has a background in managing equivalency degree programs.  
There are likely to be several additional short term external consultancies to support staff and 
teacher training activities in the first two years of the program.  But the cost of external technical 
assistance will be keep to less than 10 percent of the overall project funding.  The employment of 
Timorese national contractors is expected to account for 10-20 percent of project funding.  The 
description of resource needs below provides ideas for improving the Directorate#s service 
delivery within a reasonable expectation of gradually improving institutional capacity.  
 
6.  Funding Flows.  Because of the Ministry of Education#s successful experience in managing 
funding from the World Bank, AusAID and the FTI-Catalytic Fund, formal procurement and 
financial management capacity assessments should not be required.  No individual contract, with 
the exception of the external management advisor is expected to exceed US$100,000.  The 
majority of funding for this initiative is expected to be disbursed to the MoE in the form of 
budget support for hiring national contractors and teachers (who will be selected on a 
competitive basis) and for the printing, purchase and transport of educational materials.  All 
printing funded under the project will be contracted competitively to private suppliers. The flow 
of funds from the IDA account to the MoE will be mapped at appraisal.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Education#s Directorate of Adult and Non-
Formal Education in Dili and in 65 sub-district schools/training facilities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be assessed, as needed, during preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (EASER) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/01/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
To be determined.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr James A. Stevens 
08/18/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jose Vicente Zevallos 
08/18/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
08/18/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
