Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3679 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/16/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Togo 
Project ID: P111064 
Project Name: Togo - Financial Sector and Governance Project 
Task Team Leader: Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTFP 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Corporate governance (P);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to contribute to economic growth and improved 
economic governance through financial sector restructuring and strengthening.  Financial sector 
restructuring will lead to more efficient government resources allocation towards poverty 
reducing and growth inducing sectors and will contribute to private sector led growth.  
 
Key expected results include (i) development and implementation of a satisfactory strategy for 
banking restructuring (BTCI, UTB and BIA), (ii) signature of partnerships with strategic 
investors for BTCI, UTB and BIA, (iii) strengthened supervision of microfinance institutions, 
(iv) increased financial transparency of microfinance sector, (v) development and 
implementation of a strategy to reduce the pension deficits of the social security institutions 
(CRT and CNSS), (vi) increased capacity of the Government to steer reforms in the financial and 
private sectors and (vii) improved public private sector dialogue.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL).  The proposed US$10 
million Financial Sector and Governance project will focus on technical assistance to various 
stakeholders with a view to improve economic growth and governance.  More specifically, the 
Page  2
technical assistance will support the Government reforms program agreed with the World Bank 
and the IMF budget, with a focus on the financial sector.  
 
The project will have four components: (i) banking sector restructuring, (ii) microfinance sector 
strengthening, (iii) social security sector restructuring and strengthening and (iv) support to 
implementation of reforms in the financial and private sectors.   
 
Component 1: Banking sector restructuring.  The Togolese banking sector is facing a crisis due 
to serious lack of governance and very high levels of non performing loans (NPLs) which has led 
to three banks, accounting for 56 percent of the market, to require recapitalization of over CFAF 
100 billion.  Technical assistance will support the financial and institutional restructuring of key 
commercial banks.  
 
Component 2: Microfinance sector strengthening.  Contrary to the banking sector, the 
microfinance sector is relatively healthy in Togo and plays an important role in providing access 
to financial services.  There is however a need to strengthen the supervision of this sector to 
prevent crises.  The microfinance supervision capacity of the Ministry of Finance therefore needs 
to be strengthened, as well as internal and external controls within the major microfinance 
networks (which represent 80% of the microfinance sector). This will also include support to the 
consolidation of the sector (i.e. independent credit and savings cooperatives joining networks).  
Increased financial transparency will also be supported (including promotion of rating).  
 
Component 3: Social security sector restructuring and strengthening.  The pension system for 
civil servants (CRT) is facing a deep financial deficit, which requires important government 
subsidies (CFAF 7 to 8 billion annually) to ensure timely payment of pensions.  Technical 
assistance is needed to help reform the pension system with a view to bring the system closer to 
equilibrium and reduce the burden on the government budget. Technical assistance will also be 
provided to reduce the actuarial deficit of CNSS.   
 
Component 4: Support to implementation of reforms in the financial and private sectors. 
Technical assistance will be provided to (i) increase capacity of the Government to steer reforms 
in the financial and private sectors through the Secretariat Permanent pour le suivi des politiques 
de reformes et des programmes financiers and (ii) improve dialogue between the public and 
private sectors.  
 
The World Bank has worked very closely with the IMF on financial sector issue and joint 
missions have been organized. Additional support from development partners will be sought.  
AFRITAC , UNDP and UNCDF are currently supporting the microfinance sector in Togo and 
the proposed support to microfinance supervision would be undertaken in collaboration with 
these three agencies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Mostly Lome, the capital city.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The proposed operation is a Technical Assistance operation and should not trigger any safeguard 
policies. Funding is mostly for consultants and, to a lesser extent, equipment and refurbishment 
(i.e. painting, installing air conditioner; no civil works will be undertaken).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Warren Waters (AFTQK) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/07/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable. Category C project.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin 
10/01/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/01/2008 
Comments:  No safeguard specialist is required if project remains as in PCN and ISDS. Later, should 
the project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environment or social impact, consult 
ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Iradj A. Alikhani 
10/01/2008 
Comments:   
