Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/14/2008 
Report No.:  AC3921
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Togo 
Project ID:  P113544 
Project Name:  Additional Financing to CDD - Food Crisis 
Task Team Leader:  Giuseppe Zampaglione 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Crops (72%);Primary education (14%);Other social services (14%) 
Theme:  Global food crisis response (P);Nutrition and food security (S);Other social 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
7.00
7.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
This project is being prepared under OP/BP 8.0 "Rapid Response to Crisis and 
Emergencies."  As part of the Bank-Government's strategy to respond to the social and 
economic emergency in Togo, the Project Development Objective the proposed 
restructured Project will be to provide poor communities with improved basic socio-
economic infrastructures and income generating activities by financing among others at 
least 350 subprojects to be identified and implemented directly by communities.  
 
Additional financing to the original project is currently being requested to support the 
expansion of the Community Development Project and its broad objective to support 
socio-economic infrastructures and services in favor of vulnerable communities of Togo, 
in particular by financing the costs associated with increasing the production of rice, 
maize and other cereals for which the national food balance is negative. The project will 
also support targeted school feeding operations in  vulnerable communities. Specifically, 
the additional financing responds to the food price crisis by subsidizing the provision of 
improved seeds and fertilizers for the production of 14,000 tons of cereals.  In addition 
the project will subsidize daily lunch meals for approximately 16,800 primary school 
Page  2
students in 84 schools in targeted areas over two years, starting with school year 2008-
2009.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project Development Objective of the proposed Project is to provide poor 
communities with improved basic socio-economic infrastructures and income generating 
activities. The original PDO was changed with the additional financing to ensure that the 
Government, through the recently established Technical Secretariat (TS) and in close 
collaboration with the Ministry for Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock (MAFL) can 
implement projects to increase food production.  
 
The proposed additional financing of US$7.0 million will support: (i) a School Feeding 
Emergency Operation sub-component under Component 1 (Community Development), 
and (ii) a new Enhancing Cereals Production component.  As a result, the CDP will be 
structured as follows:  
 
Component 1: Community Development (US$14.5 million rather than the original 
US$12.5 million) will have two sub-components:  
 
Community Development Sub-Projects (US$12.5 million) is unchanged from the 
original component 1 and will facilitate beneficiary access to improved health, education, 
water and sanitation, and other basic services (200 sub-projects) as well as to income 
generating activities (150 sub-projects);  
 
School Feeding Emergency Operation (US$2.0 million) is a new sub-component and 
will support the preparation and distribution of daily lunch meals for approximately 
16,800 primary school students in 84 schools in targeted areas over two years, starting 
with school year 2008-2009.  
 
Component 2: Training (US$1.7 million) will remain unchanged.  
 
Component 3: Management and Operating Costs (US$3.0 million) will remain 
unchanged, as additional management and operating costs to implement the new 
activities have included in their respective budgets.  
 
Component 4: Enhancing Cereal Production. (US$5.0 million) is new and aims to 
increase domestic production of cereals by about 14,000 tons by the end of the second 
year of project implementation. This component complements the objective of 
component 1 to support 150 income generating activities at the community level, as it is 
expected that most of such activities will be of an agricultural nature and will therefore 
benefit from improved access to agricultural inputs. It will have two sub-components:  
 
Procurement and distribution of fertilizers and seeds.  (US$ 4.4 million), will support 
costs associated with the urgent procurement of 4,275 metric tons of fertilizers and of 356 
tons of commercial seeds. Both fertilizers and seeds will be distributed to 14,000 selected 
Page  3
food crop producers.  This sub-component will also finance the production and 
distribution of 14 tons of foundation seeds in 2009.  
 
Coordination and technical support (US$0.6 million) will finance capacity building 
activities within the MAFL for proper project implementation and supervision and will 
finance limited operating expenses of the regional and prefectural departments of the 
MAFL. This subcomponent will also support the design of an innovative and sustainable 
system to deliver and distribute fertilizers and seeds.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be distributed in the five main regions of Togo. For the School Feeding 
Emergency Operation, school feeding programs will be targeted more heavily towards 
areas badly affected by the Food price crisis and the recent flooding. For the Enhanced 
Cereal Production component, activities will include the distribution of fertilizers.  As the 
use of improved agricultural inputs often leads to an increased use of pesticides and the 
use of such agents, particularly without proper instruction, has led to negative health and 
environmental outcomes, the ESMF will need to take this into account.  Given that both 
components will result in a redistribution of resources, they may have potential social 
ramifications, as discussed in the following sections.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
From an environmental and social safeguard point of view, both the parent project and 
the proposed additional financing are Category B .  That is, the environmental and social 
impacts of the project, for the most part, are expected to be minimal, site-specific and 
manageable. Two safeguard policies are relevant to activities under the additional 
Page  4
financing: The Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01) and the Pest Management 
Policy (OP 4.09).  
 
To ensure that sub-projects are environmentally sustainable and that all possible 
negative environmental or social impacts are minimized and mitigated, an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being prepared to be used by the CPD 
after approval by ASPEN, including a simplified Pest Management Plan (PMP). The 
ESMF will be disclosed in Togo and at the Bank's Infoshop within six months of 
effectiveness in line with OP 8.00.  To ensure effective implementation of the ESMF 
within  the CDP and the additional financing, funds will support relevant training, as to 
be detailed in the ESMF. Training topics might include environmental screening of sub-
projects; how to plan, implement and monitor mitigation measures; national 
environmental legislation; the purpose of the Bank’s safeguard policies; and 
environmental issues facing Togo. The TS will oversee the implementation of the ESMF 
and ensure that appropriate resources are made available in this regard.  
 
The parent project, the Community Development Project (CDP), poses a number of 
risks which are not relevant to activities under the additional financing. The Involuntary 
resettlement safeguard is triggered under the activities for the parent project, as 
community subprojects may include the construction of community buildings, thus 
necessitating some relocation. Similarly, a community might also construct a health post, 
thus requiring the ESMF to propose mitigation measures related to medical waste 
management  
 
The additional financing produces potential environmental risks due to the likelihood 
that the activities under Component 4 (provision of seeds and fertilizers to increase cereal 
output) will lead to an increased use of pesticides, thus triggering the Pest Management 
Safeguard (project funds will not directly be used to purchase pesticides).  
 
The approach for the School Feeding program  relies on the well-respected, indigenous 
maman system and is mindful of the advantages of building on an existing mechanism 
not only in economic terms but also in terms of social acceptability; as a result, the 
assessed risk of a negative social impact is low.  The major concern with this program is 
the expectations that it might produce within the population.  As an emergency operation, 
the School Feeding program has a limited two-year life.  It will have to be clearly 
communicated to beneficiary communities that assistance is of limited duration and funds 
will no longer be available at the end of the two years.  As such a communications expert 
is working with the TS to place this communications strategy in the project’s operational 
manual.  
 
With regards to the Enhanced Cereal Production component, there may be some 
negative impact on communities, due to the distributional effects that this component will 
put in motion.  In order to maximize gains in agricultural output, this component will 
target the most efficient producers (both crops and seeds), who are usually the most 
entrepreneurial members of the community and are likely to be amongst the better-off.  It 
will have to be clearly communicated that the assistance provided by this component 
Page  5
should generate a trickle-down effect benefitting the majority of community members 
and that the primary objective of the component is to increase domestic production of 
cereals.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There no major potential indirect and/or long-term impact due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The risks associated with pesticide and fertilizer use may be mitigated through proper 
instruction of beneficiaries on how to safely use such inputs, the increased quantities of 
pesticides that will be needed, and how to mitigate potential harmful effects, and to this 
end a section of the ESMF will discuss these aspects.  
 
To mitigate possible social risks associated with the project, the TS, the AGAIBs and 
their NGO partners will draw on their experience using community based strategies.  
There is ample evidence that community based approaches are particularly suited in 
fragile states, as they make it easier to leverage the strengths of actors often marginalized 
in development projects, such as civil society and grassroots communities.  Because of 
their involvement with the pilot preceding the CPD (the EPPR), the TS and all partners 
such as NGOs and PTAs are experienced in adapting project objectives to local 
circumstances, thus ensuring that local dynamism and assets are harnessed while taking 
into account norms and customs. In addition, the extensive consultations held for the 
preparation of the CDP with NGOs, CBOs, development partners, Government officials 
and civil society, complemented by poverty assessments and surveys (e.g., the QUIBB) 
have provided insights into the underlying socio-cultural, institutional and political 
context of Togolese society, and more in particular on the roots of the social and 
institutional crisis, and the constraints and opportunities posed by the current context for 
conducting the proposed activities.  
 
Further, project activities will be accompanied with a communications campaign to 
explain clearly to beneficiary communities the nature of project activities, targeting 
mechanisms, and the timetable for the implementation of these activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The safeguard instruments will be prepared following a broad-based consultation 
framework involving relevant sectoral ministries, including: Education, Health, 
Agriculture, Environment and other stakeholder groups, such as Agency for support to 
grass root initiatives (Agence d’Appui aux Initiatives de Base); Village Development 
Page  6
Committees (Comites Villageois de Developpement) and NGOs.  The ESMF, simplified 
PMP and the RPF will be prepared in full compliance with national and Bank safeguard 
policies. Prior to disclosure in-country and at Bank InfoShop, a workshop will be held 
with relevant stakeholders to share study findings and gather the views of the 
participants, as well as a way to foster their ownership of project safeguards 
implementation.  
 
The preparation of the ESMF and simplified PMP has already started and will conclude 
no later than February 2009, with a full disclosure of the manual.  Preparation will be 
carried out by the Recipient, with the possible assistance of some consultants.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/19/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/19/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/10/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/16/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/19/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  7
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
N/A 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Zampaglione 
10/14/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
10/14/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
10/14/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
10/14/2008 
Comments:   
