Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3547 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Togo 
Project ID: P110943 
Project Name: Community Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Giuseppe Zampaglione 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (30%);Health (20%);Other social services (17%);Micro- and 
SME finance (17%);Sanitation (16%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement (P);Other social development (S);Education 
for all (S);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Note: This project is being prepared under OP/BP 8.0 "Rapid Response to Crisis and 
Emergencies".  As part of the Bank-Government's strategy to respond to the social and economic 
emergency in Togo, the principal outcome of the proposed Project will be to provide to poor 
communities in the country better access to quality public services and to economic 
opportunities. Facilitated access to improved health, education, water and sanitation, 
transportation services and to income generating opportunities will help to address some of the 
most urgent problems of poor communities in Togo, especially rural. It is expected that the 
Project will improve the overall social situation of residents of targeted communities and that 
through their direct participation in the decision-making process and implementation of 
subprojects they regain some level of trust in local and central authorities.  
 
The PDO of the proposed Project is to provide to poor communities of Togo improved access to 
basic services and to economic opportunities, by financing at least 450 sub-projects to be 
identified and implemented directly by communities.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In Togo, the joint approach of the Government and the Bank to respond to the social and 
economic crisis takes into account the most recent institutional experiences on delivery of social 
services and in support of economic development and social protection. Institutional 
arrangements include the establishment and functioning of: a) five regional community 
development funds managed by the AGAIBs with similar governance mechanisms and common 
operational guidelines; b) limited centralized liaison functions to facilitate coordination, cross-
learning and donor relations; c) centralized financial management reporting functions to optimize 
on Bank disbursement and reporting requirements and to provide fiduciary advisory services to 
the five implementing agencies; and d) innovative role of the program advisory committee 
(Comite d’Orientation du Programme or COP) formed by donors, government and civil society.  
 
The Project will include three components (IDA financing only):  
 
(1) Community sub-projects (US$13 million) to facilitate access of the population to improved 
health, education, water and sanitation, transportation services and to income generating 
opportunities. Sub-projects will be implemented by poor communities through their Community 
Development Committees (CDCs) with the support of the AGAIBs. Under this component, the 
AGAIBs will make sub-grants to CDCs to finance 250 public services sub-projects (average of 
US$40,000 per sub-grant) and 200 economic opportunities sub-projects (average of US$10,000 
per sub-grant). Communities will contribute with an additional 10% (in cash or kind). Sub-
projects may include construction of health centers, primary schools, markets, small bridges, 
small access roads, etc. The project sites will tend to be small.  
 
(2) Training (US$2 million) at the community and regional levels (including AGAIBs) on 
community driven development activities and procedures, and at the national level to support 
liaison functions (financial management, procurement and reporting).  
 
(3) Management and operating costs, and audits (US$2 million). This component will finance 
the salaries and operating costs of the five AGAIBs and of all other support needed both at the 
central and local level, as well as the audits, other consulting services and limited provision of 
goods.  
 
The lending instrument proposed for this operation is a grant financed by an exceptional IDA 
allocation as part of the arrears clearance package.  This intervention is filling a major gap in 
community investments, as the 10th European Development Fund preliminary allocations do not 
include the refinancing of the more than ten years of the EU program on micro-projects 
(Programme Pluriannuel de Microrealisations - PPMR) and as the UNDP program on 
communities is coming to an end.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be distributed in the five main regions of Togo.  However, the exact location 
and the type, scale and environmental and social characteristics of sub-projects are currently 
unknown as they will be demand-driven.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
The project requires an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF and RPF will enable communities to screen 
their sub-projects for potential environmental/social impacts and to develop/implement 
appropriate mitigation measures. Draft TORs for ESMF and RPF have been provided to the 
clients to hire consultants who will prepare the ESMF and RPF six months within project 
effectiveness.  Meantime, an ESSAF has been developed in the context of project preparation, 
which refers to these two safeguard instruments and when they are expected.  They will be 
prepared following a broad-based consultation framework involving relevant stakeholder groups 
and in full compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Project will finance sub-projects to support local communities restore social and 
economic infrastructures and provide them with economic opportunities. OP 4.01 is triggered 
because these sub-projects (such as rehabilitation, construction of schools, health facilities, 
bridges, markets and community water and sanitation) have been identified to have, in some 
cases, minimal environmental impacts, which can be managed to an acceptable level. A Rapid 
Environmental Assessment of the on-going sub-projects under the pilot operation financed by the 
LICUS Trust Fund determined that mitigation measures could be adopted to address the related 
environmental issues. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared and will include a mini medical waste management plan for handling the health care 
related waste at the community-level.  The ESMF will formulate standards methods and 
procedures specifying how unidentified future subprojects whose location, number and scale are 
unknown, at this time, will systematically address environmental and social issues in the 
screening and categorization, siting, design, implementation, operational phases and maintenance 
of the subproject lifecycle.  It will include: (i) The systematization of environmental and social 
impact assessment for all identified sub-projects before investment; (ii) Procedures for 
conducting sub-project specific EIAs, be they Limited Environmental Impact Assessment 
(LEIA) or Full Environmental Impact Assessment (FEIA) as applicable; and (iii) Capacity 
strengthening and awareness raising campaigns targeted at relevant stakeholder groups for better 
implementation and monitoring of project safeguard measures.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Though the project will not finance land acquisition, which must be done on a voluntary 
basis as a community level decision, some exceptional cases may require land acquisition and 
resettlement.  A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared as due diligence and 
RAPs will be prepared during the implementation if needed. The RPF will be disclosed in
-
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
country and at the InfoShop within six months after Grant effectiveness.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
It is not expected that small village wells to be built by communities will use any 
international water source.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/12/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project being processed under OP/BP 8.0 (Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies), 
the ESMF and RPF will have to be prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country 
and at the Bank’s InfoShop within six months after Grant effectiveness. (Differently from 
what is mentioned in note 1 to this section, which the system does not allow to delete).  
 
SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Zampaglione 
04/22/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Nina Chee 
04/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maurizia Tovo 
04/22/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
