Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/16/2008 
Report No.:  AC3650
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Togo 
Project ID:  P110943 
Project Name:  Community Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Giuseppe Zampaglione 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTH2 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (30%);Health (20%);Other social services (17%);Micro- and 
SME finance (17%);Sanitation (16%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic engagement (P);Other social development (S);Education 
for all (S);Health system performance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
17.20 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Note: This project is being prepared under OP/BP 8.0 "Rapid Response to Crisis and 
Emergencies".  As part of the Bank-Government's strategy to respond to the social and 
economic emergency in Togo, the principal outcome of the proposed Project will be to 
provide to poor communities in the country better access to quality public services and to 
economic opportunities. Facilitated access to improved health, education, water and 
sanitation, transportation services and to income generating opportunities will help to 
address some of the most urgent problems of poor communities in Togo, especially rural. 
It is expected that the Project will improve the overall social situation of residents of 
targeted communities and that through their direct participation in the decision-making 
process and implementation of subprojects they regain some level of trust in local and 
central authorities.  
 
The PDO of the proposed Project is to provide to poor communities of Togo improved 
access to basic services and to economic opportunities, by financing at least 350 sub-
projects to be identified and implemented directly by communities.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
In Togo, the joint approach of the Government and the Bank to respond to the social and 
economic crisis takes into account the most recent institutional experiences on delivery of 
social services and in support of economic development and social protection. 
Institutional arrangements include the establishment and functioning of: a) five regional 
community development funds managed by the AGAIBs with similar governance 
mechanisms and common operational guidelines; b) limited centralized liaison functions 
to facilitate coordination, cross-learning and donor relations; c) centralized financial 
management reporting functions to optimize on Bank disbursement and reporting 
requirements and to provide fiduciary advisory services to the five implementing 
agencies; and d) innovative role of the program advisory committee (Comite 
d’Orientation du Programme or COP) formed by donors, government and civil society.  
 
The Project will include three components (IDA financing only):  
 
(1) Community subprojects (US$12.5Million) to facilitate access of the population to 
improved health, education, and water and sanitation services, to other basic socio-
economic infrastructures, and to income generating opportunities.  Subprojects will be 
implemented by poor communities through their Village Development Committees 
(CVD – Comite Villageois de Developpement) with the support of theAGAIBs.  Under 
this component, the AGAIBs will make sub-grants to CVD to finance approximately 200 
basic infrastructure subprojects of a maximum cost of US$60,000 each (average of 
US$47,500 per sub-grant) and approximately 150 income generating activities 
subprojects with a maximum cost of up to US$25,000 each (average of US$20,000 per 
sub-grant).  Communities will contribute with an additional 10% (in cash or kind).  This 
component includes an amount of about US$1.3 million (10% of the sub-projects) for the 
recruitment by the AGAIB of intermediaries such as NGOs that would help communities 
during the whole sub-project cycle. Resources to finance the 350 subprojects will be 
distributed to the five regions of Togo, according to criteria based on population and 
poverty levels.  The Project will be implemented under a highly decentralized approach 
and with strong involvement of local communities.  
 
(2) Training (US$1.7 Million) at the community and regional levels (including 
AGAIBs), on community-driven development methodologies and operational procedures 
(including compliance with safeguards) and at the national level to support liaison 
functions (financial management, procurement and reporting).  
 
(3) Management and Operating costs (US$3.0Million).  This component will finance the 
salaries and operating costs of the five AGAIBs and of the Technical Secretariat as well 
as all Monitoring and Evaluation activities, information and communication campaigns, 
the financial and technical audits and other consulting services.  This component will also 
finance limited provision of goods.  
 
The lending instrument proposed for this operation is a grant financed by IDA. This 
intervention is filling a major gap in community investments, as the 10th European 
Page  3
Development Fund preliminary allocations do not include the refinancing of the more 
than ten years of the EU program on micro-projects (Programme Pluriannuel de 
Microrealisations - PPMR) and as the UNDP program on communities is coming to an 
end.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be distributed in the five main regions of Togo.  However, the exact 
location and the type, scale and environmental and social characteristics of sub-projects 
are currently unknown as they will be demand-driven.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project identifies a number of environmental issues which are direct or indirect 
consequence of implementation of subprojects due to the nature of the subprojects.  
These subprojects, like rehabilitation or construction of schools, health facilities, bridges, 
markets and community water and sanitation, have been identified to have in some cases 
minimal environmental impacts. Initial experience acquired under the LICUS financed 
EPPR project which supported the completion of more than 110 subprojects shows that 
due to the minimal level of environmental impact of the on-going subprojects, mitigation 
measures could be easily adopted to address them.  Subsequent to that experience, three 
key environmental issues were identified.  One of these is land clearing for construction 
and use of land for waste disposal which may have very localized and perhaps temporary 
health implications.  These can be mitigated by construction of garbage bins and good 
waste disposal practices.  The second issue is the possibility of biodiversity loss, soil 
erosion due to clearing of trees which can be mitigated through community tree and grass 
planting.  The third issue is the possible creation of open pits as a result of rehabilitation 
Page  4
or construction activities, but with the caveat that in order to save human and animal life, 
that the se pits are marked with clear signs.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There no major potential indirect and/or long term impact due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Project implementation units will need to demonstrate their commitment to 
environmental and social safeguards issues.  However, as local capacity is weak, the 
ESMF and the RFP will indicate how capacity issues are going to be addressed to ensure 
appropriate implementation of the mitigation measures.  Consultation with key 
stakeholders during the preparation and the implementation of the ESMF and of the RPF 
will facilitate a level of ownership of the frameworks.  In addition, capacity building 
through training will also be identified as a means to support implementation at the 
community level.  Moreover, it is proposed that the Project supports the implementation 
units and local government staff to undertake some training on environmental and social 
impact assessments, mitigation and management plans.  During appraisal the social and 
environmental specialist took part at some quick trainings sessions with the PIU and with 
relevant ministries, in particular with the Ministry of environment, Social affairs, and 
Cooperation and Development.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The safeguard instruments will be prepared following a broad-based consultation 
framework involving relevant sectoral ministries, including: Education, Health, 
Environment and other stakeholder groups, such as Agency for support to grass root 
initiatives (Agence d’Appui aux Initiatives de Base) ; Village Development Committees 
(Comites Villageois de Developpement) and NGOs.  The ESMF and the RPF will be 
prepared in full compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies. Prior to disclosure 
in-country and at Bank InfoShop, a workshop will be held with relevant stakeholders to 
share study findings and gather the views of the participants, as well as a way to foster 
their ownership of project safeguards implementation.  
 
It is expected that soon after Board approval the preparation of the ESMF and of the 
RPF will be launched and concluded no later than September 2008, with a full disclosure 
of the manual.  Preparation will be carried out by the Recipient, with the possible 
assistance of some consultants.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/31/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
No 
Page  6
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Zampaglione 
05/15/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
05/16/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
05/16/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
05/16/2008 
Comments:   
