Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3892 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/25/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Togo 
Project ID: P113544 
Project Name: Additional Financing to CDD - Food Crisis 
Task Team Leader: Giuseppe Zampaglione 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 9, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (72%);Primary education (14%);Other social services (14%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (P);Nutrition and food security (S);Other social 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
7.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
This project is being prepared under OP/BP 8.0 "Rapid Response to Crisis and Emergencies."  
As part of the Bank-Government's strategy to respond to the social and economic emergency in 
Togo, the Project Development Objective the proposed restructured Project will be to provide 
poor communities with improved basic socio-economic infrastructures and income generating 
activities by financing among others at least 350 subprojects to be identified and implemented 
directly by communities.  
 
Additional financing to the original project is currently being requested to support the 
expansion of the Community Development Project and its broad objective to support socio-
economic infrastructures and services in favor of vulnerable communities of Togo, in particular 
by financing the costs associated with increasing the production of rice, maize and other cereals 
for which the national food balance is negative. The project will also support targeted school 
feeding operations in  vulnerable communities. Specifically, the additional financing responds to 
the food price crisis by subsidizing the provision of improved seeds and fertilizers for the 
production of 14,000 tons of cereals.  In addition the project will subsidize daily lunch meals for 
Page  2
approximately 16,800 primary school students in 84 schools in targeted areas over two years, 
starting with school year 2008-2009.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective of the proposed Project is to provide poor communities with 
improved basic socio-economic infrastructures and income generating activities. The original 
PDO was changed with the additional financing to ensure that the Government, through the 
recently established Technical Secretariat (TS) and in close collaboration with the Ministry for 
Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock (MAFL) can implement projects to increase food 
production.  
 
The proposed additional financing of US$7.0 million will support: (i) a School Feeding 
Emergency Operation sub-component under Component 1 (Community Development), and (ii) a 
new Enhancing Cereals Production component.  As a result, the CDP will be structured as 
follows:  
 
1: Community Development (US$14.5 million rather than the original US$12.5 million) will 
have two sub-components:  
 
1.1 Community Development Sub-Projects (US$12.5 million) is unchanged from the original 
component 1 and will facilitate beneficiary access to improved health, education, water and 
sanitation, and other basic services (200 sub-projects) as well as to income generating activities 
(150 sub-projects);  
 
1.2 School Feeding Emergency Operation (US$2.0 million) is a new sub-component and will 
support the preparation and distribution of daily lunches to approximately 16,800 primary school 
students to primary school students over two-years.  
 
2: Training (US$1.7 million) will remain unchanged.  
 
3: Management and Operating Costs (US$3.0 million) will remain unchanged, as additional 
management and operating costs to implement the new activities have included in their 
respective budgets.  
 
4: Enhancing Cereal Production. (US$5.0 million) is new and aims to increase domestic 
production of cereals by about 14,000 tons by the end of the second year of project 
implementation. This component complements the objective of component 1 to support 150 
income generating activities at the community level, as it is expected that most of such activities 
will be of an agricultural nature and will therefore benefit from improved access to agricultural 
inputs. It will have two sub-components:  
 
1.1 Procurement and distribution of fertilizers and seeds.  (US$ 4.4 million), will support costs 
associated with the urgent procurement of 4,275 metric tons of fertilizers and of 356 tons of 
commercial seeds. Both fertilizers and seeds will be distributed to 14,000 selected food crop 
producers.  This sub-component will also finance the production and distribution of 14 tons of 
foundation seeds in 2009.  
Page  3
1.2 Coordination and technical support (US$0.6 million) will finance capacity building 
activities within the MAFL for proper project implementation and supervision and will finance 
limited operating expenses of the regional and prefectural departments of the MAFL.  This 
subcomponent will also support the design of an innovative and sustainable system to deliver and 
distribute fertilizers and seeds.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be distributed in the five main regions of Togo. For the School Feeding 
Emergency Operation, school feeding programs will be targeted more heavily towards areas 
badly affected by the Food price crisis and the recent flooding. For the Enhanced Cereal 
Production component, activities will include the distribution of fertilizers.  As the use of 
improved agricultural inputs often leads to an increased use of pesticides and the use of such 
agents, particularly without proper instruction, has led to negative health and environmental 
outcomes, the ESMF will need to take this into account.  Given that both components will result 
in a redistribution of resources, they may have potential social ramifications, as discussed in the 
following sections.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has already been exposed to World Bank Safeguard policy.  Under the earlier 
LICUS finance EPPR, rapid environmental assessment of the on-going sub-projects was 
conducted.  Additionally, the process has already begun for the conduct of the ESMF for the 
parent project, the Community Development Project.  The capacity of the Technical Secretariat 
and the AGAIB will be further built over the course of the ESMF.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTCS) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered given that the environmental and social impacts of the project, for 
the most part, are expected to be minimal, site-specific and manageable.  
 
From an environmental and social safeguard point of view, both the parent project and the 
proposed additional financing are Category B .  
 
To ensure that sub-projects are environmentally sustainable and negative environmental or 
social impacts are minimized/mitigated, an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) is being prepared to be used by the CPD after approval by ASPEN, including a 
simplified Pest Management Plan (PMP). The ESMF will be disclosed in Togo and at the Bank's 
Infoshop within six months of effectiveness in line with OP 8.00.  To ensure effective 
implementation of the ESMF in the CDP and the additional financing, funds will support 
relevant training, to be detailed in the ESMF. Training topics might include: (i) environmental 
screening of sub-projects; (ii) how to plan, implement and monitor mitigation measures; (iii) 
national environmental legislation; the purpose of the Bank’s safeguard policies; and (iv) 
environmental is
sues facing Togo. The TS will oversee the implementation of the ESMF and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
ensure that appropriate resources are made available in this regard.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The additional financing produces potential environmental risks due to the likelihood that the 
activities under Component 4 (provision of seeds and fertilizers to increase cereal output) will 
lead to an increased use of pesticides, thus triggering the Pest Management Safeguard (project 
funds will not directly be used to purchase pesticides).   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The parent project, the Community Development Project (CDP), poses risks which are not 
relevant to activities of the additional financing. The Involuntary resettlement safeguard is 
triggered under the activities for the parent project, as community subprojects may include the 
construction of community buildings, thus necessitating some relocation. Similarly, a community 
might also construct a health post, thus requiring the ESMF to propose mitigation measures 
related to medical waste management.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  09/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The project is being processed under OP/BP 8.0 (Rapid Response to Crisis and 
Emergenceis), the ESMF and PMP annex will have to be prepared, reviewed, approved and 
disclosed incountry and at the Bank’s Infoshop within 6 months of grant effectiveness.  The 
preparation of the ESMF and simplified PMP has already started and will conclude no later 
than February 2009, with a full disclosure of the manual.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giuseppe Zampaglione 
09/25/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Roxanne Hakim 
09/25/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
09/25/2008 
Comments:   
