Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2008 
Report No.:  AC3520
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Tonga 
Project ID:  P096931 
Project Name:  Tonga Transport Sector Consolidation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Thakoor Persaud 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Aviation (50%);Ports, waterways and shipping (25%);Roads and highways 
(15%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme:  Managing for development results (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S);Other urban development 
(S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.44 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.96
0.96 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to establish and consolidate the operations of 
the newly-created MOT as a unified transport sector- policy, planning and regulatory 
ministry and to improve the level of compliance of the civil aviation and maritime 
subsector entities with international safety and security standards.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project components are as follows:  
 
Component A:  Establishment of sustainable transport sector policy, institutional and 
operational framework.  (US$1,000,000, 18% of total project cost).  Provision of 
technical assistance to help the GoT to develop first-generation policy/planning 
frameworks and sector development policies and plans to address priority needs and help 
to build the MoT into a more sustainable transport sector entity. There are four main tasks 
to be financed under this goal.  
 
Page  2
A.1: Formulation of a transport sector national policy and planning framework 
(US$350,000): Developing an improved policy, planning and legislative framework for 
the transport sector, including formulation of strategic principles for the transport sector 
(on issues such as role of government, market competition, user-charges, conditions for 
subsidy, private sector participation, etc); an appropriate system for assessing the merits 
of policy and project proposals; and policy positions on key sector issues for 
consideration by GoT.  The results will feed into a National Transport Policy Framework 
which integrates sector and cross-sector polices and development plans, and a program of 
legislative reform.  
 
A.2, A.3 and A.4:  Preparation of sustainable investment plans for the aviation, maritime 
and road/land transport sub-sectors (US$650,000): Specifically, under this component the 
following will be prepared: (a) an aviation sector master plan ($150,000); (b) a medium 
term investment and financing plan for Fua’amotu International airport ($100,000); (c) a 
review and sustainable investment and financing plan for the domestic maritime sector 
($150,000); and (d) options for sustainable road maintenance and investment plan 
($250,000).  These plans will focus upon preserving and fully utilizing existing assets and 
building upon them in line with financial and human resource capacity, local country 
environment conditions and related considerations.  Development should respond to 
growth and new demand requirements in stages along a logical development path with 
any required central fiscal support clearly identified.  The development plans for each 
sector will be used in a National Transport Sector Development Plan and prioritized 
three-year actions plan for MoT.  
 
Component B: Meeting mandatory urgent and high priority obligations. (US$2.86m, 
53% of total project cost).  This component comprises strategic investments required to 
respond to and meet mandatory (urgent and high priority) safety and security standards 
required under international agreements, treaties and obligations. It comprises:.  
 
B.1  Aviation sector legal and regulatory surveillance and compliance obligations 
review and support. (US$150,000).  Regulatory oversight of the Tongan aviation sector is 
very limited. Tonga currently requests operational and airworthiness inspectors from the 
New Zealand CAA to perform these inspections against pay. While this inspection by the 
New Zealand CAA is satisfactory as an interim solution, ICAO recommends and MoT is 
committed to ensuring that Tonga become more proactive in terms of regulatory 
oversight. With the enactment of an up-to-date regulatory framework, certain oversight 
functions may be carried out in the future by the Tongan authorities.  The technical 
assistance will review and analyze the current stage of the primary aviation law, as well 
as the operating regulatory framework and the technical guidance material as well as 
provide for capacity building within the Civil Aviation Department of MoT, development 
of regulatory Handbooks and similar.  
 
B.2  Navigational aids and equipment at Fua’amotu International Airport 
(US$1,100,000).  The communication, navigation, and surveillance infrastructure of the 
country is limited.  In particular, the VHF Omni-directional Radio Range 
(VOR)/Distance Measuring Equipment (DME) (a type of radio navigation system for 
aircraft) at Fua’amotu International is working, but has a poor reliability record and is 
Page  3
well past its productive operational life.  Replacement by a new DVOR/DME at 
Fua’amotu airport is necessary in order to ensure continued compliance with 
ICAOrequirements.  Similarly. the currently installed Visual Approach Slope Indicator 
(T-VASI) on the Fua’amotu runway is increasingly difficult to maintain.  It isused by 
large air transport aircrafts to provide visual descent guidance information during the 
approach to the runway. and wwithout a working VASI, international flights cannot land. 
The currently installed T-VASI and is to be replaced by a new Precision Approach Path 
Indicator (PAPI) that has a similar purpose to the basic VASI but also provides a visual 
indication of the aircraft's position on the glidepath to the runway.  
 
B.3  Fire tender at Fua’amotu International Airport (US$850,000).  Fua’amotu 
International Airport complies with a category 8 (highest) fire fighting level.  However, 
three of the current five firefighting vehicles are old and in poor condition.  Two are to be 
reconditioned by Tonga Airports Limited (TAL) from its own resources but one in 
particular (a Mack P447) has reached the end of its operational life and needs to be 
replaced to ensure continued compliance with ICAO requirements.  
 
B.4  Replacement of security (baggage screening) equipment and emergency power 
equipment (US$130,000).  The x-ray machine is needed to provide passenger screening 
as required by ICAO security regulations for international passengers, including those in 
transit at Fua’amotu airport. One back-up generator is needed at Fua’amotu airport and 
one at Vava’u airport to ensure airport service continuity and safe aircraft operations 
during (relatively frequent) power outages.  
 
B.5  Improvements to all ferry terminals (US$451,500).  Improvements will be made to 
the ramps/platforms, fenders and navigational lights, and improvements made to cabling 
and equipment of reefer power and to provide for the isolation of dangerous goods 
Nuku’alofa , Ha’apai, Vava’u, Niuafo’ou, Niuatoputapu and Ha’afeva ferry terminals to 
improve safety and security of passengers and to facilitate the operation of essential ferry 
services between the Outer Islands.  
 
B.6  Marine safety and environmental protection equipment (US$24,000), including 
outboard motors for pollution (oil spill) management workboats and dangerous goods 
fuel drums  at the ferry terminals in Ha’apai and Vava’u.  
 
B.7  Reform of motor registry system (US$150,000).  The sub-component will finance 
transition of the motor registry unit from the Ministry of Police to the MoT, review of 
options and development and implementation of appropriate procedures and systems for 
managing the motor-vehicle registry and driver-licensing records.  
 
Component C:   Transition towards sustainability in the transport sector. (US$ 601,000, 
11% of total project costs):  This component will builds on the findings and 
recommendations of Component A.  It compromises a package of strategic items 
(technical assistance and targeted investments) consistent with the policy/ planning 
framework and medium-term sustainable investment plans developed in Component A.  
Page  4
It will help to support the GoT in the early stages of implementing key initiatives towards 
a
more sustainable transport sector, and to consolidate the transition to the unified 
Ministry of Transport.  The precise program of sub-components will depend on the 
outcomes of the Component A analysis.  However based on the findings of the project 
preparation missions and discussions with GoT, the following have been tentatively 
identified:  
 
C.1 Legislative framework (US$200,000). Assistance with drafting of legislation to 
implement the recommended legislative reforms identified in the Transport Sector 
Planning and Policy Framework module of Component A.  
 
C.2  Resurfacing the inter-
island ferry docking wharf at Nuku’alofa (US$220,000).  To 
upgrade the existing domestic ferry terminal surface to improve passenger safety.  
 
C.3  Installation of solar lighting at all ferry terminals (US$26,000)  
 
C.4  Safety and security equipment at airports ($150,000) -- on-going airport 
investments.  
 
Component D:   Project Implementation Support (US$601,000, 11% of total project 
cost): After reviewing the volume, diversity and scope of the various tasks above, it was 
decided that in spite of fairly limited institutional capacities within the small country, a 
fully-fledged Project Unit with full-time staff would be costly and not warranted under 
the proposed project.  Consequently, it was proposed to have a project support team 
(PST) within MoT to provide the necessary technical support to both MoT and TAL.  The 
PST will assist in the preparation of work-plans, budgets, progress and impact reports, 
and coordination of the overall implementation of the project.  It will comprise a full-time 
locally-recruited project manager, part-time internationally recruited procurement and 
aviation advisers and locally recruited works supervisory support for the marine division.  
Project associated incremental operating costs will also be covered under this component 
(including, for example, transport to Outer Islands to supervise the various activities, 
local workshops for stakeholders, procurement associated advertising and printing costs, 
travel and subsistence for staff supervising electrical and concrete small works, and 
similar)   For the just-completed Tonga Cyclone Emergency Reconstruction Management 
Project (CERMP), a steering committee comprising key actors chaired by the Ministry of 
Finance was very instrumental in addressing inter-institutional and related issues.  It is 
proposed to have a similar system for the proposed project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will be located in the Nuku Alofa, Hapia and some of the other major 
islands of the Royal Kingdom of Tonga.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential adverse environmental impacts where they occur will mostly be associated 
with:  
 
•
the maritime sector activities at the Ferry Terminals at Nuku Alofa and the other 
major islands, which are largely civil works for hard/sealed surface paving, ramp 
widening and reconstruction; and construction of bunded storage areas for dangerous 
goods and petroleum products. The construction contracts for the civil works are 
expected to be small in the order of US$25,000 to US$50,000.   
 
•
the aviation sector for the handling and use of foam material in the newly 
purchased fire engines; and handling and disposal of used lubricants at the service yard at 
the airports.  
 
The construction related environmental concerns are to do mostly with disposal of 
rubble and other spoil material, use of unauthorized quarries and borrow pits, emissions 
of dust and noise; and improper handling of lubricants and fuels for the main construction 
equipments. These may lead to impacts on water quality from contamination of nearby 
receiving water bodies and reduced air quality within close proximity of the sites during 
construction.  
 
There were concerns that the large volumes of foam material required for the fire 
engines may be improperly stored and handled which may result in leakage of the 
material into the ground and into the air. The EMP has confirmed that this form material 
is inert.  
 
These impacts will be small if not negligible, local and confined to the immediate 
vicinity where it may occur and can be readily avoided and or easily mitigated through 
widely available and tangible mitigation measures.  
Page  6
With regards social impacts there will be none since this project will require no land 
acquisition whatsoever since for the maritime sector all investments will be located or 
undertaken at the existing sites of the domestic ferry terminals in Nuku Alofa, Hapia and 
the other islands, and similarly also with regards the aviation sector, at the existing site of 
the International Airport on Tonga Tapu and at other international and domestic airports 
on the other islands.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives will be considered in the context of exploring engineering design 
solutions for the drainage of the storm water run-off from the newly paved areas at the 
ferry terminals. Options would be explored to determine if oils would have to be 
separated from the run-off before disposal into the seas.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The GoT has prepared an Environmental Management Plan which will be integrated into 
the technical design and civil works contracts. The EMP contains suitable measures for 
mitigation of the impacts, for monitoring of the implementation of these measures and 
outlines an adequate budget to ensure these measures are implemented.  
 
During construction, the implementation of these measures will be supervised by the 
main engineering design consultants and during implementation the required measures 
will be implemented by either the Marine Division of the Ministry of Transport (w.r.t. 
ferry terminals) and Tonga Airports Ltd (w.r.t. airports). Both corporations have adequate 
capacity to undertake the responsibilities they have been assigned in the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/02/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  7
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is an Environmental Management Plan.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thakoor Persaud 
04/16/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
04/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Bruce M. Harris 
04/18/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
04/18/2008 
Comments:   
