Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3429 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tonga 
Project ID: P096931 
Project Name: Tonga Transport Sector Consolidation Project 
Task Team Leader: Thakoor Persaud 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASTE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Aviation (50%);Ports, waterways and shipping (25%);Roads and highways 
(15%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme: Managing for development results (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and 
privatization (S);Trade facilitation and market access (S);Other urban development 
(S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to assist the Government of Tonga to advance ongoing 
transport sector reforms and initiatives so that the sector can better respond to both current and 
future national needs in a safe, secure and sustainable manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed IDA grant would support three main components:  
 
a. 
Component 1: Establishing a framework for sustainable development of the transport 
sector.  Assistance to develop an improved policy, planning and legislative framework for the 
sector as well as investment plans and strategies consistent with the long-term sustainable 
capacity of Tonga.  
 
Page  2
b. 
Component 2: Meeting mandatory urgent and high priority obligations.  Assistance to 
respond to and meet mandatory (urgent and high priority) safety and security needs as required 
under international agreements, treaties and obligations.  
 
c. 
Component 3: Transition towards sustainability in the transport sector.  Implementation 
of measures required to institutionalize and transition the Ministry of Transport and other sector 
agencies as appropriate into a more-sustainable position after the initial framework is established 
and initial critical investments are made, including assistance to implement strategic items 
consistent with the framework developed in Component 1 and a review and update of sector 
legislation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Most of the works would be located on the main island of Tongatapu, Tonga.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Over the years, the GoT has implemented numerous World Bank projects of at least similar or 
more significant infrastructural works and as such has gained some experience with World Bank 
safeguards policies. The MoT is committed to ensuring qualified and experienced staff are 
available to work on these issues and has further agreed to use World Bank Safeguard Guidelines 
and project preparation will include an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bruce M. Harris (EASTE) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The projects negative environment impacts will be local and extremely minor where they 
occur, since the works will be for small contracts ( less than US25,000) involving mostly 
maintenance or improved drainage of existing stretches of roads,resurfacing of existing wharfs, 
placement of security lights and other equipment at wharfs and at the airport. To manage these 
local impacts, the GoT is preparing an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) which will be 
integrated in the design and contracts for all civil works. The EMP will be reviewed and cleared 
by the World Bank and disclosed lcoally and at the infoshop before appraisal of this project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  3
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/17/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Any needed studies will be done by March 23, 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thakoor Persaud 
02/15/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
03/11/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
