Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3763 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/11/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Tunisia 
Project ID: P095847 
Project Name: Second Water Sector Investment 
Task Team Leader: Julia Bucknall 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (50%);Water supply (27%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (23%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
34.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
34.00 
 
African Development Bank 
34.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
68.00
136.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project has three development objectives: to help (i) the Government institutions involved in 
water management take better investment, policy and pollution control decisions using an 
improved information base, (ii) remote rural communities use improved water supply systems, 
and (iii) farmers use improved or new irrigation and drainage systems.  
 
This will be achieved mainly through: (a) making new information and the results of innovative 
pilot activities available to decision-makers in the MARH and MESD, (b) creating/improving 
piped drinking-water services in rural areas, and (c) creating/rehabilitating irrigation systems. 
The project objectives are fully in line with the overarching goals of the water strategy and will 
contribute to bringing the effective demand for water in balance, on a sustainable basis, with the 
expected future levels of supply at the national and local levels.  
 
Page  2
The project targets three groups of beneficiaries: i) the staff involved with water resources 
management in public institutions. After project closing, this staff will be better informed (with 
improved monitoring systems), better trained, and better equipped (with new methodological 
tools and practical results from experimental actions), ii) the rural populations whose living 
conditions will improve with better drinking water systems (they will travel less distance to 
collect the water and be able to use more water than before), and iii) irrigated farmers, who will 
have access to new or improved irrigation water.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be a joint operation with the AfDB, and AFD. Among the total cost of $170 
million (TD 200 m), the Bank will invest 20% (US$ 34 m), AfDB 20%, and AFD 40%. The 
remaining 20% would be financed by the Government of Tunisia.  
 
The first objective of the project relates to three components: Component 1: groundwater 
management (with 21% of the total cost) will include 150 exploratory boreholes, purchase and 
rehabilitation of piezometers, participatory aquifer management schemes, information systems to 
monitor surface and ground water quantity. Component 2: Water Conservation and 
Environmental Protection (4% of the total) will focus on monitoring of water pollution, inclusion 
of environmental clauses into standard bidding documents for water infrastructure, and studies 
on using treated wastewater for uses other than agriculture. Component 3: Institutional and 
capacity-building (2% of the total) consists of targeted research on non conventional water use, a 
new long-term strategy (Water Vision 2050), institutional coordination, and M&E. The second 
objective relates to Component 4: Rural water supply (27% of the total) focuses on improving 
basic water supply systems for a more advanced level of service, creating new systems in un-
served areas and supporting user groups.  The third objective relates to Component 5: Improved 
irrigation management (46% of the total investment), which includes creation of schemes where 
groundwater has been shown to be sufficient, rehabilitation of surface water schemes, small 
works including modernizing pumping stations, and extension of existing schemes using treated 
wastewater. Activities using treated wastewater for agriculture will use Tunisian guidelines that 
were developed under PISEAU I.  This component also includes support on tariff studies, 
support to water user associations and other technical assistance activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is financing the government’s programme, as detailed in the 11th plan for economic 
development.  The sites of the investments for the first two years of implementation are known.  
Those after that time are not yet known, but criteria of eligibility exist or are being developed.  
 
All types of activities in the program were also financed under the first project, for which 
considerable capacity was built up to incorporate environmental considerations into investments 
(environmental clauses in standard bidding documents for hydraulic investments, training of 
regional implementing agencies, etc) and for monitoring potential impacts on soil (study on soil 
quality degradation in irrigated areas) as well as surface water (monitoring system for sources of 
pollution) and groundwater (groundwater quality monitoring, groundwater models and 
management plans).  These mitigating and screening actions will also be continued and further 
strengthened in PISEAU II through an Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF), which will provide criteria for determining when specific environmental or social 
Page  3
safeguard plans are necessary and outline the required content of such plans. Therefore, the 
project will develop specific environment and/or land acquisition plans for specific investments 
identified in the screening questionnaire contained in the ESMF.  
 
An environment and social specialist will be part of the Project Management Unit to oversee all 
the environment and social requirements identified in the EMSF and the project-specific ESMPs.  
The project will also continue the program of training to the regional implementing agencies.  
 
The project involves the following possible environmental issues.  
 
1. 
For the drilling of exploratory boreholes -- potential for overexploitation of shallow and 
deep aquifers.  The average depth of boreholes is 250 meters.  However, the project includes 
three additional exploratory boreholes to better understand the extent and location of the aquifer 
shared between Tunisia, Libya and Algeria (North West Saharan aquifer), for which a formal 
agreement was reached between the three countries. Exploratory boreholes of this type financed 
by PISEAU I were of great benefit to the knowledge and understanding of this important aquifer.  
The exploratory boreholes are based on hydro-geological and geophysical studies and benefit 
from the accumulation of knowledge acquired under PISEAU I amongst other sources.  In 
addition PISEAU I financed modeling of two aquifers (El Houaria and Chougafia). Two 
additional modeling studies for the proper management of aquifers will be financed under 
PISEAU II (Hajib and Sisse). The project will also finance modeling as part of a decision 
support system for the proper management of aquifers.  The Environmental and Social 
Management Framework(ESMF), to be prepared for this project, will clarify the adequacy of the 
aquifer  modelling to determine rate and sequencing of the borehole-drilling as well as the 
adequacy of the practices used to determine whether a particular borehole is “positive”.  
 
2. 
For the creation of irrigation schemes -- possibility of contributing to overexploitation of 
aquifers; risks of problems of weak agricultural productivity arising from possible poor quality 
aquifer water; potential risks of over-exploitation of deep aquifers with very limited recharge. 
The ESMF will evaluate adequacy of practices under PISEAU I and suggest improvements if 
necessary.  
 
3. 
For artificial recharge of aquifers with treated wastewater – potential damage to aquifer 
quality if existing Tunisian wastewater quality standards are not consistently met. Artificial 
recharge with treated wastewater will be piloted in Djerba from the wastewater treatment plant of 
Aghir which is operated by the Office National de l’Assainissement (ONAS).  The project will 
finance a strategyfor artificial recharge with surface and treated waste water and the ESMF will 
determine the extent to which existing water quality and quantity monitoring activities are 
adequate.  
 
4. 
For irrigation with treated wastewater – potential problems with soil and shallow aquifer 
quality if Tunisian wastewater quality standards are not consistently met.  The PISEAU I 
financed and PISEAU II will carry out a study for transfer of treated waste water for irrigation 
and extend soil and water quality monitoring activities for irrigation schemes, including the sites 
that use treated wastewater.  The ESMF will determine the extent to which these systems are 
Page  4
adequate for the schemes that use treated wastewater, especially those that will be financed by 
PISEAU II.  
 
5. 
For rehabilitation of irrigation schemes -
–
possible contamination of surface and ground-
water with agricultural chemicals and salt.  As above, the ESMF will determine the extent to 
which existing surveillance systems are adequate and suggest mitigation actions as necessary.  
 
For social safeguards, the main issue relates to the use of private land for groundwater drilling 
and for constructing irrigation canals.  No resettlement is foreseen. Since the specifics of land 
ownership of each investment is not yet clear, the ESMF will contain a  resettlement policy 
framework with a screening tool to determine when a land acquisition plan (LAP) needs to be in 
place and what the LAP should contain.  When appropriate, formal agreements ("accords de 
cession volontaire") will be established with the private land owner(s). These agreements, 
recorded in a relevant legal format, will clearly indicate the owner(s)' agreement to voluntarily 
concede his /her land, for the needs of the project without any compensation.  Additional 
information recorded in the agreement could be the dimensions of land and the time frame 
projected for project use. All agreements will be signed by the project and the designated 
representatives of the private owners and will be systematically kept for records.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agencies are the Ministry of Agriculture and Hydraulic Resources (MARH) 
and Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (MESD). They were the 
implementing agencies for PISEAU I, for which performance was satisfactory. Coordination 
between the different agencies involved in water planning, management and services improved 
over the last decade, but needs to improve further, since it will become even more important in 
the second phase of the project.  In the activities financed by PISEAU I, the ICR indicated that 
appropriate environmental guidelines were followed, although supervision on environmental 
safeguard issues was insufficient.  The project would have benefitted from more attention to 
social issues during implementation, although these were social TA activities rather than 
safeguards.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNSSD) 
Mr Mohammed A. Bekhechi (LEGEN) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) has been proposed for the project because of 
the following possible environmental issues:   
 
The project involves the following possible environmental issues.  
 
1. For the drilling of exploratory boreholes -- potential for overexploitation of shallow and 
deep aquifers.  The average depth of boreholes is 250 meters.  However, the project includes 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
three additional exploratory boreholes to better understand the extent and location of the aquifer 
shared between Tunisia, Libya and Algeria (North West Saharan aquifer), for which a formal 
agreement was reached between the three countries. Exploratory boreholes of this type financed 
by PISEAU I were of great benefit to the knowledge and understanding of this important aquifer.  
The exploratory boreholes are based on hydro-geological and geophysical studies and benefit 
from the accumulation of knowledge acquired under PISEAU I amongst other sources.  In 
addition PISEAU I financed modeling of two aquifers (El Houaria and Chougafia). Two 
additional modeling studies for the proper management of aquifers will be financed under 
PISEAU II (Hajib and Sisse). The project will also finance modeling as part of a decision 
support system for the proper management of aquifers.  The Environmental and Social 
Management Framework(ESMF), to be prepared for this project, will clarify the adequacy of the 
aquifer  modelling to determine rate and sequencing of the borehole-drilling as well as the 
adequacy of the practices used to determine whether a particular borehole is “positive”.  
 
2. For the creation of irrigation schemes -- possibility of contributing to overexploitation of 
aquifers; risks of problems of weak agricultural productivity arising from possible poor quality 
aquifer water; potential risks of over-exploitation of deep aquifers with very limited recharge. 
The ESMF will evaluate adequacy of practices under PISEAU I and suggest improvements if 
necessary.  
 
3. For artificial recharge of aquifers with treated wastewater – potential damage to aquifer 
quality if existing Tunisian wastewater quality standards are not consistently met. Artificial 
recharge with treated wastewater will be piloted in Djerba from the wastewater treatment plant of 
Aghir which is operated by the Office National de l’Assainissement (ONAS).  The project will 
finance a strategy for artificial recharge with surface and treated waste water and the ESMF will 
determine the extent to which existing water quality and quantity monitoring activities are 
adequate.  
 
4. For irrigation with treated wastewater – potential problems with soil and shallow aquifer 
quality if Tunisian wastewater quality standards are not consistently met.  The PISEAU I 
financed and PISEAU II will carry out a study for transfer of treated waste water for irrigation 
and extend soil and water quality monitoring activities for irrigation schemes, including the sites 
that use treated wastewater.  The ESMF will determine the extent to which these systems are 
adequate for the schemes that use treated wastewater, especially those that will be financed by 
PISEAU II.  
 
5. For rehabilitation of irrigation schemes -– possible contamination of surface and ground-
water with agricultural chemicals and salt.  As above, the ESMF will determine the extent to 
which existing surveillance systems are adequate and suggest mitigation actions as necessary.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has been proposed because of the need to formalize 
land acquisition in the project.  The main issue relates to the use of private land for groundwater 
drilling and for constructing irrigation canals.  No resettlement is foreseen. Since the specifics of 
land ownership of each investment is not yet clear, the ESMF will include a resettlement policy 
framework with a screening tool to determine when a land acquisition plan (LAP) needs to be in 
placen and what the LAP should contain.  When appropriate, formal agreements ("accords de 
cession volontaire") will be established with the private land owner(s) agreement to voluntarily 
concede his/her land, for the needs of the project without any compensation. These agreements, 
recorded in a relevant legal format, will clearly indicate the owner(s)' agreement to concede his 
/her land, for the needs of the project without any compensation.  Additional information 
recorded in the agreement could be the dimensions of land and the time frame projected for 
project use. All agreements will be signed by the project and the designated representatives of 
the private owners and will be systematically kept for records.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
October 15, 2008.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Julia Bucknall 
07/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
07/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
07/10/2008 
Comments:   
