Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/10/2007 
Report No.:  AC3267
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P106284 
Project Name:  Cadastre Modernization Project 
Task Team Leader:  Wael Zakout 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
274.87 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.79
7.79 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall goal of the project is to contribute to government agenda to improve quality 
and effectiveness of public services through spreading and making effective E-
government applications. The specific objective of the proposed project is to improve the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the land registry and cadastre services. This objective will 
be achieved through: (i) renovating and updating cadastre maps to support digital 
cadastre and land registry information; (ii) making the digital land registry and cadastre 
information available to public and private entities (iii) improving customer services in 
land registry and cadastre offices; (iv) improving human resources in the TKGM; (v) 
developing policies and capacity to introduce in Turkey best international practices in 
property valuation.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will include the following components:  
 
Component 1: Cadastre and Land Registry Renovation and Updating.  The component 
will support (through renovation) the conversion (into digital format), updating and 
integration of existing analogue and digital cadastre information, land registry and related 
Page  2
data, into updated, accurate, consistent and standardized legally agreed cadastral 
renovated digital map and data sets, that will be available for entry into TAKBIS.  
 
The resulting renovated parcel information will be entered into the national cadastre and 
land registry systems thereby increasing the fidelity and security of the parcel information 
and the title overall. The component will include the following activities:  
 
•
Cadastre renovation;  
 
•
Base mapping in selected areas.  
 
Component 2: Improved Service Delivery. The component will support the 
modernization of the TKGM infrastructure so as to improve TKGM’s ability to provide 
coreservices to the Government and citizens of Turkey. It includes consultancy services 
to provide strategic advice on critical issues affecting the national implementation of 
TAKBIS in Land Registry and Cadastre Directorates. Model offices will be established in 
three regions so as to provide examples of office layouts that support streamlined, 
improved and integrated workflows involving both Land Registry and Cadastre 
Directorates of TKGM and the operation of the integrated version of TAKBIS. This 
component will also support procurement of furniture and equipment that may be 
required for the new model land offices. Furthermore, the component will support the E-
government initiative through making available an E-cadastre data through the planned 
Turkish National Spatial Data Infrastructure.It will provide access to land registry and 
cadastre data.  
 
The component will include the following sub-components:  
 
•
Cadastre integration consultancy support;  
 
•
Model office construction/renovation;  
 
•
Integration of E-Cadastre into National Spatial Data.  
 
Component 3: Human Resources and Institutional Development. The component will 
support the development of strategic plans and human resources development plans to 
ensure that the TKGM personnel skills match the strategic needs of the organization. The 
component will also finance training, study visits to countries which have undertaken 
similar modernization programs in the last few years, and support the development of 
video conferencing capability between regional directorates and headquarters for 
management, core and specialized training.  
 
The component will include the following activities:  
 
•
Human Resources Development Strategy;  
 
•
Business Planning and Strategic Planning including stakeholder analysis and the 
private sector roles;  
 
•
Training and study visits.  
 
Page  3
Component 4: Property Valuation. The component will investigate and develop the 
policy and institutional options for the property valuation function in Turkey in line with 
international best practices. The component will also finance the development of interim 
guidelines and piloting of property valuation in two municipalities and support building 
of the required capacities. It will include the following sub-components:  
 
•
Policy development (proposals on legal, institutional and technical arrangements);  
 
•
Pilot implementation; and  
 
•
Capacity building.  
 
Component 5: Project Management (US$2 million). This component will finance the 
project management costs, including the procurement and financial management 
contractors, the incremental costs to supervise the field activities, and the monitoring and 
evaluations, including the costs of customer surveys.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Component 2 of the Project proposes to include physical renovations or reconstruction 
works for selected cadastral and land registry offices that will represent model offices in 
three regional directorates. These model offices intend to support streamlined, improved 
and integrated workflows involving activities of the Land Registry and Cadastre 
Directorates of TKGM (the Client) and the operation of the integrated version of 
TAKBIS. Proposed renovation works will include painting, electrical wiring, installation 
of new windows and doors, modernization of archives, and possible minor demolition of 
existing partitioning walls that will allow adaptation of the existing offices to 
development of new modern cadastre services. New construction of small buildings 
designated for such future model offices may also take place. Given that the project will 
include small scale construction works connected to buildings renovation and 
reconstruction, the proposed project is classified as environmental assessment Category B 
according to the World Bank policy OP 4.01 based on which preparation of an 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) is requested as condition for project 
appraisal.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will include small scale construction works related to buildings renovation 
and construction. The possible environmental impacts associated with these small scale 
rehabilitation or reconstruction works are minor, short-term and mainly during the 
construction phase including temporary emissions of particulate matter/dust to the air, 
noise pollution, accumulated piles of construction waste, mild soil erosions, potential 
contamination of water and soil from improper material storage or usage of construction 
equipment, impact on buildings with architectural, historical or cultural significance, and 
exposure of workers to asbestos containing materials.  
 
Because the specific civil works of selected offices could potentially be within a historic 
district, the Bank safeguard policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is 
applicable to these investments. Consideration of such concerns is provided in the works 
contracts that will include requirements that the contractor is obliged to look for chance 
finds and immediately stop the construction work at the contested location and alert 
responsible authorities in case of chance finds.  
 
The possible environmental impacts will be prevented through mitigation measures and 
monitoring actions that are presented in the project Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) and inserted in the technical specifications of the contract provisions 
for the contractors who will perform the rehabilitation works. As part of EMF, the 
reconstruction of the model offices will be subjected to a site-specific environmental 
screening and review process (e.g., site check-list).  This process will minimize site-
specific environmental impacts and will use a standardized format that includes, but is 
not limited to, review of: (i) current environmental problems at the sites (soil erosion, 
water supply contamination, etc.); (ii) potential environmental impacts due to the project 
(disposal waste from construction, construction noise and dust, etc); (iii) potential 
impacts on archaeological and historical sites.  
 
Page  5
The proposed mitigation and monitoring plans will be attached to the civil works 
contracts and include guidance to provide consistent technical standards on proper 
construction procedures to ensure the protection of public health and the local 
environment.  The contractors will follow the local construction standards and will be 
responsible to ensure that all local existing regulatory standards and requirements are 
met. The EMF will be disclosed with the public and stakeholders on the TKGM website 
before Project Appraisal.  Any comments received during public disclosure will be 
incorporated in a final EMF document.  
 
The project will not support land acquisition or associated involuntary resettlement. All 
civil construction works planned will be executed on existing land plots which are 
already in the possession of the respective regional directorates.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There will be no long term impacts dues to the project activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared an EMF for the proposed construction works that provides 
environmental guidelines and outlines appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures 
during the proposed activities.  The General Directorate of Land Registry and Cadastre 
(TKGM) is responsible for the implementation and monitoring of the Bank’s safeguards 
policies and resulting environmental management and mitigation measures. TKGM will 
fulfill this responsibility through its Construction Works Unit under the Department of 
Administrative and Financial Affairs and Project Management Team which will carry out 
procurement procedures and perform contract management for the project activities. The 
TKGM will assign one staff with a civil engineering or environmental engineering 
background, who in the past was involved in similar studies financed by the Bank.  
 
The renovation and/or construction of model offices will be carried out by contractors 
selected through competitive procedures who will be responsible for the proper 
implementation of mitigation measures defined in the documents which will be a part of 
the bidding package. The works done by the contractors will be supervised by 
independent technical consultants who will ensure that the environmental mitigation 
measures are strictly applied. The Provincial Directorate of the Ministry of Environment 
in the regions where the model offices will be renovated or constructed and the related 
Municipalities will be consulted regarding its own requirements for environmental 
impacts, mitigation measures and for training of related staff under Turkish legislation.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the TKGM, authorities related to the Ministry of Environment, 
local communities and municipalities, NGOs, engineers, and architects.  
 
The EMF was disclosed in-country in local language and in English through the 
TKGM’s website on December 10, 2007, as well as at the Infoshop in Washington on 
December 10, 2007.  The TKGM will, throughout the project implementation, have 
continuous consultation with the stakeholders, as necessary, to address environmental 
issues/concerns that may affect them.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/09/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/09/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/10/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
Yes 
Page  7
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
11/12/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
11/12/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
11/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
12/10/2007 
Comments:   
