Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/05/2008 
Report No.:  AC3972
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P112949 
Project Name:  Access to Finance for SMEs - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 3, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSPF 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The additional financing will continue to support the project's development objective "to 
increase Turkish small and medium enterprises (SME) access to medium term finance". It 
will scale up the achievements of the original project not only during the implementation 
period (2008-2012), but also beyond that period as the Borrower will use the reflows 
repaid from the initial sub-borrowers to finance new investments before the funds are 
returned to the World Bank.  
 
The Access to Finance for SMEs project has proven effective in achieving its objectives 
by providing access to medium term finance for over 170 firms so far. The loans are well 
dispersed both sectorally and geographically. SMEs representing more than twenty 
sectors from varied areas such as printing, plastic processing, tourism and food 
processing have utilized funds from the project. The geographical coverage extends to 
most parts of Turkey with an emphasis on underserved areas such as the North, East, 
South East and the Center.  The additional financing for the Halkbank loan will enable 
further expansion of the sectors covered and broaden the coverage of the project thus 
enhancing the impact by improving access to finance for SMEs   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The additional financing will finance a credit line intermediated by Halkbank. The SMEs 
will be the final beneficiaries of the credit line. For purposes of this additional financing, 
SMEs will be defined as firms employing fewer than 250 people and having annual sales 
of less than US$20 million. To ensure that the project covers geographical regions in 
which SMEs are particularly underserved, Halkbank plans to allocate a portion of the 
loan to underserved areas. The credit line will finance medium term working capital (e.g. 
raw materials) and investment loans (e.g., machinery, equipment, and civil works) with 
no sector restrictions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Projects location is of SMEs that are located all over Turkey   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Halil Agah (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is subject to environmental assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01).  The 
Environmental Category of the project is FI, based on the fact that some of the 
investments under the project, which may be of all EA categories, will not be identified 
until project implementation. Environmental issues of sub-borrowers and their sub-
projects will be addressed through the sub-loan environmental eligibility assessments. 
Environmental assessments will be carried out in accordance with both Government of 
Turkey Environmental Assessment (Regulations on Environmental Impact Assessment, 
Official Gazette, dated 16 December 2003, Number 25318 from the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests-MoEF) and World Bank EA (OP 4.01) requirements. There 
will be no large scale significant and/or irreversible impacts. For the sub projects to be 
defined during project implementation, the Bank will verify during supervision that 
Page  3
Halkbank also follows the Environmental Assessment Framework (EAF) procedures for 
environmental review.  
 
The Turkish environmental impact assessment regulation classifies projects by 
environmental risk in a manner similar to World Bank Environmental Assessment (EA) 
policy (OP 4.01).  Some cases may arise, however, where the resultant environmental 
risk assignment under the Turkish system may differ from that of the World Bank, 
though in all cases the more protective approach will apply.  In these limited cases 
Halkbank will seek additional information and/or to undertake additional measures to 
assess and mitigate risks as a condition of using loan funds.  The seven key elements 
involved in the EA process are:  (a) screening, (b) EA documentation, (c) public 
consultation, (d) review and approval, (e) disclosure, (f) conditionality and (g) 
supervision and reporting. The procedures and institutional responsibilities are all 
delineated in the Environmental Review Procedures Document (EAF).  
 
The project may include small scale construction works related to buildings renovation 
and construction. The possible environmental impacts associated with these small scale 
rehabilitation or reconstruction works are minor, short-term and mainly during the 
construction phase including temporary emissions of particulate matter/dust to the air, 
noise pollution, accumulated piles of construction waste, mild soil erosions, potential 
contamination of water and soil from improper material storage or usage of construction 
equipment, and exposure of workers to asbestos containing materials.  
 
Because the specific civil works of the existing factory buildings could potentially be 
within a historic district, the Bank safeguard policy on Physical Cultural Resources 
(OP/BP 4.11) is applicable to these investments.  For cultural property issues, local 
municipality is responsible for application of Turkish laws and regulations, including 
those relating to cultural heritage. Regional Councils in the provinces have identified 
certain areas as “designated” areas of cultural and historical importance. If proposed civil 
works are to take place within one of the designated areas, it is reviewed by the 
appropriate Regional Council prior to being approved, and, if appropriate, specific 
provisions are attached to the approval.  If the construction site is outside a designated 
area, approval by the Regional Council is not required.  However, all construction is 
subject to national laws and procedures related to chance finds.  If an historical or cultural 
object is found during construction, work stops and the Ministry of Culture and Tourism 
is informed, which sends an expert to provide direction on how to proceed with the 
activity.  
 
Halkbank will review the subprojects made to SMEs and it will not support any 
investment requiring land acquisition or associated involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 
4.12).  All civil construction works planned will be executed on existing land plots which 
are already in the position of the respective factory/production buildings and/or industrial 
zones, and assessment of the investments will confirm that the locations are not occupied 
or being used for economic activities by any persons.  
 
The Bank safeguard policies on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) and Projects on 
International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) are not triggered for the project because no 
Page  4
investments will take place on or affecting international waterways (Euphrates, Tigris and 
Asi rivers, etc) or involving or dependent upon dams.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of the project Operational Manual the Borrower-Halkbank has prepared an 
Environmental Review Procedures which serves as the Environmental Assessment 
Framework (EAF) and defines the environmental assessment procedures for the project.    
For purposes of the additional financing Halkbank will update the EAF in consultation 
with the WB with the final document acceptable to WB. Halkbank has during the Access 
to Finance for SMEs Project developed institutional capacity to determine and monitor 
environmental risks of individual sub-projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the Halkbank officers, the borrowers, authorities related to the 
Ministry of Environment and Forestry, local communities and municipalities and NGO. 
The Borrowers have had and will continue to have consultations with final beneficiaries 
(small and medium enterprises) and potentially negatively impacted local people, NGOs 
and other.  
 
Environmental Assessment Framework was disclosed in 
–country in local language and 
in English through the Halkbank website on November 3, 2008, as well as the Infoshop 
in Washington on November 4, 2008.  Public consultation on the EAF was held prior to 
project appraisal, in March 2006  No new public consultation meeting was held for this 
additional financing as the EAF is not being substantially changed. The Halkbank will, 
through the project implementation, have continuous consultation with the stakeholders, 
as necessary, to address environmental issues/concerns that may affect them.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/29/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  5
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  6
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
10/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Halil Agah 
10/30/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
11/04/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Lalit Raina 
11/04/2008 
Comments:   
