Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3900 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P112578 
Project Name: Second Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader: Sameer Shukla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 5, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
300.00
300.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to help increase privately owned and operated energy production from 
indigenous renewable sources within the market-based framework of the Turkish Electricity 
Market Law, and to help enhance demand-side energy efficiency.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will closely follow the project design of the existing project, and will consist of a 
term lending facility to Turkish financial institutions, aimed at financing renewable electricity 
generation and energy efficiency.  
 
Renewable Energy: As in the existing project, all renewable energy sources are eligible for 
financing including hydro, wind, geothermal, biomass, and solar energy. It is expected that most 
of the investments will be in renewable electricity generation plants, though the follow-on 
facility is proposed to also target renewable resources (such as geothermal) for heating and 
cooling purposes.  The follow-on project proposes to update the eligibility criteria for hydro 
projects to reflect the definition of renewable hydro projects in the Renewable Energy Law 
–
those projects with a reservoir area limited to 15 km2 or less. Investments onor affecting 
international waters, as defined in OP 7.50, will be excluded from financing.  
Page  2
Energy efficiency investments:  It is proposed that the new project covers also energy efficiency 
investments.  As discussed above, there is significant potential in energy efficiency, and energy 
efficiency investments are gaining in importance, particularly because of the supply security 
situation in Turkey.  During project preparation and implementation, the types of energy 
efficiency investments to be included will be identified and developed.  It is proposed that the 
project maintains flexibility (such as by having one component covering both renewable and 
energy efficiency investments), so as to enable optimal usage of funds based on the development 
of energy efficiency investments during project implementation.  
 
Technical assistance for energy efficiency:  A component on technical assistance is also 
proposed.  Experience in other countries suggests that the provision of technical assistance in 
identifying, evaluating and developing energy efficiency investments to participating banks as 
well as industries during the initial stages results in accelerated implementation.  Two types of 
support may be needed in this regard: (a) Support for the participating banks and industries in 
order to enhance their appraisal skills in this regard, and for helping mainstream other incentives 
such as those available through the carbon market; and (b) Support for strengthening the 
institutional and regulatory framework for energy efficiency, including development of an 
effective ESCO industry.  Grant funding is likely to be available for such TA.  KfW has shown 
interest in participating in the renewable energy area and may be able to provide grant financing 
for this support.  This will be discussed with KfW (and other potential funding agencies) during 
project preparation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Turkey.  Sites for subprojects are not known at this stage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
TSKB and TKB have implemented their Operational Manuals satisfactorily.  Through their 
experience with the existing Renewable Energy Project, and through their experience with other 
multilateral lenders, TKB and TSKB have developed sound procedures for project approval and 
supervision, both maintain well trained environmental professionals on their staff who are 
knowledgeable and experienced regarding the safeguards aspects of project development.  
 
Some investments have involved land acquisition.  Although the land is actually purchased by 
the investors through negotiations with private owners, the investors are provided declarations of 
Public Benefit (subject to expropriation in the public interest) by the regulator, EMRA, prior to 
investing in order to be assured that the land will ultimately be available.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (QAG) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (EASTE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
While subproject locations have not been identified yet, the experience during the ongoing 
Renewable Energy Project gives an indication of the types of safeguards issues that the proposed 
project may face.  
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
EMP requirements for Category B projects:  The FIs find themselves in competition with 
commercial banks that are willing to finance these projects with no additional requirements over 
and above those required by the Turkish authorities. In order to streamline project processing, the 
Bank agreed that the FIs will prepare templates/generic EMPs  for common types of sub-projects 
which could then be easily modified for specific investment proposals by project sponsors.  
 
Before completion of appraisal, the environment management framework (currently 
included in the Operational Manual as the environment section) will be suitably revised and 
disclosed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
At the time of appraisal TKB and TSKB both expected some of the investments to require 
land acquisition.  The ongoing project therefore did not trigger OP 4.12, on the express 
agreement that land acquisition would be based on a “willing buyer/willing seller” basis.  During 
implementation however, there were cases where this approach was not feasible, particularly for 
hydropower subprojects.  In such cases, the investor used expropriation for “public benefit”.  The 
Operational Manual was thus revised in 2006 to include procedures for dealing with land 
acquisition and resettlement acceptable to the Bank under OP 4.12.  Both FIs have been 
following the Manual closely under the ongoing project.  Prior to appraisal, a social safeguards 
policy framework will be prepared and disclosed.  The framework will be included thereafter in 
the Manual for ease of implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
The Manual covers requirements with regard to dam safety, reflecting the Bank’spolicy in 
this regard.  The project has seen two subprojects where the dam safety policy was triggered, and 
the project sponsor followed the requirements of the policy satisfactorily, under the oversight of 
the FI.  A panel of experts was set up, which reviewed construction progress periodically. The 
panel will continue to monitor the dam for safety considerations after its completion.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/15/2008 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The environment management framework will be revised and disclosed, and a social 
safeguards policy framework document will be prepared and disclosed, by completion of 
appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameer Shukla 
12/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Gary Stuggins 
12/08/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
