Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3332 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/17/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P102172 
Project Name: Health Transformation and Social Security Reform Project 
Task Team Leader: Sarbani Chakraborty 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (70%);Other social services (30%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Population and reproductive health (S);Other 
communicable diseases (S);Social safety nets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
166.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project will support the GOT complete its fiscal and institutional readiness for 
nationwide transition to family medicine and the implementation of universal health insurance. 
The project development objective (PDO) is to (i) support the MOH complete policy and 
capacity building interventions to become a health system steward, (ii) build capacity of SSI to 
become a strategic purchaser in the health system, and (iii) complete service delivery reforms 
(family medicine, transformation of public hospitals) in the Turkish health system.  The 
achievement of the PDO will contribute to the broader Program objective, namely: “Ahealth 
system which regards patient rights and satisfaction, is accessible, is of high quality, prioritizes 
preventive health services, is cost-effective and sustainable, will be established (as stated in the 
MOH’s Strategic Plan for 2009-13). An updated results framework to accompany the MOH 
Strategic Plan and performance-based budget is currently under development (with World Bank 
technical support). Indicative list of indicators for measuring achievement of the PDO includes:  
 
•
Improved allocative efficiency in public spending on health through increasedspending 
on preventive and primary health care services and cost-effective health interventions  
Page  2
•
Improved performance (quality and efficiency) in reformed public hospitals, University 
and private hospitals.  
 
•
90% of the population of Turkey enrolled with a family doctor  
 
•
New institutional mechanisms for regulating quality of care, pharmaceuticals,medical 
devices and private provision of health services operational  
 
•
Improved targeting of public financing for non-contributory health insurance   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project is Phase II of an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) and triggers for Phase I 
are met.  
 
The proposed project will be designed either as a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp) or as a SWAp 
with a pilot on results based financing. Innovations in project design are consistent with GOT’s 
current emphasis on strengthening results-based management through a revamped strategic 
planning and performance-based budgeting system for the public sector (See Table 1 for list of 
options). Elements of a SWAp were included in the restructuring of HTP and HTP 
implementation has substantially improved since the restructuring (disbursements at mid-term in 
October 2006 were 9% of total loan proceeds, currently disbursements are 42% of loan proceeds.  
 
Option 1: SWAp/Programmatic Financing  
 
Bank supports specifics programs of HTP or a slice of the whole program. Annual review of 
progress on a set of results indicators, and flexibility over annual allocations consistent with the 
GOT’s annual budget formulation process. This option provides strong support for the results-
based strategic planning processes (five year plans) and the medium-term expenditure 
framework (MTEF)  
 
Option 2: SWAp + Piloting of Output-based financing  
 
Bank supports specifics programs of HTP or a slice of the whole program. Annual review of 
progress on a set of results indicators, and flexibility over annual allocations consistent with the 
GOT’s annual budget formulation process. This option provides strong support for the results-
based strategic planning processes (five year plans) and the medium-term expenditure 
framework (MTEF.  One components designed as a pilot on output-based financing. Ex-ante 
definition and costing of a preventive health care package for delivery through the community 
health network. Financing linked to achievement of specific results.  
 
Greater use of country systems (procurement and financial management) is also under 
discussion in Turkey. The GOT is interested in the use of country systems in so far as it mitigates 
slow project implementation and provides opportunities for Turkey to strengthen its fiduciary 
systems. An Institutional Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) was recently complete to identify 
opportunities for greater use of country systems in the health sector. The main finding of the IFA 
is that greater use of country systems was possible for the proposed project, provided appropriate 
risk mitigation measures, as identified in the IFA were implemented.  
 
Indicative list of Components include:  
 
A. 
MOH Stewardship, Provider Reforms and Strengthening Public Health Functions 
(estimated costs: US$75 million):  This component would support the implementation of the 
Page  3
program areas identified in MOH’s Strategic Plan for 2009-13 which include: (i) strengthened 
preventive and primary health services, (ii) improved diagnosis and treatment services, (iii) 
improving the quality of health services, (iv) institutional restructuring and capacity building, (v) 
managing pharmaceutical and medical devices regulation, (vi) health information systems, (vii) 
supporting multi-sectoral health responsibility and aligning health policies with EU accession, 
(viii)cross-border health, (ix) appropriate governance to support health and financial security for 
the entire population.  
 
B. 
Piloting Results-Based Financing for Preventive Health Services (estimated costs: US$25 
million).  This component will support the implementation of a results-based financing model for 
preventive health services managed by the MOH. Under this component, a preventive health 
benefits package for the population covering key non-communicable and communicable diseases 
will be delivered by a network of providers including family doctors and community based 
public health systems (health centers).  Expected results will be defined (e.g. # of the population 
at risk screened for breast, lung cancer) and included in a performance-based contract. This 
system will build upon the existing system of capitation payments to family doctors, which 
includes a performance-based element. Capacity-building of MOH institutions and providers to 
implement this system will be included in this component.  
 
C. 
Capacity building of the Social Security Institute (estimated cost US$66 million): This 
component will support the capacity-building of the Social Security Institute in the following 
areas: (i) implementation of the SSI Information Systems Strategy for the effective management 
of the social security and UHI system, (ii) implementation of a training program of SSI program 
managers in provider payment systems, medical audit, financial management, pension fund 
management and hardware, software, (iii) implementation of a new targeting mechanism for 
non-contributory health insurance (to replace the current Green card scheme).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Field- Republic of Turkey   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Health (MoH) and associated institutions such as the Refik Saydam Hygiene 
Institute have the needed institutional capacity to develop and implement environmental control 
and safeguard policies and the Department of Curative Services in the MoH has the capacity to 
support and monitor hospital implementation of hospital waste management plans.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
The project will not have any type of civil works or land acquisition.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/10/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sarbani Chakraborty 
06/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
06/17/2008 
Comments:  Approved 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Dominic S. Haazen 
06/16/2008 
Comments:  Approved 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
