Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2009 
Report No.:  48289
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P112578 
Project Name:  Private Sector Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sameer Shukla 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
500.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
550.00 
 Clean 
Technology 
Fund 
100.00
650.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objective is to help increase privately owned and operated 
energy production from indigenous renewable sources within the market-based 
framework of the Turkish Electricity Market Law, and enhance demand-side energy 
efficiency in the industrial sector, thereby helping to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will closely follow the project design of the existing Renewable 
Energy project.  The proposed loan will help increase privately owned and operated 
energy production from indigenous renewable sources within the market-based 
framework of the Turkish Electricity Market Law, enhance energy efficiency, and 
thereby help reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  The proposed Project will consist of two 
IBRD credit lines, one each to TSKB and TKB, and two CTF credit lines to each FI. 
Aggregate CTF financing will be limited to 20% of the total project costs of sub-projects.  
The FIs will allocate 10% of the IBRD loan towards energy efficiency, with the 
remaining focused on renewable.  The Project will be complemented by a parallel 
technical assistance program financed by other donors (KfW and UNDP at this stage), 
Page  2
through ongoing and planned activities. The TA will focus on capacity building for 
financial intermediaries and industries for energy efficiency investments. Other donors 
such as JICA and AfD also may consider providing additional TA as necessary.  
 
Renewable Energy: all renewable energy sources for electricicty production are eligible 
for financing including hydro, wind, geothermal, biomass, and solar energy, as well as 
renewable resources (such as geothermal) for heating and cooling.  
 
Energy efficiency:  The new project proposes to cover also energy efficiency 
investments in industries.  Some of the subsectors likely to be borrowers include iron and 
steel, cement, ceramics, chemicals and textiles.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project locations not known yet.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (QAG) 
Mr Bernard Baratz (OPCQC) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project involves investments that may trigger World Bank safeguard polices on 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Dam 
Safety (OP 4.37).  Since the project is an FI operation, individual subprojects are not 
known a priori. Consequently, the Environment Policy Framework and Resettlement 
Policy Framework utilized under the first operation were revised by the PFIs based upon 
both lessons learned in the fisrt operation and recent changes made to the  Turkish 
regulation on environment assessment. The revised environmental and resettlement 
policy frameworks were reviewed by the World bank. English language versions of the 
revised Environmental Management Framework and Social Safeguard Framework were 
Page  3
disclosed in the Infoshop prior to appraisal. Turkish language versions of the revised 
Environmental Management Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework were 
disclosed at TSKB and TKB websites on January 28, 2009 and January 26, 2009. Both 
environment and resettlement safeguard framework documents are included in the 
Operational Manual, which will govern the manner in which PFIs will required to 
implement the project. The operation mannual including the environmental and 
resettlement procedures were completed prior to completion of Project Appraisal.  
 
The dam safety framework used under the ongoing RE Project will be used for the 
proposed Project.  This framework will be included in the operations manual as well.  
 
It was agreed under the ongoing Project that hydro power projects would be financed on 
a
specified list of domestic basins.  This was reflected in the legal agreements for the 
ongoing project in the form of a list of the river basins where hydro subprojects could be 
located. The same approach will be continued under the proposed Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is likely to have significant positive environmental benefits through reduced 
GHG emissions, which will have benefits both nationally and globally.  The use of CTF 
resources will enable the project to finance hitherto underutilized or new renewable 
technologies such as biomass, geothermal and solar, in addition to energy efficiency, all 
of which will have very significant positive environmental benefits.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Hydro projects locations are based on feasibility assessments by sponsors of sites 
identified by DSI. The assessments include environmental aspects, and also alternative 
uses of water such as irrigation needs.  The Government provides water use rights after a 
careful assessment of the alternative needs, such as for irrigation. After implementation, 
projects are operated taking into account downstream water needs, including a minimum 
flow requirement to satisfy ecological needs.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Both borrowers, TSKB and TKB, have sound environmental and social safeguards 
assessment capacity.  TSKB is a bit more advanced, because of its wider exposure to 
World Bank policies and to a greater number and variety of projects in the past.  
 
In July 2008, the Government of Turkey updated its environmental assessment 
regulation (No. 26939).  The chief difference is that the threshold criteria for projects 
requiring an EIA (Annex I - similiar to Category A) and projects that require further 
evaluation (preparation of a Project Introduction File-PIF: Annex II) have been made 
stricter.  As a result, under the second Renewable Energy Project, a greater number of 
subprojects are likely to require EA documentation under the new legislation.  
 
Page  4
With the assistance of German (KfW) aid, TSKB has developed a screening system for 
evaluating environmental risk. The scheme is similar to the World Bank system in that it 
results in ratings of “A”, “B” and “C” as does the World Bank system. TSKB utilizes this 
scheme for all their projects in addition to the Annex I/Annex II system required by the 
Turkish EA legislation. This system is a structured evaluation of environmental risk, and 
considers both the project related environmental risk elements as well as the 
environmental risk elements of the project sponsor.  
 
TSKB has had a full-time environmental specialist familiar with World Bank safeguard 
policies on its staff for many years.  The specialist has worked closely with TSKB 
engineers in assuring World Bank safeguard requirements have been followed.  TKB has 
recently reassigned a staff member to assure safeguard requirements as detailed in the 
Operations Manual are fully implemented.  
 
The environmental specialist also oversees land acquisition issues related to the 
investments.  The hydropower subprojects in the first operation were located in remote 
mountainous areas with steep, narrow valleys and the reservoirs are deep and wide, 
covering limited horizontal space in the valleys.  Consequently they require little land 
acquisition in total and much of the land belongs to the Forestry Department, rather than 
private owners.  The subprojects in the second operation are expected to be similar.  
Seven subprojects in the first operation acquired between 2 and 6 ha total of private land, 
and three others involved much less.  No households were relocated in the first operation 
and none are anticipated in the second.  Energy investments are eligible for Public 
Benefit Declarations, which entitle the investor to expropriate land, if necessary, thus 
triggering OP 4.12, even if no expropriation occurs.  In practice, however, the investors 
negotiate essentially all private land purchases and have generated no local opposition.  
Only one plot was expropriated in the first operation.  Informal land use is rare, and the 
instances in the first operation consisted of seasonal cropping in river beds, for which 
operators were compensated like owners. Neither TKB nor TSKB are involved directly in 
the land acquisition process, but they monitor the issue carefully as part of their own due 
diligence procedures.  Turkish expropriation laws and procedures are consistent with OP 
4.12, thus adhering to the project Operations Manual (revised in 2006 to include 
resettlement) was relatively straightforward in the first operation and is expected to 
continue to be so in the second operation.  OP 4.12 will apply to private transactions, to 
the extent that there is informal third-party use.  The framework covers this aspect.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the local populations where individual subprojects are to be 
located, NGOs, Ministry of Environment and Forests and their provincial counterparts. 
For individual subprojects, the environment and resttlement policy frameworks describe 
requirements and procedures for public consultation to be conducted during the EA 
process as part of any EA document preperation as well as EA regulation allows 
subproject sponsors to carry out further consultations if deemed necessary. The 
environment framework and the resttlement policy framework were publicly disclosed 
prior to appraisal as indicated above, and revised frameworks after the ISDS review will 
Page  5
be disclosed again. Individual subproject EA documents will be regularly disclosed in the 
PFI websites, in local MoEF offices and in municipal buildings with public access and 
ENglish languauge versions will be sent to the World Bank by the PFIs for disclosure in 
the Infoshop.  
 
Category A projects will be reviewed by the Bank prior to the FI taking the financing 
decision.  Public consultation requirements under the Turkish environmental regulation 
(one consultation meeting at scoping stage, followed by public consultations at the draft 
EIA stage inviting written comments) are considered acceptable.  The FI will assess the 
efficacy of the consultations for any proposed subproject, and if required may request an 
additional consultation meeting.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/28/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/29/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
This is an "FI" operaiton so EA documents are not available since individual subprojects 
have not yet been identified. Subprojects EAs will be disclosed in country and in 
Infoshop as and when they are received.  The environmental and resettlement policy 
frameworks were disclosed prior to appraisal, and will be disclosed again after they are 
revised.  
 
Once subprojects are identified during project implementation, for subprojects which 
fall under the dam safety policy, the sponsor will prepare emergency preparedness and 
operations and maintenance plans, and make necessary arrangements for public 
awareness and training.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Page  7
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameer Shukla 
02/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
02/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
02/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
02/24/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ranjit J. Lamech 
02/26/2009 
Comments:   
