Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/15/2009 
Report No.:  48585
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Turkey 
Project ID:  P102172 
Project Name:  Health Transformation and Social Security Reform Project 
Task Team Leader:  Sarbani Chakraborty 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 13, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 11, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (95%);Other social services (5%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (40%);Population and reproductive health 
(20%);Other communicable diseases (20%);Social safety nets (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.13 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1. 
The proposed APL 2 is the second phase of an APL, which supports the 
implementation by the Government of Turkey of its Health Transformation Program.  
APL 2 finances the Government's Health Transformation and Social Security Reform 
Project (HTSSRP), which builds on the ongoing Health Transition Project (HTP) 
financed by APL 1.  
 
2.
The objectives of  the Health Transition Project supported by APL Phase 1 were 
to: (i) help expand the capacity of the Ministry of Health (MOH) and the Social Security 
Institute (SSI) to formulate and effectively implement health policies, health sector 
regulatory mechanisms and health insurance functions; and (ii) support the 
implementation of critical health services delivery reforms (Family medicine and hospital 
autonomy) with the objective of improving access, efficiency, quality and fiscal 
sustainability of the health sector.  
 
3.
The objectives of the Health Transformation and Social Security Reform Project 
supported by APL 2 are: (i) increasing the effectiveness of the Social Security Institute 
(SSI) and the Ministry of Health (MOH) in formulating and implementing reforms in 
Page  2
provider payments and health systems performance, and (ii) piloting output-based 
financing for non-communicable diseases (NCD) prevention and control.   
 
3. Project Description 
Lending instrument:  This second-phase APL finances the Health Transformation and 
Social Security Reform Project, which will be implemented over a period of four years.  
The total loan amount is Euro 56.10 million (US$ 75,125,000 equivalent).  The project 
and loan have three components:  
 
Component A: Support for MOH#s Strategic Plan of 2010-2014 (Euro 46.17 million)  
 
This component supports the implementation of the MOH Strategic Plan and has as its 
main objective converting the MOH into a health sector steward and completing health 
service delivery reforms.  It will finance technical assistance, training and goods for eight 
program areas of the Strategic Plan with an emphasis on implementation of family 
medicine, hospital reforms, public health and regulatory reforms and strengthening 
policy-making, priority-setting and monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Component B: Piloting Output-Based Financing for Non-communicable diseases (NCD) 
prevention and control (Euro 6.84 million)  
 
The objective of this component is pilot test and evaluate a model for implementing 
interventions for NCD prevention and control at the provincial level using output-based 
financing mechanism. It consists of two sub-components (i) output based financing for 
family medicine practices which will finance a positive incentive based system for 
providers to deliver a package of cost-effective interventions for NCD prevention and 
control, (ii) capacity building for provincial and central level implementation of output-
based financing pilots.  
 
Component C: Capacity building of the Social Security Institution (Euro 3.09 million)  
 
4.
The objective of this component is to enhance the Social Security Institution#s 
capacities for the implementation and promotion of UHI. The component finances 
technical assistance and training with the objective of strengthening SSI capacities in 
becoming a strategic purchaser in the health sector and making evidence-based decisions 
vis-
à-vis the implementation of provider payment reforms, contracting with public and 
private providers and continuous update of the UHI benefits package. It consists of two 
sub-components: (i) SSI capacity-building for the implementation and promotion of UHI, 
(ii) SSI project management.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support largely technical assistance and training for relevant agencies in 
Ankara as well as hospitals and social security centers based throughout the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
None   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
None   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  4
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sarbani Chakraborty 
11/04/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
11/04/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
11/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abdo S. Yazbeck 
11/13/2008 
Comments:  Appoved 
