Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3970 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/23/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Turkey 
Project ID: P112949 
Project Name: Access to Finance for SMEs - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 7, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (100%) 
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The additional financing will continue to support the project's development objective "to increase 
Turkish small and medium enterprises (SME) access to medium term finance". It will scale up 
the achievements of the original project not only during the implementation period (2008-2012), 
but also beyond that period as the Borrower will use the reflows repaid from the initial sub-
borrowers to finance new investments before the funds are returned to the World Bank.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional financing will finance a credit line intermediated by Halkbank. The SMEs will be 
the final beneficiaries of the credit line. For purposes of this additional financing, SMEs will be 
defined as firms employing fewer than 250 people and having annual sales of less than US$20 
million. To ensure that the project covers geographical regions in which SMEs are particularly 
underserved, Halkbank plans to allocate a portion of the loan to underserved areas. The credit 
line will finance medium term working capital (e.g. raw materials) and investment loans (e.g., 
machinery, equipment, and civil works) with no sector restrictions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Sub-loans will be given to SMEs throughout Turkey.   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As part of the project Operational Manual the Borrower-Halkbank has prepared an 
Environmental Review Procedures which serves as the Environmental Assessment Framework 
(EAF) and defines the environmental assessment procedures for the project.    For purposes of 
the additional financing Halkbank will update the EAF in consultation with the WB with the 
final document acceptable to WB. Halkbank has during the Access to Finance for SMEs Project 
developed institutional capacity to determine and monitor environmental risks of individual sub-
projects.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Halil Agah (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is subject to environmental assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). The Project's 
environmental category is FI.  Environmental issues of sub-borrowers and their sub-projects will 
be addressed through the sub-loan environmental assessments and/or environmental management 
plans as required and as outlined in the Operational Manual (Environmental Review Procedures 
section). Environmental assessments will be carried out in accordance with both the Government 
of Turkey Environmental Assessment (EA) requirements and the World bank environmental 
assessment policies and procedures.  Subprojects qualifying as Category A, or which would 
trigger 4.12 or OP 7.50 will be identified through environmental screening and EIA procedures 
and will be excluded from financing under the project. It is not expected that any subprojects will 
affect natural habitats, forests or physical cultural resources, or involve or promote the use of 
pesticides.  Therefore, these OPs are not triggered.  However, the environmental screening and 
EIA procedures will include attention to these issues and incorporate assessments and mitigation 
measures that might be needed.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Sub-projects involving land acquisition or displacement of people or economic activities will 
be excluded   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Sub-projects affecting international or transboundary waters will be excluded   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/27/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Operational Manual/EAF will be updated to incorporate changes from the first project 
and ensure full compliance with both Government of Turkey and WB requirements. New 
project will follow the updated EAF   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Isfandyar Zaman Khan 
10/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
10/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Daniel Pollner 
10/23/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
