Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3612 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P110803 
Project Name: Support to Secondary Education Program 
Task Team Leader: Harriet Nannyonjo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 14, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Education for all (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
375.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
410.00
410.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed operation is designed to assist the Government to provide affordable secondary 
education opportunities of acceptable quality to all eligible primary school graduates. The 
Program Objective is to (a) improve access to post-primary education, with emphasis on the 
poorest rural and peri-urban areas which presently do not have sufficient capacity to absorb 
qualifying students; (b) improve the quality and relevance of post-primary education and training 
at all levels; and (c) improve efficiency in the delivery of post primary education.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Adaptable Program Loan (APL)will ensure that adequate resources are available to 
support financing of the transition costs for USE, including: increases in the number of 
classrooms and science rooms, an initial supply of textbooks and science equipment; and 
retooling/retrenchment of teachers and capacity enhancement. The project will have the 
following components: Component 1: Financing the program through SWAP modalities (i) 
Investments for expanding access to lower secondary for primary school leavers through: (a) 
expanding infrastructure in participating overcrowded government schools; (b)Improving quality 
for lower secondary students through: (i) providing teachers to government schools based on an 
Page  2
equitable staffing formula; (ii) provision of textbooks, science equipment and other instructional 
materials; (iii) providing special support for science and math teachers; (c)Institutional 
strengthening in lower secondary through: (i) Training for head teachers to promote school level 
accountability, and for selected MoES staff and managers of private schools to improve 
management.  
 
The project Component 1 includes small construction activities associated with planned annual 
construction of 3,992 classrooms (actual construction rate may be lower due to local absorbtive 
capacity) and associated infrastructure such as pit latrines, libraries, teacher's houses, 
multipurpose science rooms, etc.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
At the national level, the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA)regulates 
environmental management in coopeeration with specialist environmental and social staff in the 
line ministries. NEMA has good technical capacity as well as local presence through the District 
Environmental Officers (DEO) to oversee simple construction activities such as those proposed 
under this project, although the field supervision of large number of small activities will need to 
rely also on the MOES staff and local auhtorities.  
 
The Ministry of Education and Sports( MOES) and the local authorities have extensive 
experience with construction of classrooms and other school facilities. The construction 
standards and guidance are spelled out in the Construction Guidelines prepared by the 
Construction Unit of MOES. MOES and local school authorities supervise the quality of 
construction based on the Guidelines. The process is construction-oriented and not broad enough 
to adequately address World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
To ensure that the Borrower capacity for safeguards under the proposed opearation are 
adequate, support will be provided in form of a an environmental and social management 
framework and resettlement framework to guide project implementation (including practical 
checklists and guidance on land acquisition). Training to MOES central and local staff and local 
authorities will be provided for proper application of the frameworks, and periodic review of the 
frameworks use will be carried out during project implementation to monitor compliance and 
adapt safeguards maangement as necessary.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Classroom and other facilities construction trigger this policy. Therefore an Environmental 
and Social Management Framework (ESMF)will be prepared and disclosed before Appraisal.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Classroom and other facilities construction trigger the acquisition of land, and hence the 
Involuntary Resettlement Policy. The instrument to be prepared and disclosed before Appraisal 
is a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF,because the specific details and locations of the 
classrooms and other facilities to be constructed are not yet known.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/24/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguards related documents - ESMF and RPF - are under finalization following 
comments from the Bank on the drafts. They will be completed in July 2008. These will be 
disclosed prior to Appraisal, in the country and at the Bank's InfoShop.  
 
The PCN stage and PAD stage of project preparation are taking place close together due to 
a
change of the lending instrument from DPL to APL during pre-appraisal.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Harriet Nannyonjo 
07/18/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/18/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
07/18/2008 
Comments:   
