Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3575 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/08/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P111366 
Project Name: Environmental Management and Capacity Building II  Additional Finance 
Task Team Leader: Nathalie Weier Johnson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Solid waste management (50%);Sub-national government administration 
(30%);Oil and gas (20%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project’s Development Objective is to contribute to sustainable management of 
environmental and natural resources at the national, district, and community levels.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This is an additional finance operation for scaling up activities initiated under the EMCBP II 
parent project.  Therefore the activities and components will generally remain the same, the 3 
components are as described below:  
 
District Solid Waste Management/Composting Activities Phase 2: The objective of this activity 
is to address the solid waste management crisis and expand the number of towns and 
municipalities active in carbon trade through composting. Rural towns generating up to 70 tons 
per day (TPD) of organic waste receive support to improve collection efficiency and process the 
wastes at existing landfill sites.  
 
Page  2
Selection criteria reflect considerations of scale (with towns generating 50-70tpd waste over the 
next 5 years), collection capacity (with towns demonstrating ability to collect and dispose of 
some of their current waste stream), land availability (having available a suitable site of at least 8 
acres in extent that is or could be licensed by NEMA), and political will and commitment.  
 
The investment package at each site would include: skips, a skip lifter, a bulldozer/tractor for 
turning compost, and a 70 tpd capacity platform using the design currently being constructed in 
nine existing sites.  
 
A
total of up to nine towns (selected using the above criteria and due diligence fact-finding 
inspections by NEMA and the World Bank teams) will be financed. Towns under consideration 
are: Gulu, Busia, Tororo, and Mityana (currently ready); Masindi and Masaka (subject to 
confirmation of land availability); Hoima, Arua, and Entebbe (subject to site visits by World 
Bank team to confirm overall eligibility).  
 
Lead Agencies: Priority Petroleum Sector Activities: The objective of this activity is to address 
some existing gaps in the environmental management of this sector. Support to the oil and gas 
sector will build on the model of regulatory reviews, workshops, and custom training that was 
piloted during the EMCBP II lead agency component. In the case of the oil and gas sector, it will 
also include representation from the oil-bearing districts within the relevant interventions. Within 
the environmental area, existing support from other donors is focusing on sensitivity mapping, 
training, the development of EIA guidelines, routine monitoring and inspections, and planning 
inputs associated with oil spill contingency and emergency response. Identified gaps that will be 
financed under the Additional Financing fall into the following general areas: (i) legislation and 
regulations; (ii) training and sensitization; and, (iii) specific monitoring and emergency response 
equipment needs required by various government line agencies.  
 
Centre Institutional Strengthening: NEMA 
–
Priority Enforcement Activities: Theobjective of 
this activity is to provide core operational support for NEMA’s monitoring and enforcement 
mandate across all operations. Priority areas for intervention include (a) logistical support for 
vehicle operation and inspections; (b) training, relating to training of inspectors, general 
sensitization of stakeholders, and translation and printing of natural resource management 
regulations; (c) enforcement and monitoring support for laboratory equipment, consumables, 
protective equipment, and legal services for prosecuting cases; and, (d) modest administrative 
support for project accounting.  
 
Tree Planting: NFA – Priority Tree-planting Activities: The objective of this activity is to 
augment NFA revenue earning capabilities through improved use of its degraded forest lands and 
engagement with new carbon finance markets. Of five areas considered, two sites were selected 
that would permit NFA to develop new models of sustainable forest use:  
 
Site A focuses on replanting of denuded forest lands in the North Rwenzori forest reserve, with 
a
view to selling the carbon assets on the formal or voluntary markets. The project represents a 
scaling up of the successful Rwoho forest model, with the innovation being scale (up to 2000 ha) 
and the potential sale of emission reductions to markets outside the Clean Development 
Mechanism (CDM).  
 
Page  3
Site B focuses on some 2500 ha of degraded forest lands in the Kasagala Central Forest Reserve 
(CFR) just north of Kampala. NFA already has a demonstration reforestation site in this CFR, 
and the proposed activity will focus on the sustainable planting and management of species 
suitable for charcoal production. The project will also support the demonstration of a small 
number of high efficiency kilns that are anticipated to improve charcoal production efficiency 
from current levels of 10-12% (using traditional methods) to efficiencies approaching 50% using 
technologies proven elsewhere. The project also supports methodology development and 
monitoring to permit potential validation and registration of emission reductions from the 
improved processing efficiency.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The specific location of the project activities for each component is as follows:  
 
Composting:  Composting activities will be undertaken on licensed landfill sites of the 
following districts: Gulu, Busia, Tororo, and Mityana (currently ready); Masindi and Masaka 
(subject to confirmation of land availability); Hoima, Arua, and Entebbe.  
 
Tree Planting: Site A focuses on replanting of up to 2000 ha of denuded forest lands in the 
North Rwenzori forest reserve, with a view to selling the carbon assets on the formal or 
voluntary markets. The degraded area is in the Western Rift Valley and currently holds no 
commercially viable species; if re-established as a standing forest, it would be well integrated 
within the landscape which also includes a number of other areas of ecological importance along 
the Congo/Uganda border.  
 
Site B focuses on some 2500 ha of degraded forest lands in the Kasagala CFR just north of 
Kampala. NFA already has a demonstration reforestation site in this CFR, and the proposed 
activity will focus on the sustainable planting and management of species suitable for charcoal 
production. The area’s easy access to Kampala has been responsible for continued degradation of 
forests in the general area, with much of the degradation resulting from non-sustainable 
harvesting of forest for charcoal production. The degraded  lands under consideration for this 
activity currently hold no commercially harvestable timber species.  
 
Lead Agency Component:  This is a capacity building activity for the oil and gas sector so there 
is no specific location.  
 
Central Institutional Strengthening: This is also a capacity building activity and therefore there 
is no specific location.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Strong capacity exists for environmental and forestry safeguard issues. The Implementing 
Agency (NEMA) has received support from the World Bank since 1994 to develop and 
implement state of the art EIA legislation and regulations, while also providing onward training 
to 21 lead agencies in government (including the National Forestry Authority) and to district 
environment officers in all of the districts. the legislation and regulations themselves have been 
under active implementation for the past decade. Some of this training to key agencies will 
Page  4
continue under the Additional Financing, especially to the Ministry of Energy and Minerals 
Development and to NFA.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nathalie Weier Johnson (AFTEN) 
Mr Herman Jack Ruitenbeek (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project will be supporting the rehabilitation of degraded forest areas in Uganda by 
replanting trees. The aim is to improve the forest cover and environmental protection of the 
watersheds.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/14/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No additional safeguard 
–related studies are required.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nathalie Weier Johnson 
05/08/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/08/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
05/08/2008 
Comments:   
