Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/20/2007 
Report No.:  AC3176
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P090867 
Project Name:  Local Government Management and Services Delivery Project 
Task Team Leader:  Lance Morrell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 12, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2007 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
143.70
143.70 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the ability of LGs to plan and 
manage resources in collaboration with communities for service delivery. Achievement 
of the PDO will be measured in terms of the following monitoring indicators: (i) % of 
LGs in the North meeting the minimum conditions; (ii) % of LGs which have been 
computerized completing their final accounts within four months; and (iii) % of Higher 
LGs registering 20% increase in own source revenue from the baseline year of 2005/06.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has the following components:  
 
Component 1 - Support to the Public Financial Management Reform Program. The 
component will provide support to the Public Financial Management at central and local 
government levels to ensure the efficient, effective, transparent and accountable use of 
public resources as a basis for poverty eradication and improved service delivery.  
Activities will include: (i) roll out of the financial management system in Ministries, 
Departments, Agencies and Local Governments (LGs); (ii) strengthening of Ministry of 
Local Government (MoLG) and Local Governments' capacity through professional 
Page  2
training and capacity building in the areas of budget formulation, financial management 
and control; and financial reporting; (iii) implementation of the Good Governance and 
Anti-Corruption (GGAC) Strategy in Local Governments; (iv) increasing local revenues; 
and (v) monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Component 2 - Support to the Local Government Sector Investment Plans.  The 
component will provide development grants and capacity building grants to local 
authorities and Community Driven Development (CDD) grants to communities.  The 
primary objective to this additional support is to integrate a CDD approach into 
decentralized service delivery systems by creating a mechanism within local government 
for channeling harmonized support to community-level activities. The component will 
also provide additional resources to the GoU funded capacity building grants specifically 
to address: i) selected capacity gaps of LGs in the North to reach a comparable national 
level after 20 years of civil war, and ii) finance professional training for some core staff 
in LGs to achieve efficient and effective utilization of public resources for improved 
service delivery.  
 
Component 3 - Institutional Support to Government.  The component will support the 
process of change management within MoLG and Local Governments.  Activities will 
include:  (i) realignment and strengthening of MoLG to enhance its ability to oversee the 
implementation of newly-introduced sectoral reforms; and (ii) program support to the 
management and coordination of activities under the program as well as improved M&E 
and the implementation of programs to improve the level and quality of communication.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented thru local governments in urban and rural areas across 
the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is likely to incur negative environmental and social issues such as water, soil, 
and air pollution; loss of vegetation; loss of livelihoods and access to assets due to the 
construction and/or rehabilitation of future investments. Negative environmental and 
social impacts could also occur in the event of unsafe medical waste management at the 
project's planned health care facilities. None of the potential impacts are expected to be 
significant and/or irreversible as the investments will not be on a large scale, and 
provisions for effective environmental and social management have been made under the 
project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to 
future investments.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since this project is part of the government's local development program, alternatives 
were not discussed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the exact locations and types of investments could not be identified prior to the 
appraisal of this project, the borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to be 
applied by qualified personnel to future investments at the planning stage. Following the 
recommendations of the ESMF, the project will support activities designed to enhance 
the borrower's environmental and social management capacity.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders will include members of the Physical Planning Commission, the 
National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), local governments, 
communities, NGOs, and land authorities. In the course of preparing the ESMF, it 
became apparent that there is an interest in, for example, (i) making mainstreaming of 
environmental and natural resources management mandatory for local governments; (ii) 
carrying out regular environmental audits; and (iii) encouraging local governments to use 
the local development grants for investments in solid waste management. Additional 
consultations with potentially affected persons will be carried out during the 
environmental and social screening process as outlined in the ESMF.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/06/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/30/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/30/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/31/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  5
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Lance Morrell 
11/20/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
11/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
11/20/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
11/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
11/20/2007 
Comments:   
