Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4336 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/20/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P115563 
Project Name: Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project 
Task Team Leader: Peter Okwero 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 23, 2010 
Managing Unit: AFTHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to improve capacity to deliver the Uganda National 
Minimum Health Care Package by strengthening (a) physical functionality of the existing health 
infrastructure, (b) planning and management of human resources for health, and (c) essential 
management systems and functions as well as accountability for health care service delivery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project comprises four components: (a) health infrastructure development; (b) human 
resource development and management; (c) strengthening management systems and functions as 
well as accountability for health care service delivery; and (d) project management.  
 
Under component one, the project will support, at existing campuses of health facilities, major 
civil works (demolition and rebuilding, expansion, addition or reconstruction of buildings) at two 
regional referral hospitals:Mubende and Moroto,as well as minor civil works (refurbishment or 
addition of maternity wards, general wards, outpatient departments and staff houses and health 
training schools) at 16 general hospitals and 29 local health centers (HC Type IV) throughout the 
country. The target facilities have been selected.  
Page  2
Medical waste management may include project support for medical waste incinerators.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Ministry of Health will be responsible for executing the project. The health facilities 
proposed for renovation under the project are located up-country and in the rural areas, while the 
policy reforms to be supported by the project will cover the entire country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental Health Division of the Ministry of Health is charged with executing the 
environmental health plans under the overall policy guidance of the National Environmental 
Management Agency.  The division works together with NEMA to strengthen efforts in handling 
all environment related issues, including those under civil works.  
 
Environmental Management of Civil works: The Ministry of Health in-house environmental 
focal person and engineering staff will oversee the design and implementation of health 
infrastructure improvements.  The project will provide support to build their capacity in 
environmental management through short term training, study tours, secondments, etc. The 
training will be extended to sub-national level engineering and environmental staff involved in 
project supervision.  
 
Medical Waste Management: The Ministry of Health and the decentralized health service 
delivery points have experience with the formulation and implementation of the Health Care 
Waste Management Plan, including the establishment and operation of medical waste 
incinerators. In addition, the sector has a Uganda Safe Injection Policy. The challenge continues 
to be the weak health care waste management system due to insufficient and inadequate 
equipment for handling of waste material and the poor enforcement by the relevant authorities. 
The project will support strengthening of medical waste management through implementation 
support to the existing National Health Care Waste Management Plan.  
 
Land: Land acquisition for construction of health and ancillary facilities has not been a common 
occurrence in the Health sector. In the past land was donated by individuals or communities for 
the purpose of setting up a health facility, which practice has somewhat changed. Therefore the 
Ministry of Health's present capacity to deal with issues of land taking if any or converting land 
uses due to expansion of facilities is low. The relevant safeguards instrument to be prepared will 
therefore include capacity building activities with an aim of improving compliance and at the 
same time help build the critical mass that is required to monitor the social mitigation measures 
where relevant. The instrument will be determined by the social assessments in all the identified 
facilities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The rehabilitation/expansion of basic health infrastructure and construction of staff houses 
under first component triggers O.P 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Given the project will 
support major civil works at 2 regional referral hospital as well as minor civil works at 16 
general hospitals and 29 health centers (HC Type IV) which may have potential adverse 
environmental impacts, the project needs to comply with environmental assessment requirements 
under the Uganda National Environment Act (1995), National Environmental Impact 
Assessment Regulations 13/1998, other Ugandan environmental regulations, and the World Bank 
safeguard policy OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. Environmental due diligence for the 
major civil works will be carried out through preparation of an Environmental Assessment 
including an Environmental Management Plan. Environmental due diligence for the minor civil 
works will be carried out through preparation of site specific Environmental Management Plans. 
Environmental due diligence for medical waste management will be carried out through 
implementation of the National Health Care Waste Management Plan and related policies and 
preparation of Environmental Assessment for medical waste incinerators, should the Ministry 
decide to establish them.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
There is no plan to use pesticides under the project.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project activities include the rehabilitation and expansion of existing 2 regional, 16 
general hospitals and 29 Health Centre Level 4, including construction of staff houses which 
may have implications on both acquisition of land or converting land uses, hence triggering OP 
4.12, Involuntary Resettlement. Depending on the assessment, a Resettlement Plan (RAP) will be 
prepared for each individual site.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/28/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EIA will be undertaken for major civil works at two sites, Mubende and Moroto. EMPs will 
be developed for minor civil works at other sites.  National Health Care Waste Management 
Plan will be updated. All draft safeguard documents (including draft RAPs) will be prepared 
and disclosed in the country and at the Bank's InfoShop, before appraisal.  If all draft RAPs 
can't be done by then, the project will either delay appraisal or else prepare a resettlement 
policy framework to govern later RAP production.  The disclosure is slated for September 
17, 2009.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter Okwero 
07/20/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
07/20/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
