Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3256 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/12/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P092837 
Project Name: UGANDA ROADS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM PHASE 4 
Task Team Leader: Dieter E. Schelling 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development objective of the Roads Development Program Phase 4 Project (RDPP4) is to 
improve access to rural and economically productive areas and to progressively continue to build 
up sustainable road sector planning, design and program management capability including road 
safety management.  The Program supports Government of Uganda's (GOU) ten-year rolling 
Road Sector Development Program (RSDP) through the rehabilitation of priority links of the 
national roads network and the establishment of the Uganda National Road Authority.  
 
The indicators will be agreed on during pre-appraisal, but may include as output indicator the 
savings in travel time, decrease in transport cost and improved road safety resulting from the 
planned interventions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project has the following components:  
 
Page  2
(i) 
the rehabilitation and widening of the main road between Kampala to the West of the 
country from Busega to Mityana (58km) estimated to cost $40m including supervision;  
 
(ii) 
the upgrading of the Zirobwe-Wobulenzi road (23km) near Kampala estimated to cost 
$15m including supervision;  
 
(iii) 
the financing of the balance of the cost of the paving of the Dokolo to Lira road which is 
being financed under RDPP3, but for which there is a lack of about US$20m;  
 
(vi)the financing of periodic maintenance works on the Kampala to Kafu road that are currently 
being executed under APL1, but where insufficient funds are available;  
 
(v) 
the financing of road safety activities ($2m);  
 
(vi) 
the preparation of a future urban transport component for Kampala ($2m);  
 
(vii) 
the preparation of further design and bidding documents on priority roads ($3m);  
 
(viii)  capacity building activities for UNRA, RF and MoWT including the procurement of 
respective services, goods and works for an estimated US$3m.  
 
Total IDA financing is $100m.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The roads to be rehabilitated are in central Uganda.  The Busega-Mityana road forms part of the 
east-west corridor. The Zirobwe-Wobulenzi road is a continuation of the Kampala-Gayaza-
Zirobwe road being financed under the third phase of the Road Development Program. The 
Dokolo-Lira road is part of the international link between Kenya and Southern Sudan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
NEMA (National Environmental Management Authority) has got well established systems and 
procedures in place to review safeguards documents based on existing legislation. It is reviewing 
and clearing all Environmental Assessments before disclosure.  The Ministry of Works and 
Transport has a safeguards unit with a sociologist and an environmental specialist, who are 
assisting the various transport sector agencies to meet safeguards requirements. RAFU (the Road 
Agency Formation Unit) who is managing the national roads until June 30, 2008 and from whom 
UNRA 
–
the Uganda National Road Authority - will take over by July 1, 2008, has in the past 
mainly worked with local and international technical assistance to deal with safeguards matters 
and has currently one permanent safeguards specialist. UNRA plans to establish a safeguards 
unit within the Directorate of Planning and it is currently recruiting its staff (an environmental 
and a social specialist). Once the unit is established its capacity will need to be assessed by a 
safeguards specialist of the task team. It is hoped that the unit will exist at appraisal (in May 
2008), otherwise to have such capacity would become an effectiveness condition for the credit.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project has a Category B rating. The investments under this project will focus on 
rehabilitation and widening of the main road between Kampala and Mityana (58kms); upgrading 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
of the Zirobwe -Wobulenzi road (23kms); and paving of the Dokolo- Lira. All these activities are 
on existing roads whose potential environmental and social effects are well understood and 
readily manageable.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The potential resettlement impacts as a result of rehabilitation and widening, and upgrading 
of existing roads are known and manageable through the resettlement instruments under 
preparation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/19/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) for the three road projects have been 
completed, approved and disclosed. The Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for Busega-
Mityana road is being finalized and should be disclosed latest by June 30, 2008. The RAPs 
for Zirobwe-Wobulenzi and the Dokolo 
–
Lira roads have been approved and were disclosed 
on April 29, 2008. The draft Kampala-Zirobwe-Wobulenzi Resettlement Action Plan was 
disclosed at Infoshop on January 19, 2004, and the reviewed final RAP was disclosed on 
April 29, 2008.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dieter E. Schelling 
01/23/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/23/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
01/23/2008 
Comments:  The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responsibilities. 
