Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/25/2009 
Report No.:  AC3651
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P111366 
Project Name:  Environmental Management and Capacity Building II  Additional 
Finance 
Task Team Leader:  Nathalie Weier Johnson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 13, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 4, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (50%);Sub-national government administration 
(30%);Oil and gas (20%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project’s Development Objective is to contribute to sustainable management of 
environmental and natural resources at the national, district, and community levels.   
 
3. Project Description 
This is an additional finance operation for scaling up activities initiated under the 
EMCBP II parent project.  Therefore the activities and components will generally remain 
the same, the 3 components are as described below:  
 
District Solid Waste Management/Composting Activities Phase 2: The objective of this 
activity is to address the solid waste management crisis and expand the number of towns 
and municipalities active in carbon trade through composting. Rural towns generating up 
to 70 tons per day (TPD) of organic waste receive support to improve collection 
efficiency and process the wastes at existing landfill sites.  
 
Page  2
Selection criteria reflect considerations of scale (with towns generating 50-70tpd waste 
over the next 5 years), collection capacity (with towns demonstrating ability to collect 
and dispose of some of their current waste stream), land availability (having available a 
suitable site of at least 8 acres in extent that is or could be licensed by NEMA), and 
political will and commitment.  
 
The investment package at each site would include: skips, a skip lifter, a 
bulldozer/tractor for turning compost, and a 70 tpd capacity platform using the design 
currently being constructed in nine existing sites.  
 
A
total of up to nine towns (selected using the above criteria and due diligence fact-
finding inspections by NEMA and the World Bank teams) will be financed. Towns under 
consideration are: Gulu, Busia, Tororo, and Mityana (currently ready); Masindi and 
Masaka (subject to confirmation of land availability); Hoima, Arua, and Entebbe (subject 
to site visits by World Bank team to confirm overall eligibility).  
 
Lead Agencies: Priority Petroleum Sector Activities: The objective of this activity is to 
address some existing gaps in the environmental management of this sector. Support to 
the oil and gas sector will build on the model of regulatory reviews, workshops, and 
custom training that was piloted during the EMCBP II lead agency component. In the 
case of the oil and gas sector, it will also include representation from the oil-bearing 
districts within the relevant interventions. Within the environmental area, existing support 
from other donors is focusing on sensitivity mapping, training, the development of EIA 
guidelines, routine monitoring and inspections, and planning inputs associated with oil 
spill contingency and emergency response. Identified gaps that will be financed under the 
Additional Financing fall into the following general areas: (i) legislation and regulations; 
(ii) training and sensitization; and, (iii) specific monitoring and emergency response 
equipment needs required by various government line agencies.  
 
Centre Institutional Strengthening: NEMA 
–
Priority Enforcement Activities: 
Theobjective of this activity is to provide core operational support for NEMA’s 
monitoring and enforcement mandate across all operations. Priority areas for intervention 
include (a) logistical support for vehicle operation and inspections; (b) training, relating 
to training of inspectors, general sensitization of stakeholders, and translation and 
printing of natural resource management regulations; (c) enforcement and monitoring 
support for laboratory equipment, consumables, protective equipment, and legal services 
for prosecuting cases; and, (d) modest administrative support for project accounting.  
 
Tree Planting: NFA – Priority Tree-planting Activities: The objective of this activity is 
to augment NFA revenue earning capabilities through improved use of its degraded forest 
lands and engagement with new carbon finance markets. Of five areas considered, two 
sites were selected that would permit NFA to develop new models of sustainable forest 
use:  
 
Site A focuses on replanting of denuded forest lands in the North Rwenzori forest 
reserve, with a view to selling the carbon assets on the formal or voluntary markets. The 
project represents a scaling up of the successful Rwoho forest model, with the innovation 
Page  3
being scale (up to 2000 ha) and the potential sale of emission reductions to markets 
outside the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).   
 
Site B focuses on some 2500 ha of degraded forest lands in the Kasagala Central Forest 
Reserve (CFR) just north of Kampala. NFA already has a demonstration reforestation site 
in this CFR, and the proposed activity will focus on the sustainable planting and 
management of species suitable for charcoal production. The project will also support the 
demonstration of a small number of high efficiency kilns that are anticipated to improve 
charcoal production efficiency from current levels of 10-12% (using traditional methods) 
to efficiencies approaching 50% using technologies proven elsewhere. The project also 
supports methodology development and monitoring to permit potential validation and 
registration of emission reductions from the improved processing efficiency.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The specific location of the project activities for each component is as follows:  
 
Composting:  Composting activities will be undertaken on licensed landfill sites of the 
following districts: Gulu, Busia, Tororo, and Mityana (currently ready); Masindi and 
Masaka (subject to confirmation of land availability); Hoima, Arua, and Entebbe.  
 
Tree Planting: Site A focuses on replanting of up to 2000 ha of denuded forest lands in 
the North Rwenzori forest reserve, with a view to selling the carbon assets on the formal 
or voluntary markets. The degraded area is in the Western Rift Valley and currently holds 
no commercially viable species; if re-established as a standing forest, it would be well 
integrated within the landscape which also includes a number of other areas of ecological 
importance along the Congo/Uganda border.  
 
Site B focuses on some 2500 ha of degraded forest lands in the Kasagala CFR just north 
of Kampala. NFA already has a demonstration reforestation site in this CFR, and the 
proposed activity will focus on the sustainable planting and management of species 
suitable for charco
al production. The area’s easy access to Kampala has been responsible 
for continued degradation of forests in the general area, with much of the degradation 
resulting from non-sustainable harvesting of forest for charcoal production. The degraded  
lands under consideration for this activity currently hold no commercially harvestable 
timber species.  
 
Lead Agency Component:  This is a capacity building activity for the oil and gas sector 
so there is no specific location.  
 
Central Institutional Strengthening: This is also a capacity building activity and 
therefore there is no specific location.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nathalie Weier Johnson (AFTEN) 
Mr Herman Jack Ruitenbeek (SASDI) 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will be supporting the rehabilitation of degraded forest areas in Uganda by 
replanting trees. The aim is to improve the forest cover and environmental protection of 
the watersheds.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Strong capacity exists for environmental and forestry safeguard issues. The Implementing 
Agency (NEMA) has received support from the World Bank since 1994 to develop and 
implement state of the art EIA legislation and regulations, while also providing onward 
training to 21 lead agencies in government (including the National Forestry Authority) 
and to district environment officers in all of the districts. the legislation and regulations 
themselves have been under active implementation for the past decade. Some of this 
training to key agencies will continue under the Additional Financing, especially to the 
Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development and to NFA.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the municipalities, the NFA, and the MMED.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
N/A 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
N/A 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
N/A 
Page  6
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Nathalie Weier Johnson 
03/25/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
03/25/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
03/25/2009 
Comments:   
