Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3779 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/19/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P112334 
Project Name: Uganda: Energy for Rural Transformation APL-2 
Task Team Leader: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P112340 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (40%);Power (25%);Other social services 
(25%);Telecommunications (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other financial and 
private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
25.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to increase rural access to modern energy and ICT in 
Uganda.  
 
The objective is consistent with the long-term rural areas transformation objective of the 
Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT) program, the second phase of which this project 
supports.  
 
The GEF objective is to increase the use of renewable energy and promote energy efficiency. 
Energy efficiency was not originally included in the long-term program but was added during 
Phase I when Uganda’s unexpected shortage of power at peak times created an opportunity to 
promote energy efficient lights.  
 
Page  2
These objectives will be achieved by accelerated investments and shifting from the case-by-
case approach of ERT I to processing projects through the institutional framework developed in 
ERT I.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Project Components  
 
The proposed Phase II project will be designed in-line with the 2001 description approved by 
the World Bank Board and the GEF Council.  It will provide US$75 million in IDA funds and 
US$9 million in GEF grants.  The proposed components are given below with an indicative 
financing plan.  Several donors have expressed an interest in cofinancing, including AfDB, 
Norway, Germany and Japan.   
 
Examples of physical investments under the project components include rehabilitation or 
construction of small hydropower generation, small thermal generation stations, small-scale co-
generation facilities, grid networks connected to the main grid network as well as independent 
grid and generation systems, institutional, commercial and household photovoltaic systems, 
energy packages for rural health and education facilities, improved cookstoves and rural telecom 
investments.  
 
The project design and allocation of funds responds to the implementation experience in ERT I 
as well as overall changes in Uganda’s economy, and power and ICTsectors.  
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
 
ERT Phase II will continue with the institutional and implementation arrangements established 
in Phase I.  During Phase I Government supported the creation of the new entities called for in 
the Electricity Act of 1999 - the Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA) and the Rural 
Electrification Framework (REF). In addition, Phase I support other key actors in developing 
their roles to ensure that the new structure functions efficiently:  
 
•
MEMD, Rural Electrification Board (REB), and Rural Electrification Agency (REA); 
Uganda Communications  Commission (UCC);  
 
•
Ministries of Finance, Health, Education, Water Agriculture and Local Government;  
 
•
Bank of Uganda;  
 
•
Project sponsors, a Business-to-Business Advisory Facility operated by the Private Sector  
Foundation, and financial institutions;  
 
•
End users, including small and medium enterprises.  
 
Financing Mechanism  
 
A
key issue is the need for a workable financial intermediation system for rural electrification 
and renewable energy development. For large and medium credits, Phase I initiated a two-
pronged approach to developing the needed financial intermediation mechanism:   
 
(i) make all efforts to finance rural electrification and renewable energy development as part of 
the normal functioning of the financial sector; and  
Page  3
(ii) take into account the practical barriers and gaps, and provide Ugandan institutions with 
interim financial mechanisms - with a clear exit strategy - that allow them to overcome the 
barriers and gaps.  
 
A
credit support facility that would make it feasible for financial institutions to provide the 
necessary credit for private-sector led rural electrification was established. In the interim, until 
the above facility became functional, IDA funds have been made available to refinance, on 
market terms, commercial loans 
–with the commercial banks taking the market risk – for a 
limited number of investment projects. These arrangements will be reviewed and refined during 
Phase II preparation.  
 
Design Changes Based on ERT I Implementation Experience  
 
GoU has commissioned an independent review of the Rural Electrification Subsector as well as 
of the ERT Phase I Project which identified the following issues.  
 
The original design did not call for extensive coordination or meetings so that each 
implementing agency could play its natural role. The flexibility of this design has encouraged 
many agencies to take ownership of their programs and successfully implement them. However, 
it also made it difficult for the Ministry of Energy and Minerals Development (MEMD), which is 
accepted by all participants as the lead agency, to promote implementation in agencies that have 
not been fully successful on their own. This deficiency was addressed during Phase I 
implementation by creating a Project Coordinator Unit in MEMD. However, the Government’s 
evaluation report clearly identifies substantial ongoing weaknesses.  These will be rectified in 
Phase II by strengthening the unit with effective management in place, either in MEMD or 
possibly in the Rural Electrification Agency (REA).  
 
The Government’s Rural Electrification Framework (REF) review identified deficiencies in 
REA’s legal instrument of creation which limit its autonomy and make it susceptible to undue 
political influence.  During preparation we will explore options for strengthening REA, including 
upgrading its legal instrument of creation from the current statutory instrument to an Act of 
Parliament.  
 
Participation of the private sector in Phase I was good in renewable energy power generation 
for sale to the grid but poor in access projects via main-grid extension. The international private 
sector did not show much interest in the latter, and the participation of the local private sector 
was much more limited than anticipated due to low capacity, scarcity of equity, high perceived 
risk, and other factors. Hence, in the preparation of Phase II, consideration will be given to 
refining the investment environment and modalities for attracting the private sector to main-grid 
access project. Further, consideration will be given to building on REA’s successful experience 
in financing new access projects under an arrangement wherein the public sector (REA) 
constructs and owns projects that ex-ante meet agreed criteria of economic and financial 
viability, and are concessioned under a private operations and maintenance management 
contract.  Consideration will also be given to establishing a technical backstop facility to provide 
capacity and fee-based services as needed to project operators.  
 
Page  4
The allocation of IDA and GEF funds will also be reconfigured to take account of the 
implementation record of the various agencies.   
 
The GoU and the independent review have asked for a continuation of the Phase I refinance 
facility, given its successful record. This issue, along with the Credit Support Facility, will be 
resolved in consultation with the Bank’s financialsector staff.  
 
Given the success of the ICT component, it is proposed to add some emphasis here. Some of 
the options that will be considered are: (i) assist local ISPs and content providers in provision of 
affordable access and relevant information to rural communities; (ii) provide major health clinics 
and facilities with local area networks and access to internet for enhanced service delivery and 
information access/dissemination; and (iii) explore content delivery mechanisms to increase 
educational opportunities in rural areas.  
 
However, it is also recognized that the Bank Board has approved a Regional Communication 
Infrastructure Program (RCIP), and Uganda is eligible to participate in this horizontal APL. The 
nature and scope of the Phase II ICT component will be determined in consultation with the 
RCIP staff’s plan for Uganda.  
 
Design Changes Based on Sectoral Developments  
 
In the power sector, Uganda is shifting towards a sector-wide approach (SWAp), and the Phase 
II project will be consistent with and supportive of this shift as it takes place. The Government 
has set up an Energy Sector Working Group (ESWG) whose primary objective is to improve 
coordination, harmonization and alignment of the sector activities, and thereby overall efficiency 
and effectiveness of the energy sector contribution to the PEAP. MEMD, through the ESWG, is 
preparing a Sector Investment Plan which will form the basis of a SWAp with a strong emphasis 
on rural electrification by utilizing the REF mechanism. It is noted that the SWAp for Uganda’s 
energy sector is flexible enough to encompass a number of financial instruments including 
budget support as well as stand-alone projects such as ERT Phase II.  
 
The Bank is co-financing the Bujagali dam, which is expected to be fully commissioned in June 
2011.  This is expected to end power shortages in Uganda, and also make power available for 
grid-based rural electrification. Bujagali is expected to be followed by other generation projects, 
such as the Karuma hydropower station as well as permanent heavy-fuel-oil fired thermal 
stations, and there is also expected to be regional integration of transmission grids.  
 
While the Bujagali dam will provide non-fossil fuel power to the grid, there are great incentives 
to promote renewable energy for off-grid power which would replace expensive diesel 
generation. Hence, GOU’s strategy to develop renewable energy and energy efficiency will be 
emphasized in Phase II. One option is to develop non-grant contingency support, such as loss-
sharing schemes based on risks outside the private sector’s control, instead of grants.  
 
Design Changes Based on National Developments  
 
Page  5
Increasing agricultural production has become a major priority not only for the Bank but also 
for most countries in sub-Saharan Africa, including Uganda. While Phase I did include 
provisions for working with the Ministry of Agriculture, the scheme for extending the grid 
specifically to serve agricultural producers has been slow to produce results on the ground. 
Further, Phase I did not include any element of linking ICTs directly to the agricultural 
producers. Both of these issues will be addressed in Phase II.  
 
The development of Northern Uganda has become a major national issue for the GoU, and the 
Bank is considering supporting the Government’s Northern Uganda PeaceRecovery and 
Development Plan (PRDP) through the PRDP-Northern Uganda Social Action Fund 2 Program. 
One of the PRDP objectives is revitalization of the economy, which seeks to re-activate the 
productive sectors within the region, and will require major rehabilitation of critical 
infrastructure. Phase II will coordinate with the proposed program to provide energy and ICT 
services in the region. The project team has held preliminary discussions with DED, an agency 
of the German Ministry of Economic Cooperation and Development, which has indicated a very 
strong interest in assisting the Phase II in Northern Uganda.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented country-wide. The specific locations of the future sub-projects 
are not known at this time and will be determined during project implementation based on 
demand.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under Phase I of the program, the environment and social safeguards have been handled through 
the existing government mechanisms. The National Environmental Management Agency 
(NEMA) reviewed and approved ERT sub-projects. In addition, REA provided oversight for 
environmental and social due diligence and safeguards compliance for the larger investments 
(e.g. the Kakira Sugar Mill cogeneration facility, and the West Nile 3.5 MW hydropower 
station), some of which were done through IDA technical support. Overall compliance 
monitoring, including a database, was done by REA, which was assisted by a Safeguards 
Consultant who established a RAP monitoring and tracking system. To coordinate work between 
NEMA and REA, an Inter-agency Steering Committee was established. The coordination 
between NEMA and REA on environmental and social due diligence has been satisfactory. 
These arrangements and capacities for compliance with safeguard policies and Ugandan 
regulations have been working satisfactorily in Phase I and will continue to be utilized in Phase 
II.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project involves private sector investments in rural electrification including small-scale 
power generation and distribution. As a financial intermediation operatio
n, specific subprojects 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
are not known in advance. Therefore, subprojects may have impacts in some or all of the areas 
identified above.  
 
All investments will be subject to Uganda’s existing National Environment Statute (1995) 
as implemented by the National Environment Management Authority (NEMA). In addition, 
Environment and Social Management Framework developed and implemented during Phase I 
will be used to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards, including screening for sub-
projects that may entail land acquisition or population displacement. The Rural Electrification 
Agency will require evidence of an adequate mitigation plan including all appropriate safeguards 
before forwarding an application to the Rural Electrification Board for action on a grant 
application.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
See explanation Environmental Assessement above.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
See explanation Environmental Assessement above.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
See explanation Environmental Assessement above.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As investment sub-projects may involve land acquisition or population displacement, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to guide the preparation of appropriate 
resettlement instruments (Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated RAPs). The RPF 
will provide specific guidance for sub-projects in conflict-affected areas in Northern Uganda.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Depending on the size and design of the proposed sub-projects this OP may or may not 
apply.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
See explanation Environmental Assessement above.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/28/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  7
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared under ERT 
Phase I.  This document was significantly upgraded during Phase I based on the 
implementation experience and need to clarify responsibilities of various parties, and re-
disclosed. The ESMF will be again reviewed in light of an independent evaluation of ERT I 
by consultants (under procurement), updated as necessary, re-disclosed, and used for the 
Phase II. The ESMF will be reviewed under the ongoing evaluation of ERT I implementation 
and disclosed in the country as well as in the Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal. The RPF will 
be prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal as well.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
11/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/14/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
11/14/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
