Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3383 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/17/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P109216 
Project Name: Uganda Emergency Demobilization and Reintegration Project 
Task Team Leader: Sean Bradley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 31, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTCS 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (30%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(30%);Vocational training (30%);General information and communications sector (10%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Social safety nets 
(S);Rural non-farm income generation (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Miscellaneous 
1 
8.04
8.04 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the project is to socially and economically reintegrate former rebel 
combatants into the communities to which they return, within the context of the Government of 
Uganda Amnesty Act of 2000. The project would contribute to the consolidation of peace-
building, reconciliation and enhanced security in Uganda.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
(i) Demobilization and repatriation: including post-disarmament assembly, provision of 
transport, food, shelter and medical care to reporters, registration, information and sensitization 
services, and transfer to Uganda.  
 
(ii) Reinsertion of reporters: short-term support for ex-combatants to return to communities 
through provision of basic items, cash grants, and interim care in coordination with partners who 
facilitate re-entry of "reporters" and associated populations.  
 
(iii) Support for socio-economic reintegration: counseling, referral and follow-up services to 
ensure that reporters (current and future) have equal access to education, livelihood and other 
Page  2
services available within the community - with special attention to the needs of vulnerable 
including women, children and disabled. This component links reporters with assistance 
targeting all war-affected populations.  
 
(iv) Reconciliation promotion: dissemination of information about the Amnesty process and 
reporter return. This component aims to encourage social reintegration, reconciliation and trust-
building among ex-combatants and host communities in order to support local development.  
 
(v) Program administration: including facilitating Bank staff and consultant DDR specialists to 
support early implementation and preliminary technical preparation and planning activities for 
DDR of LRA.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Uganda: particularly Northern districts  
 
Southern Sudan (or other 3rd party country): for early demobilization activities only, depending 
on where armed groups currently active outside of Uganda assemble following the successful 
conclusion of ongoing peace negotiations   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Amnesty Commission will adopt the specialized approach and screening procedures 
developed by the Multi-Country Demobilization and Reintegration Program (MDRP) for ex-
combatant demobilization and reintegration programs.  This is the same approach which was 
used by the Uganda: Repatriation, Rehabilitation, Resettlement and Reintegration of Reporters 
project (2004-2007), which was a precursor to the current project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Nina Chee (AFTEN) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework has been drafted in 
fulfillment of the EA requirement. The ESSAF has been reviewed by ASPEN and comments 
incorporated.  It will be finalized following the project decision meeting (rapid response 
committee meeting for OP 8.0 projects)   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/21/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project is being processed under OP 8.0, and a Rapid Response Committee Meeting will 
thus replace the QER and Decision Meeting.  The PAD-stage ISDS and the ESSAF which 
are required under OP 8.0 will be completed for regional safeguards review prior to the RRC 
meeting.  
 
Upon review and finalization of the ESSAF after the RRC meeting, the ESSAF will be 
disclosed in-country by the project to all project partners and potential implementing 
agencies for sub-projects, through means including the project launch workshop, regional 
training and sensitization events, district offices and the InfoShop, as part of the overall 
project documentation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sean Bradley 
01/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
01/24/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ian Bannon 
01/24/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
