Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC4120
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P111633 
Project Name:  Second  Northern Uganda Social Action Fund Project (NUSAF2) 
Task Team Leader:  Suleiman Namara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 23, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 28, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTH1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access of beneficiary 
households in Northern Uganda to income earning opportunities and better basic socio-
economic services.   
 
3. Project Description 
Livelihood Investment Support Component: This component will support two sub-
components: (i) a Public Works Program and (ii) a Household Income Support Program 
targeted at able-bodied poor households and administered at the community and county 
levels respectively.  
 
The investment menu for sub-projects under sub-component (i) may include 
rehabilitation or construction of community roads, small community water reservoirs for 
domestic water supply and agricultural use, drainage facilities in urban areas, flood 
protection dykes. Activities under sub-component (ii) may include small agribusiness 
such as dairy, poultry and egg production, cash crops, pig and goat farming, aquaculture 
and integrated farming, apiary, agro-forestry, carpentry and joinery, metal fabrication, 
Hydraform brick making and brick laying, tree nurseries, etc.  
Page  2
Community Infrastructure Rehabilitation Component: The objective of this component 
is to improve access to basic socio-economic services through rehabilitation and 
improvement of the functionality of existing community infrastructure.  
 
Investments under this component will support rehabilitation of existing infrastructure 
or complementary investments to improve the functionality of existing infrastructure, 
such as staff housing, classrooms, libraries, dormitories, solar power systems, water 
supply protection, deep boreholes, shallow wells protection, gravity flow water supply 
schemes, sewerage facilities, rain water harvesting, valley tanks and earth dams, small 
irrigation schemes, patient wards, maternity units, medical waste incinerators, community 
roads and bridges, cattle dips and crushes, animal holding grounds, grain storage 
facilities, livestock and produce markets, etc.  
 
Institutional Development Component:  This component will finance activities at the 
national, district, sub-county and communities aimed at improving accountability and 
transparency in the use of Project resources.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented throughout the 40 districts of Northern Uganda 
including those that border the region and have been included in the Northern Uganda 
Peace, Recovery and Development Plan (PRDP, 2007).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not expected to have any large scale, significant or irreversible impacts. Its 
activities will be small scale (household and community level), and distributed 
throughout 40 districts of Uganda. The potential adverse environmental impacts of the 
project are expected to be minor and manageable through the procedures outlined in the 
ESMF.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have significant indirect or long term adverse 
environmental and social impacts. This is consistent with the experience from NUSAF 1.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives supporting large infrastructure or new infrastructure investments 
(except in areas of critical need, e.g. areas with return of internally displaced persons) 
that could have significant adverse environmental impacts have been excluded from 
project design, and funding caps established to ensure small scale (household and 
community level) investments. Large scale equipment, business loans and emergency 
assistance have been explicitly excluded from the investment menu.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower will ensure compliance with national and WB safeguards through 
implementation of the ESFM and RPF. The Borrower has experience with implementing 
such instruments in other IDA projects, as well as experience with environmental and 
social management under NUSAF 1. The lessons from weak implementation of 
environmental management measures in NUSAF 1  were reflected in the NUSAF 2 
design and ESMF. Further strengthening of the Borrower capacity to implement 
safeguard measures is built into Component 3 and described in detail in the ESMF.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are Office of the Prime Minister, line ministries responsible for water 
and environment, agriculture, roads, health, education and local government, district and 
local authorities, and beneficiary individuals and communities in target districts. These 
and others were consulted trough a series of consultation workshops and meetings 
organized during project preparation, including several national level workshops 
facilitating the incorporation of lessons from NUSAF 1 into the current operation. During 
implementation, participatory rural appraisal will be used to ensure adequate involvement 
and drivenness of the project by the target communities.   
 
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/24/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/17/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/15/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/24/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/19/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/23/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Note: PMP, which is a part of the NUSAF 2 ESMF, was not disclosed prior to appraisal, 
as the decision to trigger this policy was not made at that time. The policy was triggered 
following the appraisal process to allow for small scale veterinary care and similar small-
scale pesticide use; requisit pest management measures were put in place and described 
in the revised ESMF.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Page  5
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Suleiman Namara 
03/19/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Martin Fodor 
03/19/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
03/19/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
03/19/2009 
Comments:   
