Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3737 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uganda 
Project ID: P111633 
Project Name: PRDP N-Uganda Social Action Fund 2 
Task Team Leader: Suleiman Namara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTH1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
200.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
300.00
500.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall Program Objective is to empower communities of Northern Uganda to improve their 
livelihoods and access to basic socio-economic services. The specific objectives of PRDP-
NUSAF 2 are: a)to re-build and empower communities through sensitization and training, and 
b)revitalization of the economy through increasing household incomes and rehabilitation of 
infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed multi-sectoral project will build on the lessons learned during the implementation 
of NUSAF and other rehabilitation/development programs and projects in Northern Uganda.  
Central to the proposed design is the convergence/collaboration with selected post conflict 
reconstruction programs in Northern Uganda, and therefore  primarily focus on overall 
investments at the community and local Government levels. The proposed project will have the 
following three components: Component1.  Livelihood Investment Support: The component will 
focus on investment in production, value addition and marketing enhancement programmes; 
Component 2: Infrastructure Rehabilitation Support: This component will help improve access to 
Page  2
basic social services and will include rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing infrastructure 
using service gaps identified by line ministries and local governments to enable implementation 
of quick impact activities; Component 3: Institutional Development and Capacity Enhancement.  
The component will facilitate various local government, community and other actors' capacity 
enhancement, implementation, coordination, learning and quality enhancement efforts.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented in 40 districts of Northern Uganda including those that border 
the region and have been included in the Northern Uganda Peace, Recovery and Development 
Plan (PRDP, 2007).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The local authorities in Northern Uganda have mixed capacity to handle safeguards issues as a 
result of implementing the Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF Capacity Building 
activities will be made part of the Safeguards instruments to be prepared to ensure compliance, 
and environmental and social sustainability of the project activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The rehabilitation of basic social services infrastructure and the designing of economic 
infrastruture to support growth under Component 1, do trigger O.P 4.01. An Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF)will therefore be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project activities under Component 1 that support the rehabilitation of basic social 
service infrastructure, and the economic infrastructure to be designed trigger O.P 4.12. A 
resettlement policy framework will therefore be prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/16/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The required safeguards instruments, i.e. the RPF and ESMF will be completed and disclosed 
both in the country as well as in the Bank InfoShop by November 30, 2008.  
 
The SMU has agreed to accept transfer of the safeguards responibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Suleiman Namara 
10/06/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
11/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
10/30/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
