Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/17/2009 
Report No.:  AC4090
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uganda 
Project ID:  P112334 
Project Name:  Uganda: Energy for Rural Transformation APL-2 
Task Team Leader:  Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID: P112340 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 26, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTEG 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General energy sector (40%);Power (25%);Other social services 
(25%);Telecommunications (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Other financial and 
private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified) 
25.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to increase rural access to modern energy and ICT.  
 
The GEF objective is to increase the use of renewable energy and promote energy 
efficiency. Energy efficiency was not originally included in the long-term program but 
was added during Phase I when Uganda’s unexpected shortage of power at peak times 
created an opportunity to promote energy efficient lights.  
 
These objectives will be achieved by accelerated investments and shifting from the case-
by-case approach of ERT I to processing projects through the institutional framework 
developed in ERT I.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project Components  
Page  2
The proposed Phase II project will be designed in-line with the 2001 description 
approved by the World Bank Board and the GEF Council.  It will provide US$75 million 
in IDA funds and US$9 million in GEF grants.  The proposed components are given 
below with an indicative financing plan.  Several donors have expressed an interest in 
complementary financing, including AfDB, Norway, Germany and Japan.  
 
Project    IDA   GEF  GoU  GPOBA  GTZ  DED Other Private  Total  
 
Sector  
 
Component  44.05 6.9  6.8  2.5   2.81      2.5   110        175  
 
1
Component   8.90      0.3                                     9  
 
2
ICT Access  
 
Expansion  
 
Comp.3      22.05 2.1 1.9        1.30   3.9   2.0            33  
 
Energy and  
 
ICTs for  
 
Improved  
 
Service Delivery  
 
TOTAL 
 75.00  9   9   2.5   4.11  3.9    4.5 
 110.00    218  
 
Examples of physical investments under the project components include rehabilitation 
or construction of small hydropower generation, small thermal generation stations, small-
scale co-generation facilities, grid networks connected to the main grid network as well 
as independent grid and generation systems, institutional, commercial and household 
photovoltaic systems, energy packages for rural health and education facilities, improved 
cookstoves and rural telecom investments.  
 
The project design and allocation of funds in Phase II responds to the implementation 
experience in Phase I as well as overa
ll changes in Uganda’s economy, andpower and 
ICT sectors.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented country-wide. The specific locations of the future sub-
projects are not known at this time and will be determined during project implementation 
based on demand.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Martin Fodor (AFTEN) 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (AFTCS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The ERT II project has been assigned an environmental risk Category B, because some of 
the interventions to be supported like renewable energy power generation facilities are 
likely to result into impacts on the ecosystem, and habitat for some endemic aquatic and 
terrestrial species. Despite the fact that the project is expected to provide significant 
environmental and social benefits onsite, some of its subprojects are likely to have 
potential environmental impacts on human populations or environmentally important 
areas 
–
including wetlands, grasslands, and other natural habitats. Therefore, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and 
disclosed (October 31, 2008).  At screening stage, the proposed subprojects will be 
classified as category B, or C, depending on the type, location, sensitivity, and the scale 
of the project and the nature and magnitude of its potential environmental impacts. For 
Category B: A limited EIA will be adequate, since the projects may have site-specific 
environmental impacts, and their mitigation measures can be designed more readily. 
Under the Category C: Projects are likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental 
impacts, thus exempted from EIA.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project will support relatively small investments at sites to be selected throughout the 
country.  Individual subprojects will include an alternatives assessment in cases where 
adverse impact could occur.  
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)  
 
The OP 4.01 is applicable because the program will support renewable energy power 
generation investments under Component 1, and their details and or exact locations have 
Page  4
not been identified ex-ante. As a result, the safeguard instrument used is the ESMF, and 
for   infrastructure like mini hydropower plants, specific EAs and EMPs will be prepared 
before funding is approved by the Bank.  
 
Environmental Assessment outlines the Bank’s policy and procedure for the 
environmental assessment of Bank supported operations. The Bank requires the 
Borrowers to undertake environmental screening of each proposed project to determine 
the appropriate extent and type of EA. The Bank classifies the proposed project into one 
of four categories (A, B, C or FI), depending on the type, location, sensitivity, and the 
scale of the project and the nature and magnitude of its potential environmental impacts. 
Therefore, an environmental screening process will apply to all subprojects to be funded 
by ERT II. Thereafter, sub-projects will be classified as category B, or C  (category A 
and FI will not be applicable in this context).  
 
The EAs and EMPs prepared for the ERTP II will allow the implementing agencies to 
identify, assess and mitigate potential negative environmental and social impacts of 
subprojects, and to ensure that proper mitigation measures, and monitoring plans are in 
place, and are an integral part of the subproject cost. The EAs and EMPs will present 
guidelines and procedures consistent with the Environmental Management Laws of 
Uganda and the World Bank’s Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP4.01.  
 
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for subprojects, 
which will enable the national and local governments, as well as communities, to 
simultaneously identify potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed 
subprojects; and to address them by incorporating the relevant mitigation, prevention, and 
management measures. To ensure that negative impacts are minimized or eliminated, the 
EAs and EMPs require the inclusion of mitigation impacts at the design of subprojects 
prior to implementation. The screening process has been developed as the locations and 
types of subprojects are not yet defined, and therefore potential impacts cannot be 
precisely identified.  
 
Futher, the ESMF lays out procedures for screening and mitigating impacts that may 
arise during the project implementation, including the following: (a) Guidance on 
preparation of comprehensive checklists of potential environmental and social impacts 
and their sources; (b) Systematic procedures for participatory screening of subproject 
sites and activities and the environmental and social considerations; (c) A guided 
approach for forecasting the main potential environmental and social impacts of the 
planned project activities; (d) An institutional arrangement for mitigating, preventing, and 
managing the identified environmental impacts; (e) A typical environmental management 
planning process for addressing negative externalities in the course of project 
implementation; (f) A monitoring system for implementation of mitigation measures; and 
(g) An outline of recommended capacity building measures for environmental planning 
and monitoring of project activities.  
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)  
Page  5
The OP/BP 4.04 is applicable because some ERT II interventions are likely to impact on 
the area ecosystem, and habitat for endemic aquatic and terrestrial species. The ESMF 
addresses issues pertaining to this policy. In short, ERTP II will not finance activities that 
are likely to destroy critical terrestrial and aquatic natural habitats. To the extent possible, 
it will support those interventions that contribute to the reversal of degraded natural 
habitats, such as over-exploited forests and grasslands by promoting energy efficient 
stoves and alternative sources of energy.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)  
 
The OP/BP 4.12 is applicable because ERT II will support interventions in selected 
areas that are likely to result in land taking or restriction of access by local communities. 
Involuntary resettlement policy is triggered not only when land acquisition is evident, but 
also where project activities impact assets, restrict access to other natural resources, 
and/or negatively impact on livelihoods. Since the interventions in Component 1 are not 
determined in advance and by appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has 
been prepared and disclosed (October 31, 2008). The RPF document outlines the 
principles and procedures for resettlement and/or compensation of subproject-affected 
people, and establishes standards for identifying, assessing and mitigating negative 
impacts of project supported activities. In addition, the RPF will guide the preparation, 
and implementation of the resettlement action plans (RAPs) for each individual 
subproject that triggers the involuntary resettlement policy (OP/BP 4.12).  
 
The resettlement action plans will be prepared in consultation with the affected 
individuals and communities. Resettlement assistance and compensation for impacts will 
also be determined through the same consultative process to ensure that no one is left 
worse off as a result of the project. RAPs preparation and implementation are based on 
existing laws and regulations of Uganda, as well as the World Bank policy OP/BP 4.12. 
The stakeholder groups like the local government institutions, private sector and CSOs 
where necessary will be provided with training necessary to equip them with the skills to 
screen subproject activities for impacts, prepare RAPs, and implement activities set out in 
the RPFs and subsequent RAPs. The national and local level institutions will undertake 
both desk and field appraisal of the planned interventions, and approve RAPs prior to 
commencement of the subprojects. Similarly, all compensation will be completed prior to 
commencement of the subproject. Compensation and resettlement issues will be funded 
from government counterpart funds or sectoral budget.  
 
The grievance mechanisms have been well laid out in the RPF, and they utilize the 
existing systems and structures from the lowest levels through local governments. If all 
these channels of handling grievances fail then the aggrieved individuals can resort to 
Uganda’s courts of law.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Under Phase I of the program, the environment and social safeguards have been handled 
through the existing government mechanisms. The National Environmental Management 
Agency (NEMA) reviewed and approved ERT sub-projects. In addition, REA provided 
oversight for environmental and social due diligence and safeguards compliance for the 
larger investments (e.g. the Kakira Sugar Mill cogeneration facility, and the West Nile 
3.5 MW hydropower station), some of which were done through IDA technical support. 
Overall compliance monitoring, including a database, was done by REA, which was 
assisted by a Safeguards Consultant who established a RAP monitoring and tracking 
system. To coordinate work between NEMA and REA, an Inter-agency Steering 
Committee was established. The coordination between NEMA and REA on 
environmental and social due diligence has been satisfactory. These arrangements and 
capacities for compliance with safeguard policies and Ugandan regulations have been 
working satisfactorily in Phase I and will continue to be utilized in Phase II.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Bank’s safeguards policies applicable to ERT II Project are: (i) Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04); and (iii) Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12. Two Safeguard documents therefore have been prepared. 
These are: (i) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  The safeguard documents were prepared 
following consultations with selected communities, local governments/authorities, 
national institutions and the private sector.  
 
All safeguards documents were cleared by the Uganda National Environmental 
Management Authority (NEMA) and the Bank. They were then disclosed at the World 
Bank’s Infoshop on October 31, 2008; and in country on November 10, 2008. The 
proposed mitigation measures and their monitoring plans are an integral part of the 
project design and costs   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/24/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2008 
 
Page  7
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Page  8
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
N/A 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies 
02/17/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Martin Fodor 
02/17/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Mary C.K. Bitekerezo 
02/17/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Subramaniam V. Iyer 
02/17/2009 
Comments:   
