Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3336 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/20/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P110200 
Project Name: Railway Modernization 
Task Team Leader: Michel Audige 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: October 2, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Other trade and integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
450.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
556.00 
 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
100.00
656.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to improve railway service in the 
North-South freight corridor between Russia and the Black Sea.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project has two components.  
 
Component 1: Technical services [US$5 million WB financing]  
 
This component has yet to be fully defined but is likely to consist of the following sub-
components to be implemented either by UZ or the Ministry of Transport and Communications 
(MOTC):  
 
•
Capacity Building to UZ:  Systems and training to assist in the changes in corporate 
culture and business process attendant on conversion from a Government Department to a joint 
stock company including the adoption of line of business approach [US$2 million].  
 
Page  2
•
Passenger Public Service Obligations:  Independent identification and quantification of 
cross-subsidies from freight to passenger services and development of a long-term strategy for 
implementation of a passenger public service contract system based on institutional and 
measurement models being developed in the European Union [US$2 million].  
 
•
Technical Assistance to MOTC: advisory services and review of laws and regulations to 
improve sector governance. [US$1 million]   
 
Component 2: Infrastructure Upgrade to Poltava-Dzhankoy Line [US$445 million WB 
financing]  
 
The project would upgrade a railway route that runs north-south from Kharkiv near the Russian 
border to the Crimea in the South (Kharkiv-Poltava-Mykolaiv-Dzhankoy) . To accommodate 
expected traffic growth, UZ plans to shift freight trains from the Kharkiv-Zaporizhya-Dzhankoy 
route to the upgraded Kharkiv-Poltava-Mykolaiv-Dzhankoy route, allowing the Kharkiv-
Zaporizhya-Dzhankoy route would to be operated primarily as a passenger route. This project is 
part of an overall strategy  to separate main passenger routes from freight routes to allow higher 
speed (e.g., 120-140 kph) passenger operation and provide capacity for growing traffic. The 
proposed investment would electrify , complete double tracking and improve signaling on the 
line from Kharkiv-Poltava-Mykolaiv-Dzhankoy route. The estimated cost of the entire project is 
shown in the table below.  
 
Estimated Cost of Line Upgrade (US$ millions)  
 
Investment  
 Poltava -Koristivka   Zham'ynka Vadim  
Vadim Dzhankoy  
 Total  World 
Bank Financing  
 
Electrification  
 119  
 243  
 74  
 436  
150  
 
Track  
                  54   303  
 71  
 428  
191  
 
Signaling  
          66  
 124  
 43  
 232  
104  
 
Total : 
                 239  
 670  
 187  
1,096   445  
 
UZ has confirmed in principle that the project would be jointly financed by the EBRD and the 
World Bank.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would upgrade a railway route that runs north-south from Kharkiv near the Russian 
border to the Crimea in the South (Kharkiv-Poltava-Mykolaiv-Dzhankoy) .   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This will be the first railway operation financed by the Bank in Ukraine. However, the Borrower 
through Ukraine National State Railways (Ukrazalistnitsa) has some experience in managing 
projects including safeguard requirements as they have carried out two project with EBRD 
financing. These required environmental due diligence to be performed and environmental 
monitoring /compliance to be carried out. The Bank will further support the Borrower's capacity 
in dealing with Safeguard related issues. Capacity needs are mainly at the local level with a call 
for appropriate staff and training necessary to carry out sound environmental monitoring and 
safeguard compliance - an Environmental Management Plan will be developed to provide the 
Page  3
implementing agency and the local authorities with the appropriate guidelines needed to 
undertake good practice environmental management of activities proposed under the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Rehabilitation of tracks and installation of second track could create temporary impacts 
including construction dust and noise. Replaced wooden sleepers treated with creosote and 
ballast would require proper disposal. Need to insure that track work does not create runoff in 
streams. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared before appraisal to ensure 
that adequate mitigation and monitoring activities protect the population and environment from 
possible key risks related to proposed railway rehabilitation works such as noise, soil erosion on 
steep slopes, protection of waterways, passage of animals through any protected areas (if 
relevant).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Works will be performed on existing rights-of-way so is unlikely to affect any natural 
habitat. The EMP will assess any possible negative impacts of the proposed civil works to the 
natural habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Since works will be done in the existing right of way, involuntary settlement is not 
anticipated. The team will verify this during preparation. Works may require temporary use of 
nearby land for staging materials or access. Works contractor would enter into voluntary 
agreements with landowners for use of such land. Restoration measures will be defined in the 
EMP and the contractor will implement them.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/25/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EIA and EMP should be prepared during Feb - May 2008.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Audige 
12/12/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
