Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/07/2008 
Report No.:  AC3281
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ukraine 
Project ID:  P100580 
Project Name:  Roads and Safety Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Michel Audige 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 4, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
400.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The main project development objective is to reduce road transport costs, and improve 
access and road safety along Ukraine’s main road network. Ukraine has potential to 
become an important transit country given its geographic location between Russia and 
other CIS states on the one hand and the EU market on the other. While European 
priority corridors are being improved using EU funds, it is crucial to complement this 
effort along corridors that are of domestic and regional importance, to get a maximum 
return on these major infrastructure investments.  
 
The rate of fatal crashes on Ukraine’s roads is among the region’s highest, four times 
that of EU countries. The total socio-economic cost of road crashes in Ukraine is 
estimated to range between 1.5 and 5 percent of GDP. The Government is well aware of 
this pervasive issue and has developed a road safety program in collaboration with the 
EU. The proposed project to be supported by the World Bank will contribute to 
improving the current situation with a view to reducing road traffic crashes, injuries and 
fatalities to the level of  EU countries. It will therefore focus on eliminating some 162 
identified ‘black spots’ where most crashes occur. ‘Black spots’ can be defined as 
specific road locations/sections where the number of road crashes observed per year 
largely exceeds the average observed in the whole network.  
Page  2
The key development indicators for the project are proposed to be: (i) the reduction in 
transport time and vehicle operating cost between Boryspil and Lubny from current 2 
hours and 40 minutes to 2 hours and 20 minutes and cost decrease by 12 percent per 
vehicle trip; (ii) the elimination of 162 out of 300 black spots identified by Ukravtodor 
along the national  road network; and (iii) the reduction 
–
by a factor two -- in the number 
of road crashes between Boryspil and Lubny from current 248 to 126 per year.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project cost is estimated at US$500 million of which the World Bank loan 
will finance US$400 million. The design has been kept as simple as possible, as it will be 
the first World Bank-financed transport project in Ukraine. The National Roads 
Administration, Ukravtodor, has successfully implemented three consecutive EBRD-
financed projects during the past five years. However Ukravtodor would need to 
familiarize itself with World Bank procedures, especially procurement and environmental 
and social safeguards.  
 
Details of the three components are provided below: 
 
Component 1: Road Rehabilitation of a 128 kilometer section (Borispil-Lubny) of the 
Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhansky highway (M-3) (estimated cost US$300 million financed 100 
percent by the World Bank). This component comprises civil works for the 
rehabilitation/strengthening of the existing 2x2 lanes M-3 expressway (128 kilometer 
section), including safety measures for the vehicles (signaling, lighting in critical 
sections, crash barriers, etc.,) and for local inhabitants (pedestrian crossings, parking, and 
special facilities). The M3 expressway is strategic for Ukraine’s integration with the EU 
network and as a potential domestic and international transit corridor. The design features 
of the rehabilitation works are being evaluated vis-Ã -vis the expected traffic volumes 
and composition.   
 
Component 2: Road safety improvement (estimated cost US$198.5 million of which 
US$100 million financed by the World Bank). The proposed project will eliminate 162 
“black spots” of some 300 identified by Ukravtodor; the project could support the 
recently established National Road Safety Council. In addition the project will fund the 
supply and installation of safety improvements such as vertical and horizontal signaling, 
cats’ eyes, rumble strips, and modern crash barriers onthe most critical points of the 
national road network. 
 
Component 3: Capacity Building (estimated cost US$1.5 million financed 100 percent 
by Ukravtodor). Ukravtodor will finance this component, which could include funding 
for advisory services and equipment to: (a) modernization of the current control system 
of road condition taking into account international experience. Integration of roads e-
passports into the current control system; (b) clarification of road classification in terms 
of possible reform of the control system of state and local roads; (c) preparation of a 
possible second road project; and (d) implementation of a weighing station for vehicles to 
protect roads from early destruction.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The M3 highway is the backbone of the country's road network and a vital component of 
the domestic economy. The first 100 km of the proposed section to be rehabilitated along 
Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhanskyi highway (M3) carries more than 20,000 vehicles per day 
(vpd), making it one of the highly frequented roads in the region. The rehabilitation of the 
128 kilometer section (Borispil-Lubny) of the Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhansky highway will 
be done within the existing right of way. However, there is small possibility that some of 
the safety structures might require small amount of land, which is not known at this point.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A
corridor-specific Environmental Assessment, documenting baseline conditions and 
environmental risks is proposed and considered good professional practice. Based on 
field review and regional-specific comprehensive EIAs (Kiev and Poltava Regions) 
carried out by the borrower, and the straightforward maintenance and rehabilitation 
nature of the works, the EA category is confirmed as a B category. Based on B category 
Environmental Management Plan was set to be prepared by the borrowed and disclosed 
in English and Ukrainian at Ukravtodor website http://www.ukravtodor.gov.ua and in 
Infoshop. Comprehensive regional-specific EIAs were disclosed in Ukraine at 
Ukravtodor website and summary corridor-specifit EIA combining regional-specific 
EIAs will be put on files for information purposes.  
 
While the roadway passes through or nearby some designated protected areas (including 
forest land), land areas that would be directly affected by the works are not natural 
habitats and the safeguard is not triggered.  No physical cultural resources would be 
impacted and 'chance finds' provisions will be included in the standard bidding contracts.  
Page  4
The borrower has requested that the project be expanded to include 20 additional 
kilometers of roadway to the east of Pyrintyn. The team has surveyed this section and is 
confirming the relevance of existing EIA as EIA for Poltava Region was covering this 
section. Measures to reduce risks to pedestrians and vehicles at particularly dangerous 
road segments ('black spots') were reviewed for safeguards relevance and confirm that 
OP 4.12 is triggered because during project implementation Ukravtodor might acquire 
some small parcels of land for the elimination of some black spots and possibly for the 
construction of interchanges along the section of the M3 motorway under the project. A 
Land Acquisition Policy Framework has been prepared and shared with Ukravtodor with 
a
view that it will be used as a guide for any land acquisition process to ensure 
compliance with OP 4.12. The RPF has been placed in the Bank infoshop on November 
20, 2007.  
 
The EMP has been placed in the Bank Infoshop and at the Borrowers website on 
November 20, 2007. The Mitigation and Monitoring Plan were updated with more 
quantifiable standards, reflecting Ukrainian norms and regulations and best practices.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No direct or indirect negative impacts are anticipated that would result from project 
activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No adverse impacts are expected.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
corridor-specific Environmental Assessment, documenting baseline conditions and 
environmental risks is proposed and considered good professional practice. An EMP and 
Land Resettlement Framework (LRF) satisfactory to the Bank have been prepared and 
the Borrower has agreed to implement them. In addition, the project team environmental 
and social specialist reviewed the capacity of Ukravtodor/Ukrgiprodor to implement 
EMP and RPF and found this to be inadequate. There is only one environmental 
specialist on staff in the roads agency and EIA/EMP work was carried out by a 
specialized institute ’Ukrainian Institute of Geochemistry and Environment’. Since this 
project will require supervision by the borrower (eitherdirectly or through a supervision 
contractor) the project will include training and capacity-enhancement on environmental 
management and compliance. The contractor is obligated to document the ’company 
approach’ for environment and worker health and safety before they start any works.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are government officials (Ministry of Transport, Ukravtodor, 
Ukrgiprodor, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Finance, Local Environmental 
Page  5
Authorities), local NGOs, population residing along section of Kyiv-Kharkiv-
Dovzhanskyi highway (M3) between Boryspol and Pyriatyn, business entities located 
along this motorway. The Environmental Management Plan and related information in 
Ukrainian was disseminated and disclosed at the following locations:  
 
Kyiv-Kharkiv-Dovzhanskyi highway (M3) between Boryspol and Pyryatyn:  
 
•
Pyriatyn city at the premises of Pyriatyn Regional State Administration on 24th of 
October 2007  
 
•
Lubni city at the premises of Lubny Regional State Administration on 25th of October  
 
•
Yahoyn city at the premises of Regional Highway Department on 30th of October2007   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/03/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/19/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/16/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/19/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  6
Manager review the plan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Audige 
11/19/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Dmytro Glazkov 
11/20/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari 
11/26/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
11/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Motoo Konishi 
11/28/2007 
Comments:   
