                                                                                                 49579


                           UNTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         APPRAISAL STAGE

I. BASIC INFORMATION
Date prepared/updated: July 16,2009                                                  Report No.:

1. Bulc Proiect Data
CountrY: Uru--.ru&V                                I Proiect 10: PI02341
P;;ect Name: Uru--.ru&VWind Fann Proiect
Task Team Leader: Roberto Gabriel Aiello
Estimated Aooraisal Date: AUlZust 25, 2009         I Estimated Board Date: NtA (Carbon Offset)
ManaaiR2Unit: LCSEG                               I  Lendinl~ Instrument: None, Carbon Finance
Sector: Powera.:-O).Renewable EnerJ(Y(LE)
Theme: Climate ChanRe (P)
IBRD Amount (USSm.):                 0.00
IDA Amount (USSm.):                  0.00
GEF Amount (USSm.):                  0.00
CF Amount (EURm.):                   0.72
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER (US$mj                                                    US029.7


Environmental CatCion': B
Simnlified Processin2                                Simolen              Rencater n
Is this nroiec! Drocessed under OP 8.50 (Emen~encv Recovervl                Yes   r1         No  rXl

2. Project Objectives

The main objective of the lOMW Uruguay Wind Fann Project is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions
by grid-connected electricity generation from wind power. The emissions reduction will arise from the
displacement of fossil-fuel-based electricity generation on the national grid. The project will contribute
to the sustainable development of Uruguay, most notably through energy security and the substitution
of crude oil and derivatives imports. This project being the first of its kind, it is designed as a small-
scale pilot, aimed at being easily replicated in case of success.

The project activity will generate Certificates of Emission Reductions (CERs) and revenues through
the selling of CERs under the Clean Development Mechanism. The revenues obtained will contribute
to eliminate the barriers that prevent the implementation of this project, among which the high cost of
electricity generation from wind power due to supply shortage in wind turbines manufacturing and
irregularity of wind panerns. The emission reduction credits generated through the project activity will
help Annex I countries meet their emission reduction obligations as agreed under the Kyoto Protocol.

The project will have a positive impact on local employment during construction, operation and
maintenance in a region with high unemployment. In addition, the local road network will have to be
improved, an indirect benefit from the construction ofthe plant.

3. Project Description

The wind fann is located in Sierra de los Caracoles for a total installed capacity of 10 MW. With an
estimated total plant factor of 40.8%, the wind fann is expected to produce about 36 GWh per year.
The technology used is proven as it is most commonly employed in Europe and elsewhere and the
investors participating in this project had prior experience with it.

The project is composed of 5 wind turbine generators from VESTAS, model Y80. Each wind turbine
is 2MW of capacity and generates electricity at 690 Y. The voltage is raised to 31.5 kY using dry type
transfonners which are located in each wind turbine tower. In addition, for each generator, there is an
electronic system to correct power factor, a dry type transfonner 6901230 Y for the auxiliary services
and an interconnection pane with circuit breakers.

The technology for connection to the grid was provided by UTE, Uruguay's national electricity
company, which has the monopoly for transmission and distribution. The intercoMection to the
network has been realized through a 31.5 kY line ofabout 20 km length and a boosting transformer.

4. Project Location and salient pbysical cbaracterutics relevaat to tile safeg.ard analysis

The wind fann comprises 5 turbines, located in a single line atop a hilly ridge within the Sierra de
Caracoles, about 20 km from the town of Abra de Perdomo in the Department of Maldonado. The
natural vegetation within the wind fann and its general vicinity is predominantly natural grassland
(modified by livestock grazing), interspersed with rocky outcroppings and (in the more sheltered and
moist areas) patches of native, low-growing forest (monte).


S. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Mr. George Ledee (LCSEN)
    Mr Keno Rapp (LCSDE)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered

II. Key Safeguard Polity Issues and Their Management

A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues

I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Category "B".


Environment
The project (already built and operational) bas a rather small "footprint", with the entire wind farm
situated on 27 hectares. There has been no significant loss or degradation of natural habitats for the
windmills, transmission line, and access road improvements. Because of the predominantly open
landscape, only minimal tree removal has been needed. Moreover, no change in local land use has
happened as a result of the road improvements, since the project area is on long-settled, privately-
owned estates used primarily for ranching and there are no colonization pressures from outsiders.

In tenns of potential collisions with the wind turbines, the site is considered to be of relatively low risk
for birds and of uncertain (perhaps moderate) risk for bats. The site is not a bird migration bottleneck,
because of its distance from the coast and Jack of other topography that would concentrate migrating
birds into a small area. The migratory Swainson's Hawk (Buteo swainsonii) passes through the area,
but in a highly dispersed manner. There are no wetlands or significant bird concentrations in ciose
proximity to the wind farm. Although the Sierra de Caracoles harbors some bird species of
conservation concern (endemic or threatened), these are all either (i) species of wetlands or tall
grasslands that do not occur close to the wind farm (Straight-billed Reedhaunter, Limnoctites
rectiroslrls;  Black-and-White Monjita, Xolmis domjnicana; Chestnut Seedeater, Sporophlla
cinnamomea; Entre Rios Seedeater S. zelichi; and Saffron-cowled Blackbird, Xanthopsar j1avus) or (ii)
species of the monte forest that stay fairly close to the ground and are not likely to collide with wind
turbines (Mottled Piculet, Picumnus nebu/osus and Yellow Cardinal, Gubematrix cristata). These
species are thus at very low to zero risk of being adversely affected by the project. In the case of bats,
the level of risk from the wind farm is thought to be low or moderate, but this will be confinned
through systematic monitoring. Of the 21 bat species known from Uruguay, three are definitely known
from the project area (White-bellied Myotis, Myotis a/beseem; Blackish Myotis, M riparius; and
Vampire Bat, Desmodus robustus); none ofthese are endemic or threatened.


Social
OP 4.12 is triggered due to the land that was acquired for the construction and operation of the wind
farm. The impacts involved and the income restoration measures employed were reviewed in 8
retrospective way during project pre-appraisal, which confinned that these matters have been handled
as specified by this policy.

For installation of the turbines themselves, sections of three contiguous plots (nos. 20224, 785 and
783, according to Department of Maldonado's 2nd Cadastral Section) totaling nearly 27 ha were
expropriated atop the ridge. This was done via Executive Decree in August 2006. One of the two
landowners involved has demonstrated satisfaction with the entitlements offered to him for his losses.
The total compensation amount has reportedly already been paid to this owner. The second owner (no.
783) has not been able to come to an agreement with UTE on the proposed compensation amount.
This case has been referred to the courts and is in the process of resolution, following procedures
specified in Uruguayan law.

In addition, a total of 56 plots have required easements for access to the posts for the transmission line
linking the wind farm with the San Carlos substation. In these cases, even as the easement is imposed,

compensation is not provided automatically; it has to be requested by the affected landowner via an
administrative procedure based on a claim of damages or harm (dallas y prejuielos) connected to the
running of the line through the property. According to applicable norms, once they are notified of the
need for an easement, landowners have 15 days to comment on the alignment for the transmission line
or related infrastructure. They can also request outright expropriation ifthe devaluation ofthe asset{s)
involved is considered so great that its existing use is considered to be no longer economically
feasible.

The impacts in the case of both expropriation and easements cannot be considered either large-scale or
significant. The takings involved have not led to adverse impacts on local livelihoods, since the land
area available for livestock grazing and other uses has remained essentially unchanged. In fact,
expropriated sections ofland have ranged from just 2% (in the case ofno. 20224) to 5% (in the     case of
no. 783) of the three holdings.. This is consistent with the primary forms of land tenure and use
Observed in this central part of Maldonado Department. Those subject to easements have experienced a
similarly small-scale impact; ifthey are unhappy with the compensation offered they have a number of
options available to them.

2. Describe any potential indirect andlor long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area.

No indirect impacts as a result ofthe activities associated with this small-scale project have been noted
thus far, and none are expected in the future.

3. Describe any project alternatives (ifrelevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.

With respect to .Ite....tive lites, three potential sites with high-potential wind resources were
considered for the wind farm location: Sierra de Caracoles, Sierra de las Animas, and Rinc6n del
Bonete. The criteria used for site selection included (i) quality and consistency of wind resources; (ii)
proximity to high-voltage transmission lines; (iii) existing road access; and (vi) environmental
considerations, including visual and bird impacts. The Sierra de Caracoles site was chosen for its
superior wind resource potential and its more highly favorable environmental characteristics. For
example, the Rincon del Bonete site is adjacent to a large freshwater lake and would likely have had a
more significant adverse impact on aquatic and other birds. Details on the analysis of alternative sites
are within the 2005 report, "Prapuesta de Programa sobre Energia Eollea en el Uruguay, Convenio
MlEM - UDELAR. In/onne: Analisis de los Sitios Donde Instalar un Parque E61ico de 10 MW",
which is summarized within the Environmental Impact Assessment (ElA) report for this project.

With respect to project deal"" the main alternative considered was to generate the same amount of
electricity with a larger number of smaller turbines. This alternative was rejected because ofeconomic
criteria and because the visual impacts would have been greater (a larger number of windmills would
be visible on the same ridge top). Smaller turbines would also have been riskier for resident raptors
and other birds, which mostly fly below the rotor-swept height (27-107 meters) of the selected 2 MW
turbines.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The project counterpart is the National Administration of Electricity Generation and Transport (UTE).
Uruguay's national electricity company. Its activities encompass electricity generation, transmission

and distnbution. UTE is fully able to apply safeguards policies as required by Uruguayan law and
conduct environmental assessments. The utility already has experience with environmental and social
safeguards issues, since it operates 3 hydropower plants and 3 thermal power plants.


Though the preparation of an environmental assessment is not required by Uruguayan law for
generation projects below ISMW, UTE has prepared one for this 10MW pilot project. The utility has
also taken a proactive approach to assessing and dealing with the land acquisition needs of the project.
Much of the work in this regard has been carried out by the appraisers and legal advisers of UTE's
Legal Counsel Depanment who were charged with contacting all affected landowners personally, in
order 10 notity them of impending impacts and provide them with a sense of the entitlements available,
and who continue to maintain a strong field presence.

Environment
The already completed 20 km, 31 .5 kY transmission line that links the wind farm with the existing
electricity grid follows an alignment that was carefully chosen so as to avoid crossing an existing
wetland (bailado), as well as to minimize the need for clearing any native monte forest. The
configuration and design of the transmission cables and power poles are of low risk from a bird
electrocution standpoint. Moreover, good environmental practices were followed during project
construction, which took place between August 2008 and December 2008. Land clearing (affecting
less than 27 hectares of mostly grassland), as well as the widening of short access roads, did not
exceed the minimum area required for the transportation and installation of the very large windmills
(hub height 67 meters). During wind farm construction, significant efforts were made to minimize the
clearing of any monte forest, as well as the removal of relatively short sections ofan old stone fence of
some historical interest. This fence is believed to have been built during the 17th Century, although it
does not quality as an official historical landmark because many similar such fences are found in
Uruguay. The fence is the only example of physical cultural property that was encountered during
project planning and construction.

Even though the wind fann site is of relatively low risk (at least to birds), systematic bird and bat
monitoring is nonetheless important to (i) verify whether or not a significant problem exists
(particularly in the case of bats); (ii) enable the potential adaptive management of wind farm operation
to minimize bat or bird mortality; (iii) predict the likely impacts of scaling-up wind power
development, particularly the proposed future expansion at the Sierra de Caracoles of another 10 MW,
but also in other areas of Uruguay with similar physical and vegetation characteristics; and (iv)
advance scientific knowledge worldwide, in a field that presently faces a steep learning curve and
would benefit ITom the Uruguayan data. UTE is presently designing a Bird and Bat Monitoring Plan
(Plan de Monltoreo de Aves y Murcie/agos) during wind farm operation. This monitoring will be
carried out by an independent entity, under terms of reference that will be agreed between UTE and the
World Bank. The Bird and Bat Monitoring Plan will be referenced in the Emissions Reductions
Purchase Agreement (ERPA) as a legally binding requirement under the project. However, if the
ERPA were to be signed before the Monitoring Plan is ready, then the ERPA will contain an Annex
listing the key technical criteria that the Plan will need to follow. These criteria are expected to include
(i) a primary focus on bird and bat mortality (searching for carcasses) around the turbines; (ii)
appropriate duration and intensity of monitoring during the first year, along with possible adaptive
changes in subsequent years, based on the data Obtained; (iii) appropriate surface area to search around
each turbine; (iv) appropriate correction factors to estimate the difference between observed and actual
bird and bat mortality, inCluding area not covered, scavenger removal, and observer efficiency; (v)
procedures for removing and documenting any carcasses discovered; (vi) maintaining contacts with
international experts; (vii) management and dissemination of monitoring data; and (viii) options for
cost~effectivc adaptive management of wind fann operation, to mitigate any significant mortality that
might be found.

Social
As mentioned above, of the two landowners subject to expropriation, one has already accepted the
offered compensation, whereas the second is mounting a legal challenge to the compensation package
offered to him. Easements are now starting to be paid, where they have been requested. A careful
review during the p~-appraisal mission of the haodling of both expropriation and easements found
that compensation is being paid at ~placement cost. In addition to being based on clear and consistent
procedures for the valuation of affected assets, all transaction costs are included. Asset depreciation is
taken into account to a reasonable extent; where an owner may have a doubt about the cadastral values
accorded to hislher assets, slhe has the right to reject the initial offer of compensation and request a
valuation by one of UTE's in-house appraisers. There are clearly defined procedures for addressing
disputes and complaints, including in the case of the expropriated owner who has gone to court to
defend his request for a higher compensation amount.

For UTE to have access to the ridgetop where the turbines were installed, it had to improve a number
of sections of existing dirt access roads. This introduced temporary impacts associated with the
rehabilitation works, all of which had to be compensated for. Any fences or other such assets that
sustained damage (dailos supe",inientes), either as a result of roads rehabilitation or the installation of
posts for the transmission line, were also duly compensated for.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

During the project preparation stage, several local and national organizations were consulted on the
project's potential environmental impacts, including Aves Uruguay. Also, prior to the construction of
the main project works, an information dissemination workshop was organized specifically for the
landowners who were identified by UTE as being directly affected. The meeting itself took place in
February 2008 at the Society for Rural and Industrial Development of Maldonado, and three Society
officers aod 18 concerned local residents were in attendance. Although this meeting does not appear to
have included a complete treatment of compensation options for people directly affected by
expropriations, easements, or damages as a result of the project, it did allow for a thorough discussion
ofthe results ofthe ElA, which was largely complete at that time.

UTE officials have stated their intention to hold at least two additional consultation events focusing on
the environmental and social aspects of the project, one in the vicinity of Sieml de los Caracoles and
one in Montevideo. The Bank has welcomed this decision, not least because it will provide an
opportunity to bring an enhanced ElA report for Caracoles to the attention of broader publics. As part
of the follow up to the pre-appraisal mission, the Bank has also recommended that the company make
use of these meetings to i) highlight the social and environmental aspects of the operation of the
Caracoles wind farm for a raoge of stakeholders (including those in civil society); ii) provide more
information on the rights and entitlements of those who bave been directly affected by the project's
main and complementary works; and iii) call attention to facts related to the wind farm's performance,
as a means of highlighting the benefits ofthe wind power in Uruguay more broadly.

   B.  Disclosllr~ R~qllirements D(lI~

   Environmental Anessment/AuditlManagement Plan/Other:
     Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                    0511312009

     Date of "in-country" disclosure                                05/12/2009

     Date of submission to InfoShop                                 05/15/2009
     For category A projects, date ofdistributing the Executive
     Summary ofthe EA to the Executive Directors
    Resettlement Action PlanlFrameworkIPolicy PrOI:e5S:
     Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
     Date ofreceipt by the Bank                                     07/30/2009
     Date of "in-country" disclosure                                07/3012009
     Date of submission to infoShop                                 07/3012009
    Indigenous Peoples P1anIPlanoing Framework:
      Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
     Date ofreceipt by the Bank
      Date of "in-country" disclosure
     Date ofsubmission to infoShop
    Pest Management Plan:
      Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    N/A
      Date of receipt by the Bank
      Date of "in-country" disclosure
      Date of submission to InfoShop
    *Ifthe   projel:l triggen the Pest Management and/or Physil:al Cultural Resources,
    tbe respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    Ifin-I:ountry dlsdosure ofany ofthe above dOl:uments is not expected, please
    explain why:



    C. Compliance Monitoring Indic(llot'S at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the ISDS
isfinalized by tire project decision meeting)

    OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
    review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
    creditlloan?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure ofInformation
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
    Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
    form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected

  groups and local NOOs?
  AU Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system ofthe project include the           Yes
  monitoring ofsafeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes, they
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal          will be
  documents?                                                                    reflected
                                                                                in the
                                                                               ERPA.


  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:
Environmental Specialist:
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental andlor
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr. Reidar Kvam
  Comments: Approval not required
Sector Manager:                    Mr. Philippe Charles Benoit
  Comments:

