Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4613 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/30/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Original Project ID: P070937 
Original Project Name: Third Basic 
Education Quality Improvement Project 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P111662 
Project Name: Additional Financing Third Basic Education Improvement 
Task Team Leader: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 24, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 3, 2009 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
29.90 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.50
7.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
There is no proposed change to the Project Development Objective of the ongoing Third Basic 
Quality Improvement Project under this proposed additional financing.  Therefore, the objective 
of the Project remains to increase equity, quality and efficiency in the provision of preschool and 
primary education Uruguay through: (i) school-level interventions to raise education quality in 
schools servicing socio-economically disadvantaged students; (ii) the enhancement of the teacher 
training system and the introduction of new teaching and learning instruments in the classroom; 
and (iii) an increase in the efficiency of primary education institutions.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The ongoing Third Basic Quality Improvement Project included two components: (i) Expansion 
of the Full-time School (FTS) model; and (ii) Institutional Strengthening. The proposed 
additional financing will be used solely to support the Component 1. Expansion of the Full-time 
School Model of the Third Basic Quality Improvement Project.  The main objective of this 
component is to expand the existing pedagogical model of urban full-time schools (Escuelas de 
Tiempo Completo - ETCs) to 47,000 students.  More specifically, this component finances: (i) 
Page  2
the construction, rehabilitation and equipment costs for the schools; (ii) the procurement of 
didactic materials and books; and (iii) teacher training for FTS.  
 
Under the ongoing project, a total of 120 FTS have been created through the Project amounting 
to 32,580 new student places. By December 31, 2009, the current loan will be fully disbursed but 
only reaching about 37,600 student places in FTS (80 percent of the target set at appraisal of 
47,000 newly created student places in FTS).  The proposed Additional Financing will finance 
the resources to achieve the PDO of creating 47,000 new student places in FTS.  
 
The implementation arrangements under the Additional Financing would be the same as those 
for the ongoing Project.  The ANEP would remain the key responsible agency, while the 
MECAEP Implementation Unit would continue to be entrusted with the implementation 
arrangements and the project fiduciary-related aspects as detailed in the Project's Operational 
Manual.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All the national territory.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
(a) Environmental.   The institutions in charge of developing and managing the Third Basic 
Quality Improvement Project would ensure that the personnel in charge of monitoring the project 
will comply with the project's EMP, consistent with the Bank's safeguard policies. Also, the 
EMP requires the establishment of a system to ensure proper implementation and compliance 
with environmental safeguards, requiring construction contractors to have an environmental 
specialist as part of the team.  The technical supervision of the project also requires the 
incorporation of an experienced environmental specialist.  In addition to the EA, construction 
companies need to develop an Action Plan for implementing the EMP.  
 
The local implementing agency is updating the EMP for all works contracted, following the 
environmental guidelines.  The EMP will be part of the contractual obligations.  
 
(b) Social: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement.  
 
MECAEP and ANEP have shown capacity to comply with Uruguayan Legislation (consistent 
with O.P. 4.12) for land acquisition and involuntary resettlement for the ongoing Third Basic 
Education Quality Improvement Project. They have also agreed to honor the norms for screening 
procedures and eligibility criteria of the lots of land for school construction.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO) 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSEG) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The ongoing Third Basic Quality Improvement Project triggered safeguard policies OP 4.01 
(Environmental Assessment) and it was classified as a Category B (activity where more limited 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
environmental analysis is considered appropriate to address specific environmental issues).  The 
project included civil works for: (i) classroom construction in new schools; (ii) classroom 
construction in existing schools; and (iii) classroom rehabilitation.  
 
The primary risks considered in the Environmental Assessment (EA) were associated with 
the construction period and included: (i) an increase in air pollution and noise levels; (ii) disposal 
of construction waste; (iii) potential interruption or limitation in the access to residential housing 
and businesses; (iv) potential increase of accidents; and (v) potential nuisance during the 
construction period. These risks were mitigated through the government endorsed Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP). All civil works under the ongoing project closely follow the existing 
environmental guidelines. An implementation assessment of the EMP in the sites where schools 
were constructed or renovations were carried out shows that the possible environmental impacts 
can and were mitigated through the appropriate and satisfactory implementation of the EMP.  
 
The proposed Additional Financing includes civil works similar to the ones described 
above.  Therefore, the environmental impacts are not expected to be significant, or irreversible. 
For the Additional Financing, the EMP will be updated to ensure mitigation of all potential risks. 
The EMP will include inputs identified in an updated environmental Consultation process, 
currently being performed. To facilitate EMP development, specific Environmental Guidelines 
have been updated during the preparation of this proposed Additional Financing.  
 
The Additional Financing to the Third Basic Quality Improvement Project will support the 
implementation of this Action Plan with an allocated budget to be discussed during the 
negotiation stage.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Even though this safeguard is not triggered, during the identification mission, the social 
safeguards specialist assisted the GOU in clarifying the records of the schools built under the 
Basic Education Quality Improvement Project, and the land tenure status of the 33 lots of land to 
be used for construction and/or rehabilitation of school buildings under the Additional Financing 
Project. Uruguayan Legislation on land acquisition and involuntary resettlement was compared 
with the Bank O.P. 4.12 and found to be consistent. The only case of involuntary resettlement 
under the previous project included one individual, guardian of a contiguous soccer field, who 
accepted that ANEP build another dwelling for him in an adjacent lot, to the satisfaction of both 
parties. For the Additional Financing, no land acquisition or resettlement is foreseen, as the 33 
eligible lots will already be identified  for school construction by ANEP by project negotiations. 
Eligibility criteria include:  
 
(a) 
That the parcel of land belongs to the MECAEP. If the land belongs to another 
entity of the government, it must be transferred to ANEP to be eligible for construction under the 
present project (as a donation, or a comodato for school construction purposes); and  
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
(b) 
That the parcel is clear, that is, nobody is living there and no economic activity is 
being performed. If any of the conditions above are not met, the site will not be eligible to 
participate in the project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/27/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The MECAEP will send to the Bank a Note of completion of the legal transfer of the last four 
lots of land to ANEP, prior to negotiations of the Additional Financing Project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
