Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/06/2009 
Report No.:  AC4609
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Original Project ID: P070937 
Original Project Name: Third Basic 
Education Quality Improvement Project 
Country:  Uruguay 
Project ID:  P111662 
Project Name:  Additional Financing Third Basic Education Improvement 
Task Team Leader:  Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 24, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 3, 2009 
Managing Unit:  LCSHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
29.90 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
7.50
7.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
There is no proposed change to the Project Development Objective of the ongoing Third 
Basic Quality Improvement Project under this proposed additional financing.  Therefore, 
the objective of the Project remains to increase equity, quality and efficiency in the 
provision of preschool and primary education Uruguay through: (i) school-level 
interventions to raise education quality in schools servicing socio-economically 
disadvantaged students; (ii) the enhancement of the teacher training system and the 
introduction of new teaching and learning instruments in the classroom; and (iii) an 
increase in the efficiency of primary education institutions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The ongoing Third Basic Quality Improvement Project included two components: (i) 
Expansion of the Full-time School (FTS) model; and (ii) Institutional Strengthening. The 
proposed additional financing will be used solely to support the Component 1. Expansion 
of the Full-time School Model of the Third Basic Quality Improvement Project.  The 
main objective of this component is to expand the existing pedagogical model of urban 
full-time schools (Escuelas de Tiempo Completo - ETCs) to 47,000 students.  More 
Page  2
specifically, this component finances: (i) the construction, rehabilitation and equipment 
costs for the schools; (ii) the procurement of didactic materials and books; and (iii) 
teacher training for FTS.  
 
Under the ongoing project, a total of 120 FTS have been created through the Project 
amounting to 32,580 new student places. By December 31, 2009, the current loan will be 
fully disbursed but only reaching about 37,600 student places in FTS (80 percent of the 
target set at appraisal of 47,000 newly created student places in FTS).  The proposed 
Additional Financing will finance the resources to achieve the PDO of creating 47,000 
new student places in FTS.  
 
The implementation arrangements under the Additional Financing would be the same as 
those for the ongoing Project.  The ANEP would remain the key responsible agency, 
while the MECAEP Implementation Unit would continue to be entrusted with the 
implementation arrangements and the project fiduciary-related aspects as detailed in the 
Project's Operational Manual.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
All the national territory.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO) 
Ms Isabel Tomadin (LCSEG) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
N/A.   
 
Page  3
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The primary risks considered in the Environmental Assessment (EA) are associated with 
the construction period and include: (i) an increase in air pollution and noise levels; (ii) 
disposal of construction waste; (iii) potential interruption or limitation in the access to 
residential housing and businesses; (iv) potential increase of accidents; and (v) potential 
nuisance during the construction period.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
(a) Risks have been mitigated through the government's endorsement of the 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). All civil works under the ongoing project 
closely follow the existing environmental guidelines. An implementation assessment of 
the EMP in the sites where schools were constructed or renovations were carried out 
under the ongoing project shows that the possible environmental impacts can and were 
mitigated through the appropriate and satisfactory implementation of the EMP.  
 
(b) The local implementing agency has updated the EMP for all works to be contracted 
under the proposed additional financing, following the environmental guidelines.  The 
EMP will be part of the contractual obligations.  
 
(c) The updated EMP requires the establishment of a system to ensure proper 
implementation and compliance with environmental safeguards, requiring construction 
contractors to have an environmental specialist as part of the team.  The technical 
supervision of the project also requires the incorporation of an experienced 
environmental specialist.  In addition to the EA, construction companies will need to 
develop an Action Plan for implementing the EMP.  
 
(d) The EMP includes inputs identified in an updated environmental consultation 
process. To facilitate its implementation, specific Environmental Guidelines have been 
updated during the preparation of this proposed Additional Financing.  
 
(e) The Additional Financing to the Third Basic Quality Improvement Project will 
support the implementation of the Action Plan with an allocated budget to be discussed 
during the negotiation stage.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Stakeholders were invited through the Internet and by written communications.  The 
Environmental Management Plan discussed was available to them prior to the meetings.  
The recorded minutes reflect the participants' agreement with the document.  
 
The key stakeholders were:  
 
(a) Government agencies: Dirección Nacional de Medioambiente (DINAMA), 
Mejoramiento de la Enseñanza Media y Formación Docente (MEMFOD), Ministerio de 
Vivienda, Ordenamiento Territorial y Medio ambienta (MVOTMA), FORMACIÓN EN 
SERVICIOS, Consejo Directivo Central - agrupa a los niveles de enseñanza primaria, 
Page  4
secundaria y  técnica - (CODICEN), Consejo de Educación Secundaria (CES), División 
de Arquitectura del PODER JUDICIAL.  
 
(b) Civil Society: CIEDUR/RED DE URUGUAYA DE ORGANIZACIONES 
AMBIENTALES which represents 35 Environmental NGOs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/30/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/30/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/05/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
Yes 
Page  5
credit/loan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza 
07/31/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Isabel Tomadin 
07/31/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Chingboon Lee 
08/03/2009 
Comments:   
