Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3409 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/22/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uzbekistan 
Project ID: P109126 
Project Name: Rural Enterprise Support Phase II 
Task Team Leader: Dilshod Khidirov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (40%);Agro-industry (35%);Crops (15%);Agricultural 
extension and research (10%) 
Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Small and 
medium enterprise support (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
67.96 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.80
6.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project would scale up the Rural Enterprise Support Project (RESP) and adhere to 
the original project’s main objectives of increasing the productivity and sustainability of 
agriculture and agribusinesses in project areas. This will be achieved by directly supporting the 
newly independent farmers in other regions of the country, who did not benefit from the original 
project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be mostly financed by an IDA concessional Credit. The amount of the Credit is 
still to be defined in the range of $25-40 million. The final project area coverage still remains to 
be defined on the basis of the available IDA funds. However an agreement in principle with the 
Borrower has been achieved that the Irrigation and Drainage component will concentrate on a set 
of administrative districts, while other project activities, including the Rural Finance component, 
will cover a much larger region. The project would comprise the following four components:  
 
Page  2
Component A: Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage System  This component will cover 
investments for (i) inter-farm works ; (ii) support to Water User Associations, including 
equipment, material, and training for the maintenance of on-farm canals and drainage; and 
demonstration plots. This component will be implemented in a specifically selected number of 
districts which were selected according to the needs for rehabilitation of I&D works.  
 
Component B: Rural Finance.  This component will have the objective of facilitating access to 
credit to the newly independent farmers which originated from the Shirkat reform. The 
component will finance a credit line for Participating Financial Institutions (PFI 
–
commercial 
banks, leasing companies and microfinance institutions) to on-lend to farmers and rural business 
related to farming (including but not limited to provision of farming services such as farm 
mechanization, storage and distribution facilities, financing of agricultural inputs and 
investments in tree-crops). The component will also finance leasing transactions, to allow access 
to much needed financing for rural businesses with collateral constraints. A complementary 
training program to the PFIs will be provided, to upgrade their skills in agricultural investment 
project appraisal.  
 
Component C: Rural Advisory Services.  This component has two objectives: (i) help potential 
borrowers to develop business plans in order to increase their business and financial skills, 
thereby reducing the risks that the final borrowers will face difficulties in repaying the sub-loans 
(thus reducing potential defaults); (ii) provide advisory services and training to the newly 
independent farmers in various topics such as legal, accounting, business, technical aspects 
including agronomy, water management, pesticide handling, IPM, etc.  
 
Component D: Project Management. The component will cover the overall coordination of 
project activities including fiduciary aspects of project management and monitoring and 
evaluation. The project will be managed by the Rural Restructuring Agency, an institution which 
significantly developed its capacity during the Rural Enterprises Development Project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Rehabilitation of Irrigation and Drainage (I&D) infrastructure will concentrate on seven 
administrative districts (raions): Ulugnar district (Andijan oblast), Alat district (Bukhara oblast), 
Mirishkor district (Kashkadarya oblast), Pastargom  district (Samarkand oblast), Boyovut dstrict 
(Syrdarya oblast), Buka district (Tashkent oblast) and Yazzavan district (Fergana oblast). The 
Rural Finance and Rural Advisory Services components will be available to beneficiaries 
throughout the seven project oblasts.  Detailed description of the districts and oblasts, and the 
rationale for their selection, are reflected in the feasibility study prepared by RRA. The 
environmental assessment and management plan will cover the whole project area at oblast level, 
but with particular emphasis on the seven I&D districts.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA) under the Ministry of Agriculture and Water served as 
the implementing agency for RESP-1, and will implement the proposed project. The agency has 
a
proven track record in carrying out project management, reporting, and procurement and 
financial management activities, and has developed capacity in all areas of project 
Page  3
implementation.  RRA has recruited a local consultant firm to provide a team of environmental 
specialists to prepare the EA/MP, and will also recruit an environmental specialist to support 
implementation of the project in conformity with the EMP.  ToRs for this position satisfactory to 
the Bank will be prepared as part of the PIP by appraisal.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSSD) 
Ms Amy Evans (SASDN) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
RESP-II is not expected to have any significant or irreversible environmental impacts, and is 
classified as Environmental Category "B".  The environmental impact of the proposed project is 
expected to mainly derive from the Irrigation and Drainage component and is expected to be 
small, but positive. The proposed works do not include any investment in infrastructure that 
would allow increased water abstraction from main sources. The Credit component will on-lend 
to farmers and rural business related to farming (including but not limited to provision of 
farming services such as farm mechanization, storage and distribution facilities, financing of 
agricultural inputs and investments in tree-crops). However, because these credit line 
investments are not pre-identified, there could be unforeseen environmental impacts during 
implementation.  The RESP documentation includes an Environmental Management Plan 
Framework (EMPF), which provides a screening checklist and mitigating measures for the minor 
impacts that could occur as a result of the investments.  Institutional capacity for environmental 
management will be established in the RRA through recruit an environmental specialist to 
support implementation of the project in conformity with the EMP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
RESP-II is expected to finance inter alia I&D rehabilitation of existing irrigation and 
drainage systems in seven districts. These activities are maintenance, reconstruction or 
alterations to existing infrastructure, and do not alter or expand its scope and extent.  The source 
of irrigation water in Uzbekistan is abstractions from the Syr Darya and Amur Darya rivers, both 
of which are international waterways.  The project team will request an exception to the 
‘Notification to Riparians under OP 7.50 on the basis that the I&D activities will be limited to 
rehabilitation of existing schemes, will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water 
flows to the other riparians, and in not likely to be adversely affected by the other riparians’ 
possible water use.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Page  4
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/31/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The borrower has initiated preparation of the EA/MP.  A framework EMP will be completed 
by mid-March, and specific EAs for the I&D investments will be completed during 
implementation, as part of the detailed technical feasibility study to be prepared for each 
investment.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dilshod Khidirov 
02/29/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Holger A. Kray 
03/01/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
