Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4069 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/15/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uzbekistan 
Project ID: P112719 
Project Name: Uzbekistan Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage Project 
Task Team Leader: Takao Ikegami 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to: rehabilitate the sewerage network to 
reduce leakage and expand coverage to selected areas currently unconnected, and improve the 
efficiency of wastewater treatment operations. The objective would be achieved through 
improvements in the sewerage network, expansion of sewerage connections, upgrading of each 
city’s wastewater treatment plant, and institutional capacity building.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total expected IDA financing for the proposed project is expected to be US$40 million.  
Through the following components, the BSSP would address a number of concrete deficiencies 
in each city:  
 
Samarkand  
 
Rehabilitation of the existing sewerage network.  The existing sewerage network and 
wastewater treatment plant were built 30-40 years ago and are much deteriorated.  As a result 
there is seepage of raw sewage into the ground, frequent sewer blockages, and high costs for 
O&M.  The project intends to finance the rehabilitation of the existing sewerage network  
Page  2
Expand sewerage connections to selected areas of the city.  About 98% percent of the 
Samarkand population is connected to water supply but only 64% are connected to the sewerage 
system. The imbalance has created environmental, health, and social problems; inhibited 
commercial development; and created unsanitary conditions for the local population and the 
many tourists that visit the city each year. In order to move towards balancing the disparate 
connection rates, the project on a limited basis will finance the expansion of sewerage into areas 
currently unconnected.  
 
Upgrade the wastewater treatment plant.   At the existing wastewater treatment facility, costs 
for O&M and energy use are excessive due to inefficient designs and equipment that have 
exceeded their economic life.  The project will finance the replacement of selected 
electromechanical equipment and initiate the upgrading of the plant in order to reduce O&M 
costs and energy consumption. The project also will undertake an energy audit of vodokanal 
operations to guide a scaled-up effort in the future to reduce energy costs.  
 
Bukhara  
 
Rehabilitation of the existing sewerage network.  The existing sewerage network was build 30 
to 40 years ago and is in a worse state of repair than that in Samarkand.  It is estimated that about 
two thirds of all collected wastewater seeps into the ground, creating an acute environmental and 
public health threat.  To start addressing this acute problem, the project will initiate the 
rehabilitation of the existing sewerage network.  
 
Expand sewerage connections to selected areas of the city.  Most residents are connected to the 
public water supply system, but only about half are connected to the central sewerage system.  
The rest depend on on-site sanitation which constitutes a potential environmental threat.  To 
redress the situation, the project would expand sewerage lines into unconnected areas to the 
extent financing is available.  Although the number of new connections is likely to be modest 
compared to the needs, parallel financing from other donors may be available to scale up the 
Bank effort.  
 
Upgrade the wastewater treatment plant.   Bukhara’s 30 to 40 year old wastewater treatment 
plant is in a worse state of repair than that in Samarkand.  Excessive energy use in the pumping 
stations and in the wastewater treatment plant drains resources from the vodokanal which could 
better be used to finance investments.  To respond to these problems, the project will replace 
selected electromechanical equipment in the network and in the WWTP, undertake investments 
to reduce energy consumption in the wastewater treatment plant, and undertake an energy audit 
of the vodokanal’s operations to guide a scaled-up effort in the future to reduce energy costs.  
 
Bukhara and Samarkand  
 
Technical Assistance and training. The project would finance limited technical assistance and 
training for staff in the two vodokanals to continue the capacity building started under the 
Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply Project.  It is envisaged that the technical assistance and 
training would focus on improving the vodokanal’s operational efficiency and consumer 
Page  3
orientation. The technical assistance component would also finance a program from improving 
public cleanliness and sanitary practices, including hand-washing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Bukhara and Samarkand, Uzbekistan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under the ongoing Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply project, the environmental 
management related to project activities, has been carried out according to national norms and 
the World Bank prescribed Environmental Management Plans. The envisaged impacts have been 
reduced by designs that take into account social and environemental impacts, and mitigation 
measures applied during physical implementation. Construction debris and other waste have 
been disposed according to existing norms. Land reclamation and recultivation has been applied 
upon completion of works.  
 
However, capacity of the Borrower will be strengthened to enhance their capability to better 
address safeguards requirements under this project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
Ms Simone Giger (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The policy is triggered since the project will finance rehabilitation and extension of existing 
sewerage networks in Bukhara an Samarkand. The project EA will include an Environmental 
Management Plan that will propose practical mitigation measures and monitoring activities to 
reduce the temporary environmental impacts during project implementation. The draft EA will 
be discussed in each city in one public consultation before project appraisal   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The applicability of this policy will be determined during the EA process. The project 
investments might affect water sources such as natural lakes and their habitats.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Bukhara and Samarkand are considered historical cities, therefore the probabilty of chance 
finds during civil works is high. The EMP will provide mitigation measures if physical cultural 
resources are encountered during project implementation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The team confirmed that the upgrading of the sewage treatment plant in each city will not 
require any land acquisition.  The team also indicated that it is unlikely that the borrower will 
need to acquire land through expropriation, or require any households or businesses (including 
kiosks) to relocate, for the rehabilitation of the existing sewerage network or for the expansion of 
sewerage in each city.  The team will confirm this by ensuring that the terms of reference for the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
social assessment planned during the coming months will include a task requiring the consultants 
to check every right-of-way for the sewerage expansion and network improvements that will be 
involved in the project.  In addition, team indicated that the construction contracts will specify 
that the works will not occur during the tourist season.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
OP 7.50 is triggered because the WWT plants empty to the Syr Darya River.  The Team will 
consult with LEGEN to determine whether it will be appropriate to seek an exception to the 
notification requirement.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/14/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment (EA) with Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be 
prepared and discussed in one public meeting at project sites before appraisal; if OP4.12 is 
triggered then Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be disclosed.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Takao Ikegami 
12/10/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
12/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
12/15/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
