Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4263 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/02/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uzbekistan 
Project ID: P111760 
Project Name: Syrdarya Water Supply Project 
Task Team Leader: Takao Ikegami 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2, 
2010 
Estimated Board Date: May 13, 2010 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
88.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
12.00
12.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the coverage, quality, 
efficiency, and sustainability of public water supply services in selected rayons of the Syrdarja 
province.  The objective would be achieved through rehabilitation and/or replacement of the 
existing water supply infrastructure that has now reached the end of its useful life.  In order to 
reach sustainable operations, the project would focus on creating the institutional capacity in the 
project towns and in the oblast capital Gulistan to maintain the town systems and to charge user 
charges that would be sufficient to pay for the cash costs of operations and maintenance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project implemented by the central Government Uzkomkhizmat and the Syrdarja Regional 
authorities will finance the following activities:  (i) selected rehabilitation of the water 
production and distribution systems that will benefit 50 project towns in the Syrdarja region, and 
the rehabilitated pipe sections are expected to be of much superior quality and workmanship than 
the original sections that they will replace; (ii) selected new construction of production and 
distribution systems in towns that can be supplied more economically and sustainably from local 
groundwater wells; (iii) bulk water metering and metering of individual service connections in 
Page  2
order to reduce wastage and promote financial sustainability; (iv) building the capacity to operate 
and maintain the production and distribution systems, with attention paid both to needs at the 
town and at the central levels; (v) procurement of key maintenance equipment and materials 
including cathodic protection of unprotected sections of the transmission lines; (vi) a 
communications campaign aimed at the beneficiary populations to teach hygiene education and 
to increase the acceptance of user charges linked to improved service quality in order to increase 
the likelihood that services will be financially sustainable; and (vii) detailed design and project 
management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will target water supply infrastructure investments in the Syrdarya Province located 
in the center of Uzbekistan on the left bank of Syrdarya River. The project area covers the six 
districts: Akaltyn, Bayaut, Khavast, Mekhnatobad, Mirzaobad, and Sardoba. The project districts 
are located in the southern and central part of the Syrdarya Province, stretching from the west to 
east borders of the province. The total population is 340,000 in an area of about 4,000 km2. The 
beneficiaries reside in about 50 towns.  
 
Syrdarya Regional Production Organization “Suvakova” with the headquarters in Guliston is 
responsible for water supply and waste water services in the Syrdarya Province and reports to the 
State Agency  “Uzkommunkhizmat “.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower’s institutional capacity for addressing safeguard policies is built on the ongoing 
experience implementing the Bukhara and Samarkand Water Supply Project.  The overall 
capacity to oversee safeguard management aspects needs be strengthened through regular on-site 
supervision of the central and local Project Coordination Units during the implementation of the 
proposed project.  This should include routine monitoring of the environmental and social 
aspects noted in the project EMP and in the technical specifications listed in the civil works 
contracts.  Capacity of the local and regional project entities will be built during project 
implementation and through regular Bank supervision missions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
In accordance with the World Bank OP/BP 4.01, the project is classified as category B for 
environmental assessment purposes because it involves mainly rehabilitation of existing water 
supply distribution systems. The environmental risks will be substantially mitigated through the 
preparation by the Borrower of an EIA including Environmental Management Plan (EMP) that 
will be discussed and disclosed in all project affected areas before appraisal. The EA should 
include an assessment of potential risks to quantity and quality of the groundwater supply which 
the project depends upon, and identify protection measures if required. Since a social assessment 
will be undertaken as well during project preparation, it is possible that soc
ial impact mitigation 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
measures be included with the relevant environmental measures in one document, Environmental 
and Social Management Plan (ESMP).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
It is unlikely that any cultural heritage resources will be affected by the proposed 
investments. The applicability of this safeguard policy will be analyzed during project 
preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project is not expected to involve land acquisition or cause major social impacts.  
However, the construction of new water supply infrastructure may require some displacement of 
agricultural or commercial activities.  Because the exact locations will be ascertained during 
implementation, the Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework that will be 
discussed and disclosed prior to project appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
It is likely that the project investments will not require increased demand for raw water 
although the supplies may shift somewhat in location through the development of new wells 
where this is economically advantageous. OP/BP 7.50 is triggered because the groundwater to be 
accessed is connected hydrologically with the Syr Darya river.  However, the team will seek an 
exception to the notification requirement on the grounds that this will be rehabilitation of an 
existing system.  It is expected that the amount of water used will decrease significantly through 
greater efficiency and better maintenance of the system.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/18/2010 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
-
Preparation and disclosure of EIA including Environmental Management Plan (possibl 
ESMP) before project appraisal;  
 
-
Preparation and disclosure of Land Acquisition Policy Framework before project 
appraisal;  
 
-
One public consultation when the draft EIA/EMP is available (before appraisal);  
 
-
Safeguard Consultation Meeting before QER/Decision meeting.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Takao Ikegami 
03/26/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
03/31/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala 
03/31/2009 
Comments:   
