Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2009 
Report No.:  AC4264
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P112719 
Project Name:  Uzbekistan Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage Project 
Task Team Leader:  Takao Ikegami 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 27, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (100%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
8.00
8.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to lessen the environmental impact from 
wastewater and improve the efficiency and financial and operational sustainability of 
wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1. Physical Investments (USD $43.10 million): This component will finance 
the rehabilitation of sewerage system with limited expansion of sewer system in Bukhara 
and Samarkand. Sub-Component 1.1: Bukhara Sewerage Project and Sub-Component 
1.2: Samarkand Sewerage Project  
 
Component 2. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (USD $1.03 million): 
This component will finance for both Bukhara and Samarkand: Sub-Component 2.1, the 
development of communications strategies and public awareness raising campaigns; Sub-
Component 2.2 staff training in utility management with an emphasis on improving the 
consumer orientation of the vodokanals; and, Sub-Component 2.3 establishments in both 
cities of a Pilot Supervisory Control And Data Acquisition (SCADA) and System 
database.  
Page  2
Component 3.  Feasibility Studies for Future Investment (USD $1.00 million): This 
component will finance consultant studies for future priority investment of the 
government in the water supply and sanitation sector in Uzbekistan.  
 
Component 4. Project Management (USD $1.37 million): Sub-component 4.1 Project 
Management will finance the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) as well as the two Project 
Implementation Units (PIU) in each of the Bukhara and Samarkand Regional vodokanals; 
and Sub-component 4.2 Auditing, will finance regular auditing of the Project.  
 
Component 5. Revolving Fund (USD $1.50 million): This component will finance the 
establishment and initial capitalization of Revolving Funds in the Bukhara and 
Samarkand regional vodokanals, respectively to extend medium-term financing of the 
sewerage connection costs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project investments are located in the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand, two 
historical cities in the Republic of Uzbekistan and two of the oldest tons in Central Asia. 
Rehabilitation of sewerage networks and partial expension of existing ones will take 
place in several parts of thee cities, including their historical centers. The city of 
Samarkand is located on the left bank part of Zaravshan River - international waterway 
that arises in Tajikistan and river connects from Bukhara to Amu Darya river through an 
irrigation channel. The city of Bukhara is located in Zaravshan valley in the lower part of 
Zaravshan river basin on the right bank.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSSD) 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is categorized as “B”, based on the fact that the project will involve 
rehabilitation of existing sewerage networks (with limited new expansion) and 
Page  3
wastewater treatment facilities (no construction of new facilities or changes of current 
rights-of-way are envisaged).  The project investments will trigger the World Bank 
Policies OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, the OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural 
Resources, the OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, the OP/BP 7.50 on Projects on 
International Waterways and the OP 17.50 on Disclosure Policy.  
 
Minor temporary environmental impacts typical for replacement of old pipes, instalation 
of new equipment in WWTP, and overall rehabilitation works for existing sewerage 
networks are expected during the proposed investments.  
 
There are historical monuments and cultural objects located within the project area. 
New network expansions will be selected in such way to minimize any encounter of 
surrounding landscape, existing city infrastructure or local businesses.  
 
OP/BP 7.50 -  This project qualifies for exception to notification of the riparian 
countries under para 7(a). A memo requesting such exception is prepared by team with 
the intention to be cleared by RVP by the end of appraisal. The proposed investments are 
mainly for rehabilitating and improving the existing wastewater schemes (total length 
about 54 km), which are not expected to change the quality or quantity of water in the 
nearby Zerafshan and Amu Darja Rivers. Some small expansion of the network (about 8 
km) is also envisaged under the project. The project will also finance rehabilitation of 
equipment in the existing wastewater treatment plants (without expanding these plants). 
These plants discharge their treated waters in channels that finally after several km reach 
the Zerafshan river (that flows further into the Amu Darja River at about 100Km from 
Bukhara and about 200 km from Samarkand respectively.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The proposed project is expected to have significant positive environmental impact due to 
improved coverage and efficiency of sewage services in the cities of Bukhara and 
Samarkand. It is also expected to contribute to decreased health risks associated with the 
current poor sanitation in the area.  Environmental impacts associated with partial 
reconstruction and limited expansion of existing sewerage networks as well as with 
rehabilitation of existing wastewater treatment plant pumping stations and related 
equipment (e.g., screens, aeration system, grit chambers) in these cities will be minor, 
short-term and easily identified and addressed through adequate mitigation measures 
using good construction management practices.  
 
Although the rehabilitation of the existing sewerage infrastructure is not expected to 
involve land acquisition, land will be needed for constructing the new sewage pumping 
station in Bukhara and the new sewerage pipelines in both cities.Although the exact 
locations will not be known until after the project is under implementation because the 
final designs are not yet in place, a reconnaisance of potential sites where the new 
construction is likely to occur suggests that there may be a need to displace small 
enterprises (for example, kiosks along the pipeline right of way) or possibly require 
Page  4
residents to cease using small plots of land to grow crops or trees.  Thus the project could 
lead to some loss of income for potentially affected parties.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Metal-, polyethylene- or fiberglassmade pipes can be used under construction of new and 
replacement of old sewer lines. Metal-made pipes are easily exposed to corrosion; they 
are unstable to impacts caused by aggressive groundwater less transportable and not 
convenient for assembly. Polyethylene and fiberglass made pipes are light and 
manufactured of various diameter and length, supplied with unions and fittings; they are 
suitable for transportation and assembly, not exposed to corrosion and also are durable 
with total life-span of 50 years.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The BVK and SVK in collaboration with local environmental and sanitary authorities, 
engineering and PIU consultants are in charge of administrating and coordinating the 
implementation of the project monitoring plan that will be identified in the EA analysis of 
mitigation measures. In addition to recommended preventive actions and mitigation 
measures, supported by environmental monitoring, the EMP will also endorse training of 
BVK and SVK staff and engineers in proper environment and water quality/quantity 
monitoring to address the potential threats to environment during the project 
implementation, and public awareness campaign to address public health and concerns 
from improper sanitation management.  In compliance with OP 4.12 (Involuntary 
Resettlement), the Government prepared and disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) that clarifies the policies, principles, and organizational arrangements for the 
delivery of compensation and other entitlements in the event that land acquisition and/or 
displacement occurs; the process by which these will be determined and delivered; 
possible grievance redress mechanisms; and independent monitoring of the 
implementation of a specific resettlement action plan (RAP) required for specific 
investments involving land acquisition.  The PCU will hire a consultant to carry out 
independent monitoring and assessment of the land acquisition process to determine if 
any land acquisition and provisions for compensation were carried out as planned.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The local authorities in Samarkand and Bukhara held stakeholder consultations on the 
draft RPF on April 21, 2009.  The consultations involved a broad range of stakeholders 
including representatives from relevant government departments, civil society, mahalla 
committees, and the local population.  The purpose of the consultations was to raise 
awareness on the part of the potentially affected people about the RPF and to solicit their 
feedback on the draft document.  The draft was reviewed by the team's Social 
Development Specialist and the ECA Regional Safeguard Coordinator, and has been 
made available for review by the potentially affected population at numerous sites in both 
Bukhara and Samarkand, including relevant government offices, water utilities, and 
Page  5
mahalla centers.  The draft RPF was also disclosed on the national authorities' website on 
April 21, 2009.  
 
The draft EAs were prepared by Consultants hired by Uzkomunhizmat Regions of 
Bukhara and Samarkand who also carried out public meetings on April 14, 2009 (in 
Bukhara) and April 16, 2009 (in Samarkand). Both meetings were attended by 
representatives of both municipalities, NGOs and project affecetd people. Minutes of the 
meetings were incorpotaed in the draft EIAs before their disclosure in country in Russian 
and at Infoshop in English on April 29, 2009. The draft EIA were reviewed by the Bank 
team's Enviromental Specialist towards Bank requirements before the launch of public 
meetings.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/17/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/21/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/22/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  6
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Takao Ikegami 
04/29/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruxandra Maria Floroiu 
04/29/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein 
04/29/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Wael Zakout 
05/03/2009 
Comments:   
