Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2008 
Report No.:  AC3566
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P109126 
Project Name:  Rural Enterprise Support Phase II 
Task Team Leader:  Dilshod Khidirov 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 21, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 12, 2008 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (40%);Agro-industry (35%);Crops (15%);Agricultural 
extension and research (10%) 
Theme:  Rural policies and institutions (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Small 
and medium enterprise support (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
67.96 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.80
6.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project will scale up the RESP, with the specific development objective of increasing 
the productivity and sustainability of agriculture and agribusiness, and reaching a vastly 
expanded project area. This will be achieved through the provision of financial, 
infrastructure and capacity building support to newly independent farmers situated in 
seven regions of the Republic of Uzbekistan (almost 70 percent of the country), and 
through rehabilitation of I&D infrastructure and strengthening of WUAs in seven districts 
within these seven regions.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component A. Rural Finance, to (i) enhance access to commercial financial services by 
the newly independent farmers and small/ medium size rural enterprises, and (ii) reduce 
the risks associated with lending to the agriculture sector by providing assistance to the 
potential borrowers on business planning and improving the sector-specific lending skills 
of the staff of the commercial lenders through training.  
 
Page  2
Component B. Irrigation and Drainage, to improve water management of irrigated areas 
in these seven districts, through investments in: (i) the rehabilitation of critical inter-farm 
and on-farm I&D infrastructure; (ii) strengthening WUAs and the institutional capacity to 
train and support WUAs to rehabilitate, operate and maintain on-farm I&D systems ; (iii) 
investments in demonstration plots in the district for applied modern irrigation 
techniques.  
 
Component C. Rural Training and Advisory Services, to (i) provide training and 
advisory services to newly independent farmers in various farm management skills (e.g. 
legal, accounting, business, technical aspects including agronomy, water management, 
pesticide handling, IPM etc); and (ii) increase availability of technical information and 
advisory services.  
 
Component D. Project Implementation, for overall management, monitoring and 
evaluation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will operate in seven regions (oblasts) of the country, covering approximately 
88 rural districts, or almost 70 percent of the Republic. In these seven regions (Andijan, 
Bukhara, Kashkadarya, Samarqand, Sirdarya, Tashkent and Ferghana), independent 
farmers will have access to the project credit lines and farm management training. 
Independent farmers and WUAs in the seven regions will also have access to capacity 
building and training for WUA operations and to a number of field demonstration plots 
for improved water management practices. In seven specific districts (raions) in the 
project regions, investments will be made in on-farm and inter-farm drainage and 
irrigation infrastructure, and also in capital equipment for their associated WUAs.  The 
seven districts are  
 
Ulugnar (Andijan), Alat (Bukhara), Mirishkor (Kashkadarya), Pasdargom (Samarqand), 
Bayavut (Sirdarya), Buka (Tashkent), and Yazyavan (Ferghana).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSSD) 
Ms Amy Evans (SASDN) 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
RESP-II is not expected to have any significant or irreversible environmental impacts, 
and is classified as Environmental Category "B".  The environmental impact of the 
proposed project is expected to mainly derive from the Irrigation and Drainage 
component and is expected to be small, but positive. The proposed works do not include 
any investment in infrastructure that would allow increased water abstraction from main 
sources. The Credit component will on-lend to farmers and rural business related to 
farming (including but not limited to provision of farming services such as farm 
mechanization, storage and distribution facilities, financing of agricultural inputs and 
investments in tree-crops). However, because these credit line investments are not pre-
identified, there could be unforeseen environmental impacts during implementation.  The 
RESP documentation includes an Environmental Management Framework (EMF), which 
provides a screening checklist and mitigating measures for the minor impacts that could 
occur as a result of the investments   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential indirect or long-term impacts could occur when the cumulative impacts are 
taken into account.  A loan under the credit component to a single farmer for equipment 
or purchase of basic farm inputs would present little environmental concern, and a large 
number of such small loans spread throughout the total project area would have a 
relatively negligible effect. However, if by chance a large number of requests for loans 
originated from the same area, and more importantly from the same watershed, the 
cumulative effect of all of the small (negligible) effects could be significant.  
 
The other aspect of cumulative effects of the overall project is the accumulation of a 
large number of very small impacts over the full range of project-funded activities. That 
is, the cumulative impact of all of the small impacts as a result of a number of loans for 
agricultural machinery purchase, added to the cumulative impact of all of the small 
impacts from the livestock purchase sub-projects, added to the cumulative impact of all 
of the small impacts from the non-farm enterprises. The overall cumulative impact could 
Page  4
be significant. Since many of these activities can have an effect on water quality, the 
overall effect on water quality could be significant.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EMF includes a framework for assessing and mitigating potential impacts that may 
occur during implementation of activities financed by rural credits and I&D 
rehabilitation.  For agricultural activities mitigation should not necessarily entail 
expensive inputs and much can be achieved towards the minimizing of residual impacts 
through applying efficient and safe farming techniques. One alternative considered was to 
allow financing of pesticides under the credit component. This alternative was rejected; 
however, in view of the history of pesticide use in Uzbekistan and the opportunity to have 
a
positive influence on sustainable agricultural practices, the project will support safe 
pesticide use and IPM under the rural advisory services component.  In order to prevent 
the risk of adverse cumulative environmental effects, a brief environmental analysis will 
be made of the portfolio every year by the RRA environmental specialist and reported to 
the relevant authorities in the Goskompriroda and the World Bank.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will benefit from the institutional capacity developed under RESP-1. To 
further ensure that environmental concerns are given proper consideration, the RRA will 
hire an environmental expert who can advise on environmental aspects of credit line to 
agribusinesses, as well as conduct overall proj
ect environmental monitoring. The PFIs’ 
staff will also receive training on conducting environmental due diligence.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The environmental assessment and draft EMF were discussed with local stakeholders at a 
workshop held in Tashkent on March 18, 2008. Stakeholder input to the environmental 
review and EMF were taken into account in the final documents. An extensive qualitative 
social assessment (SA) was conducted to better understand stakeholder expectations and 
to determine how the poorer farmers, the newly established private farmers and those 
relying on their home gardens can best benefit from the Project. The SA also aimed to 
elicit from farmers and other stakeholders the main obstacles to improving productivity 
and how to best remove them.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/13/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/18/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/04/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
 
 
Page  5
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Page  6
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dilshod Khidirov 
04/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Amy Evans 
04/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein 
04/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Janna Ryssakova 
04/02/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Holger A. Kray 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
