Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/01/2009 
Report No.:  AC4337
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P107845 
Project Name:  Basic Education Project - Phase Two 
Task Team Leader:  Maureen Anne McLaughlin 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 29, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 25, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Primary education (50%);Secondary education (20%);Pre-primary education 
(20%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme:  Education for all (P);Decentralization (S);Participation and civic engagement 
(S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
28.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.10 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
6.10 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the program and each of the phases is to continue supporting 
GoU’s efforts to improve effectiveness of teaching and learning through (1) targeted 
interventions in selected general secondary education schools and preschools in rural 
poor areas; (2) development of institutional capacity to assess student learning; and (3) 
adoption of predictable and transparent school budgets in selected oblasts.   
 
3. Project Description 
As BEP was originally designed as one loan, the design of BEP2, the second phase, is 
tightly tied to the first phase, building upon the capacity developed and lessons learned in 
implementation of the first phase to help the MoPE to implement new activities and 
foster broader education reform. The project combines targeted interventions to rural 
poor schools with interventions designed to make systemic change in the Uzbek 
education system.  
 
The second phase of the program continues to have five closely related components 
grouped in two main areas.  The first area consists of three interrelated components that 
Page  2
are all oriented toward the improvement of learning and teaching conditions in general 
secondary schools located in rural and poor areas (Components 1, 2 and 3).   Learning 
materials, teacher training, school board activation and school improvement grants are 
targeted to project schools. The second area consists of two components that are oriented 
towards improving the efficiency, management and monitoring capacity of the sector 
(Components 4 and 5).  These components develop a system of national assessment of 
student learning; build capacity for MoPE to monitor and evaluate; and implement and 
refine per capita financing of schools.  
 
Component 1: Providing Learning Materials and Resources for Grades Five through 
Nine of General Secondary Schools (Total estimated cost US$ 28.1 million of which IDA 
is US$ 22.4 million). The objective of this component is to improve the quality of 
teaching and learning in project schools through effective use learning materials and 
resources acquired under the project.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening School-Based Training for Teachers and Directors 
inPreschools and General Secondary Schools (Total estimated cost US$ 1.4 million of 
which IDA is US$ 1.3 million). The objective of this component is to change teaching in 
project schools and preschools towards a more interactive student-centered approach to 
improve learning outcomes.  
 
Component 3: Strengthening School Boards and Providing Competitive Grants to 
Selected Schools for School Improvement (Total estimated cost US$ 2.7 million of which 
IDA is US$ 2.7 million). The objective of this component is to increase further the 
involvement of school boards in project schools and provide competitive funding for 
school improvement.  
 
Component 4: Improving Education Financing, Budgeting and Management (Total 
estimated cost US$ 0.5 million of which IDA is US$ 0.4 million). The objective of this 
component is to improve education financing, budgeting and school management in 
selected oblasts.  
 
Component 5: Supporting Project Management and Results Management (Total 
estimated cost US$ 1.5 million of which IDA is US$ 1.2 million). The objective of this 
component is to implement national assessment of student learning and evaluate project 
effectiveness.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
n/a   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is Category C as the school grants under Component 3 will not include any 
civil works.  An environmental action plan will not be required.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
n/a   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
n/a   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Page  4
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
n/a   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maureen Anne McLaughlin 
04/30/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mamta Murthi 
05/01/2009 
Comments:   
