Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/09/2009 
Report No.:  AC4301
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P110538 
Project Name:    Ferghana Valley Water Resources Management Phase-I Project 
Task Team Leader:  Mahwash Wasiq 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 9, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (34%);Other rural development (33%);Participation 
and civic engagement (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
69.07 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
14.89
14.89 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives are to improve agricultural production in areas 
affected by water-logging, and reduce damage to housing and infrastructure from rising 
ground water levels and salinity in the project areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
Project Description  
 
The project is part of a broader Ferghana Valley Water Resource Management Regional 
Program of 15-20 years.  It is designed to address the overall constraints to Uzbekistan's 
agricultural production, damages to public and private infrastructure, threats to the 
environment and public health due to rising groundwater levels in the project area, and 
weak institutional and human resource capacity in both public and private sectors for 
efficient water resources management. It has three components:  
 
Component A: Improvement of Irrigation and Drainage Network (Total Cost US$ 75.62 
Million). This component has six sub-components. It will finance improvements in the 
surface drainage network and irrigation system and the rehabilitation/installation of 
vertical drainage networks.  
Page  2
Component B:  Institutional Strengthening and Agricultural Development Support 
(Total Cost US$3.92 million). This component has three sub-components.  It will provide 
support for institutional strengthening to public and private institutions/organizations 
involved in the enhancement of water resources management and agriculture production 
in the project area.  
 
Component C:  Project Management, Audit, and Monitoring and Evaluation of the 
Project Impact (Total Cost US$4. 43 million). This component through four sub-
components would support operational expenditures for: project management, 
consultancy services, auditing project expenditures, M&E of project impacts, and 
preparation of a future project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Ferghana Valley (FV) is a large, broad-bottomed valley surrounded by the foothills 
of the western Tien Shen and Pamir mountains, which are in turn located at the western 
end of the Himalayas. The valley is almost totally encircled by substantial mountains, 
which rise to about 4,560 meters, with only a narrow mouth to the west through which 
the Syr Darya drains the area, first into Tajikistan, and then across the Uzbek and Kazakh 
steppes to discharge into the northern Aral Sea.  
 
The main topographical features of the FV floor within Uzbekistan are:  
 
•
The valley floor is relatively flat and has a general slope from east to west. 
Elevation in eastern Andijan varies from 400 to 500 m. Similarly, in the southern part of 
the study area elevations range from above 500 m along the southern border with the 
Kyrgyz Republic to below 400 m in the northern part of this area. In this part of the study 
area, the surface gradient declines gradually from north to south with an average of about 
0.005 (that is, 5 m/km).  
 
•
Particularly flat areas are associated with the naturally poorly-drained lands in the 
centre of the valley.  
 
•
The valley floor contrasts with the rising slopes to the foothills (adirs) which 
surround the valley on all sides except to the west.  
 
•
The outwash fans of the Sokh and Altiariksai rivers are key features.  
 
The project area is located in the in the bottom of the valley, the area associated with 
naturally poorly drained lands and which has been developed during the Soviet times as 
irrigated area.  Therefore, the major problems in the project area are the high ground 
water table, destruction of private and public infrastructure, soil salinity resulting in lower 
yields and therefore lower incomes for the people living in the area.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein (ECSSD) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project triggers the Bank's safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment 
(O.P 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (4.12), and Projects on International Waterways 
(OP 7.50).  
 
Environmental Assessment (O.P 4.01).  The EA, completed in March 2009, confirmed 
the project’s initial Category “B” classification finding that the overall environmental 
impact of the project is expected to be positive, with no significant, irreversible, 
cumulative or long-term adverse impacts anticipated.  Project interventions targeting the 
drainage system and the rehabilitation works are expected to lead to improved drainage 
and reduced waterlogging and salinization in the project areas and, therefore, are 
considered positive environmental impacts.  Health and sanitation conditions are 
expected to improve as well. The drainage-related infrastructure improvements are 
expected to cause temporary and local disruption as a result of the construction activities. 
These may include temporary impacts due to the construction of access roads (increased 
traffic, dust, noise, and vibrations), pollution of soil and waters near worker camps and 
construction sites, dumping of waste materials, and health and safety problems.  
Appropriate construction safeguards can largely mitigate these negative environmental 
impacts.  Thus the environmental benefits of the project’s interventions are expected to 
outweigh any potential adverse impacts.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).  The proposed project triggers the Bank's policy on 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) because implementation will require:  (a) the 
permanent acquisition of 42 hectares of agricultural land currently leased by 37 farmers 
in order to construct 25 kilometers of new Interceptor Drains (IDs); (b) temporary land 
acquisition and economic displacement due to the rehabilitation of existing surface and 
sub-surface drains; and (c) limited economic impacts for individuals who planted trees 
illegally along roadways, canals, and collector drains, including special protection and 
sanitary zones.  
 
Page  4
Projects on International Waterways (OP 7.50). The project is located in the Syr Darya 
River Basin and its proposed interventions involve irrigation and drainage systems that 
draw water from and discharge drainage into several international waterways that 
Uzbekistan shares with its riparian neighbors (i.e. Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, and 
Tajikistan). The project
’s interventions are largely rehabilitation of existing irrigation and 
drainage systems and thus will not involve any enlargement of existing irrigation systems 
or development of any new irrigation areas. Any potential changes in water flow or 
deterioration in water quality during construction works will be mitigated through 
implementation of the EA/EMP. For this reason, the project is expected to have no 
negative impact on the quantity or quality of water flows in the international waterways 
involved in the Syr Darya River Basin. Nevertheless, because of initial and temporary 
increases in drainage flows as the area being drained during project implementation, the 
Bank requested the GOU to comply with the notification requirement contained in OP 7. 
50 and inform the Governments of Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, and Tajikistan of 
the proposed project and its potential impacts on international waterways. The GOU sent 
the notification letter on 26 February, 2009.  
 
Important to note that the project’s infrastructure interventions in the rehabilitation and 
modernization of the irrigation and drainage (I&D) systems are not expected to involve 
any significant or irreversible adverse environmental impacts.   On the contrary, the 
project is expected to reverse the environmental and land degradation caused by 
mismanagement of land and water resources and inadequate drainage and hence will have 
an overall positive environmental impact.  Furthermore, the project supports an 
environmental management and mitigation program for controlling waterlogging and soil 
salinization by improving the drainage system and water use efficiency on the irrigated 
land. The project infrastructure works mostly concern the rehabilitation of the existing 
drainage system.  Although the project will not involve any physical resettlement of 
people, the construction of 25 kilometers of new interceptor drains will require 
permanent acquisition of about 42 hectares from 37 leasehold farmers.  During the 
rehabilitation of the existing I&D infrastructure, there will be additional temporary 
impacts on farmers with standing crops and trees.  During consultations, however, these 
farmers did not object to losing the land as long as they would receive improved I&D 
infrastructure and services and the State Order for production of cotton and wheat on 
those lands would be removed.  Nonetheless, the provisions of the RAP ensures that these 
farmers will also receive compensation for lost land and income.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
There are no permanent long-term negative impacts on the environment due to the 
project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project was designed to minimize any negative environmental impacts and/or 
economic displacement.  Therefore, there are no alternatives that would provide these 
benefits and totally avoid any impacts.   
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to comply with the Bank's safeguard policies, the Government of Uzbekistan 
prepared an Environmental Assessment, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and a 
Specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the 37 farmers who will be losing land as a 
result of construction of interceptor drains.  Details are as follow:  
 
(a)  In complying with OP 4.01 and the relevant environmental requirements of 
Uzbekistan (i.e. state ecological expertise), the GOU contracted a team of national and 
international consultants to prepare an environmental assessment (EA) for the project, 
including elaboration of an environmental management plan (EMP). This action was 
taken to ensure that any potential adverse environmental impacts resulting from project 
interventions would be prevented or minimized through the application of the appropriate 
preventive actions or mitigation measures as identified in the EA and implemented 
according to the EMP. The EA/EMP includes a thorough analysis of the relevant policy, 
legal, and institutional framework; a detailed presentation of the existing environmental 
conditions in the project areas; an assessment of the expected positive and negative 
environmental impacts; environmental mitigation, management, and monitoring plans 
identifying measures to address potential adverse impacts and monitor environmental 
conditions in the project areas; and a training program to build the necessary capacity to 
properly implement these measures.  
 
(b) In accordance with OP 4.12 and the laws of Uzbekistan, the GOU prepared a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).The 
RPF sets out the policies and procedures that the government will apply in acquiring the 
land needed for constructing new interceptor drains or rehabilitating existing 
infrastructure, and compensating the affected parties when the exact locations and extent 
of impacts are known.  The specific RAP takes into account the findings of the 
comprehensive socioeconomic census of the 37 leasehold farms and sets out the 
provisions for compensating them when their land is acquired to allow construction of the 
new IDs.  As indicated in the RPF, the acquisition of land for the proposed IDs will not 
require the physical resettlement of any local farmers, nor will it result in any significant 
loss of income or access to land or other natural resources in the project areas.  The 
potentially-affected farmers have been notified and are in full agreement with the 
arrangements under the RAP for compensation for their land for this purpose.  
 
(c) 
Because of initial and temporary increases in drainage flows as the area being 
drained during project implementation, the Bank requested the GOU to comply with the 
notification requirement contained in OP 7. 50 and inform the Governments of 
Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, and Tajikistan of the proposed project and its potential 
impacts on international waterways. The GOU sent the notification letter on 26 February, 
2009.   
 
Page  6
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The government carried out a comprehensive social assessment (SA) and environmental 
assessment (EA) in two phases, the first during the project pre-feasibility study and the 
second during the final feasibility and design phase.  Both phases involved extensive 
consultations with the key stakeholders, which include leasehold farmers, dehkhan 
farmers, homeowners and other residents of towns and settlements, local governments, 
and owners of local enterprises.  
 
The first phase of the SA involved a household survey and focus group discussions with 
stakeholders covering the entire project area, and a stakeholder workshop in Tashkent in 
November 2007.  The second stage of the assessment involved the preparation of a 
Resettlement Policy Framework, which incorporated input from the phase one SA 
activities, and a Specific RAP.  The latter involved a full census of the 37 farmers that 
would be affected by the construction of new IDs.   The content of the document was 
discussed extensively with all potentially affected parties (PAPs) and governmental 
stakeholders in all 3 project raions.  A consultation workshop also was held on February 
12, 2009 in Ferghana to discuss the draft RPF and RAP. The RPF and specific RAP have 
been disclosed in the country and in the Infoshop.  On June 5, 2009, a consultation on the 
final RAP will be carried out with the 37 farmers that will be affected by the project.  
 
The framework EA carried out in 2007 during the pre-feasibility study stage was 
discussed at a stakeholder meeting in November 2007 in Tashkent.  During the feasibility 
and detailed design stage, the EA was amended and discussed with a large group 
(approximately 90) stakeholders at the February 12, 2009 stakeholder workshop in 
Ferghana.    The final EA took into account the comments received.  
 
The RPF, RAP, and EA will be disclosed in the appropriate local website, local 
newspapers and other media, and made available at relevant local government offices 
(hokimiyats, Department of Cadastre, Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources, State 
Committee for Nature Protection), mahalla committee centers, water user association 
offices).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/28/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/20/2009 
 
Page  7
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/22/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/28/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
N/A 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
Page  8
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mahwash Wasiq 
06/04/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl 
05/29/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janis D. Bernstein 
06/02/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
06/04/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Dina Umali-Deininger 
06/09/2009 
Comments:   
