Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/20/2008 
Report No.:  AC3792
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P088759 
Project Name:  Financial Sector Modernization and Information System 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaofeng Hua 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 30, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Standards and financial reporting (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.01 
 
JAPAN: Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants 
0.83 
 Financing 
Gap 
10.99
11.83 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project is to assist the State Bank of Vietnam (SBV), the Credit Information Center 
(CIC) and Deposit Insurance of Vietnam (DIV) to improve compliance with selected key 
international standards in the delivery of their main functions in the context of 
accelerated central bank reforms and banking sector development.   
 
3. Project Description 
Lending instrument:  The lending instrument will be a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) to 
be funded by an IDA credit of US$60 million (SDR 36.82 million), which accounts for 
84 percent of the total estimated Project cost (US$71.8 million). Standard IDA terms for 
Vietnam will apply.  
 
Project components:  The Project will have three beneficiaries: the SBV, the CIC and 
DIV.  To support these entities address the identified functional, institutional and 
technology weaknesses in information management and disclosure, there will be two 
main streams of activities: (a) technical assistance programs for functional strengthening, 
capacity building and support for business process re-engineering; and (b) design and 
Page  2
implementation of a centralized ICT architecture for data management, internal resource 
planning and risk control.  These activities are grouped in eight components under three 
parts: Part I 
–
Modernizing the SBV; Part II – Strengthening the CIC; and Part III – 
Enhancing DIV.  The main delivery instruments are short- and longer-term technical 
advice, hands-on as well as classroom-based training, detailed system design, and supply 
and installation of ICT packages.  
 
SBV Component 1 - Functional Strengthening and Business Re-engineering is to assist 
the SBV to develop a policy and institutional framework and improve capabilities of the 
information management and informed decision making. There are five subcomponents: 
Component 1A – Improving Data Input Quality; Component 1B – Strengthening Policy 
and Supervisory Functions; Component 1C – Developing Central Bank Financial 
Reporting; and Component 1D – Enhancing Internal Resource Management and Control.  
 
SBV Component 2 - ICT Platform Development is to assist the SBV to design and build 
a
centralized ICT platform based on international IT standards in order to support the 
SBV’s evolving role as a central bank, taking into account relevant international best 
practices, while keeping in mind all critical Vietnamese realities. Another critical part of 
the new ICT platform is an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system for internal 
resource management and risk control.  
 
SBV Component 3 – Project Implementation Management is to assist the SBV to 
manage project implementation, ensure compliance of Bank guidelines for procurement 
and financial management contract implementations are on schedule and ensure good 
communications between the multiple parties.  
 
CIC Component 1 – Business Process Re-engineering is to assist the CIC to re-engineer 
the processes for its core businesses. More specifically, this component will help the CIC 
to: (a) streamline credit information reporting requirements/templates, which will bring 
the scope and depth of credit registration more in line with the PCR of OECD countries; 
(b) provide statistical analysis on development in the credit market for the SBV and 
extenders of credit; (c) design new business processes and specify user needs; and (d) 
apply new processes and tools.  
 
CIC Component 2 – ICT Capacity Development is to assist the CIC to acquire and 
install centralized data management systems for the collection, storage, processing, 
analysis and sharing of credit information.  The proposed new system architecture is 
similar to that proposed for the SBV, although the CIC data warehouse can be considered 
as an enhanced database.  In addition, there will be no stand-alone ERP.  
 
DIV Component 1 – Business Process Re-engineering is to assist the DIV to re-engineer 
business processes and provide systematic training to its management and staff.  More 
specifically, this component will assist DIV to develop and use new business processes, 
related operational policies and procedures for: (a) assessment and projection of the 
DIV’s risk exposures to insured institutions; (b) financial assistance and payouts of PCFs 
and larger insured institutions; and (c) DIV’s internal resource planning and management.  
Page  3
DIV Component 2 
–
ICT Platform Development is to assist the DIV to build the 
technology capacity to support its current and future role.  The main expected results 
include: (a) a centralized core data warehouse for data generated by DIV’s own activities; 
(b) access to SBV’s data warehouse to obtain information from the SBV’s credit 
institutions reporting regime and financial markets; and (c) a number of satellite risk 
management systems with modern database interrogation tools; (d) an ERP system to 
support the implementation of the DIV’s new customer-centric business model; and (e) 
system design, procurement and implementation documents.  
 
DIV Component 3 - Project Implementation Management is to assist the DIV to: a) 
manage the implementation of the DIV part of the Project; b) to ensure compliance with 
Bank guidelines for procurement and financial management; c) contract implementations 
are on schedule and; d) there is good communication between the management and the 
project task teams regarding project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The activities under the Project will mainly take place at the premises of the three 
Beneficiaries, including their head offices in Hanoi and large branches in other main 
cities of Vietnam.  There will be no investment in construction, nor is there need for land 
acquisition.  Therefore no safeguard policies will be triggered.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Surhid P. Gautam (EAPCO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  5
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaofeng Hua 
07/22/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Tunc Tahsin Uyanik 
07/23/2008 
Comments:  I clear. 
