Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4236 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/23/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P115897 
Project Name: VN Urban Upgrading Project Additional Finance 
Task Team Leader: Dean A. Cira 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 23, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASVS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (80%);Housing finance and real estate markets (10%);Housing 
construction (5%);Sub-national government administration (5%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S);Personal and property rights (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
160.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
250.00
250.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project objective is the same as the Parent Project:  to alleviate poverty in urban areas by 
improving the environmental living conditions of the urban poor through the use of participatory 
planning methods and the promotion of more inclusive and pro-poor urban planning processes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will improve urban environmental living conditions through the improved access and 
expansion of urban infrastructure, mainly waste water collection, storm water drainage, access 
roads and paving, water supply, public lighting and community facilities, the benefits of which 
would accrue to approximately two million people, including approximately 1,000,000 low-
income urban residents in the cities of Ho Chi Minh, Can Tho, Nam Dinh and Hai Phong.  It will 
also enable the future scaling-up of the poverty targeted urban upgrading program to additional 
cities through the development of the National Urban Upgrading Program.  
 
The Project Components in the Parent Project will remain the same in the Additional Financing.  
Page  2
Component 1, Tertiary Infrastructure Upgrading and Services Improvements:  In each area a 
multi-sector package of tertiary infrastructure and service improvements will be provided.  This 
will include a combination of water supply, drainage, paved access roads, electricity, 
environmental sanitation and solid waste management.  Also included will be the rehabilitation 
of markets, public toilets, and health and education facilities.  These investments will take place 
in low-income communities.  
 
Component 2, Complementary Primary and Secondary Infrastructure:  This will include the 
improvement of primary and secondary infrastructure necessary to complement the tertiary 
infrastructure improvements.  Investments will mainly consist of improvements in drainage 
networks, pumping stations, road and bridge improvements and water supply.  
 
Component 3, Resettlement Housing:  An estimated 5,300 households in the Project (AF and 
Parent) will be fully or partially affected households.  Many of these households will be provided 
with resettlement housing, which will be financed under the Project.  
 
Component 4, Land and Housing Management:  This component will provide technical 
assistance and training for strengthening the administration of land use certificates, including 
updating information systems, updating cadastral maps, supporting institutional and 
organizational reforms and simplifying registration and certificate issuances processes.  
 
Component 5, Housing Improvement Loan Program:  This component will provide micro credit 
loans to low-income households for housing improvements.  
 
Component 6, this component will provide technical assistance to the decentralized project 
management units in all aspects of program implementation.  
 
Component 7, National Urban Upgrading:  This component will focus on development of a 
National Urban Upgrading Program that focuses on the scaling-up of the upgrading principles to 
all relevant cities in Vietnam. In addition, this component will provide oversight and monitoring 
of the impacts of the upgrading process.  
 
The Parent Project is designed such that each of the four cities implements its own investment 
program following the decentralization policies of the Government of Vietnam.  As such, the 
Project can be viewed as four individual projects in one program, plus a national component 
implemented by the Ministry of Construction.  The IDA Credit is allocated among the four cities: 
Can Tho; Hai Phong; Ho Chi Minh; and Nam Dinh.  The National Urban Upgrading Component, 
to date, is financed 100% from the parallel PHRD Grant. The same implementing agencies will 
be responsible for the implementation of the additional financing  
 
The Additional Financing will cover the cost overruns for the infrastructure components (1, 2 
and 3) in Nam Dinh, Hai Phong and Can Tho.  It will also cover the rehabilitation of the Tan Hoa 
–
Lo Gom Canal improvement sub-project in Ho ChiMinh City which is a new activity in Ho 
Chi Minh City under component 2.  This is the only new activity that will be financed from IDA 
funds under the additional financing, and comprises 75% of the additional financing.  
Page  3
HCMC, Tan Hoa 
–
Lo Gom Canal Improvement:  The primary aim of the Tan Hoa – LoaGom 
canal upgrading sub-project is to improve drainage performance and environmental conditions of 
the basin.  The sub-project will include:  (i) canal dredging (total length of the canal, 4,262 
meters and 415,000 cubic meters of sludge); (ii) rehabilitation of the Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal 
(including sloped, retaining wall, and box culvert); and (iii) construction of canal roads, 
embankments, bridges, pedestrian paths and public green spaces, combined storm overflows 
(CSOs) and utility services diversions.  
 
A
small amount of the additional financing will also be used for the National Urban Upgrading 
component.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will be carried out in the cities of Ho Chi Minh, Can Tho, Hai Phong and Nam Dinh 
in Vietnam.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Environmental Management Plans (EMP), Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) and 
Environmental Management Frameworks (EMF) are being followed and implemented 
appropriately in the Parent Project and the Parent Project is considered to be in compliance with 
safeguard provisions, with immediate follow-up actions taken when issues of compliance have 
arisen.  
 
The EMF outlines the processes, roles and responsibilities for the monitoring of environmental 
management.  The Resettlement Framework specifies this for resettlement activities.  These 
procedures are being followed.  Additionally it is noted that:  
 
•
All PMUs are responsible for ensuring the effective preparation, implementation and 
monitoring of the EIA, EMP, RAP and EMF. All PMUs are assessed to have the capacity to 
fulfill this responsibility with appropriate staff assigned to this task;  
 
•
The PMUs are assisted by third party, specialist consultants in carrying out these 
responsibilities through the technical assistance activities of the Project;  
 
•
PMU staff is provided with training in safeguards monitoring and supervision under 
Component 6 of the project;  
 
•
Independent Monitoring Consultants conduct quarterly (in the case of environment) and 
bi-annual (in the case of Resettlement) monitoring assessments and make reports to the World 
Bank and PMU;  
 
•
The Bank conducts at least two full supervision missions annually that include the full 
safeguards team, • 
Regular consultations between the PMU and the safeguards specialists are 
conducted as needed.  
 
The capacity is considered to be sufficient for the Additional Financing based on experience to 
date under the Parent Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  4
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The primary environmental impacts will be associated with the total volume of dredged 
material that will be removed from the canal bottom and banks, and its final disposition resulting 
from the improvement of the Tan Hoa - Lo Gom canal sub-project in Ho Chi Minh City.  
Additional impacts will include those generally associated with the construction phase and will 
be mitigated by measures specified in the Environmental Management Plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
This was triggered under the parent project for Can Tho, but is not triggered as part of the 
Additional Financing.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
For the additional financing the improvement of the Tan Hoa - Lo Gom canal there will be a 
total of 1,800 partially and fully affected households.  A Resettlement Action Plan for this sub-
project is being prepared.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/24/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The additional financing is to be divided into two parts:  (i) funding gap for existing sub-
project; and (ii) new activities.  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
Existing Sub-Project:  In Can Tho, Nam Dinh and Hai Phong, the additional financing will 
cover a funding short-fall for activities already part of the original project design.  For these 
components, the existing safeguards review and clearance procedures are being followed.  
The review, clearance and disclosure of the environmental impact assessments, resettlement 
action plans and community environmental management plans for these sub-projects are in 
draft form and are being finalized. Although not required for appraisal of the additional 
financing, they are expected to be completed before Project appraisal.  
 
New Activities:  For the Tan Hoa - Loa Gom canal improvement project, the preliminary 
EIA and RAP will be available in early March, with the final drafts to be available for 
disclosure and final approval at the end of March, 2009, prior to the appraisal of the 
Additional Financing.  This is requirement for the appraisal of the additional financing as this 
is a new activity.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dean A. Cira 
03/04/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/19/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
03/18/2009 
Comments:   
