Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2020 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/05/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P094055 
Project Name: VN-Local  Development Investment (LDIFP) 
Task Team Leader: Kamran M. Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 27, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASVS 
Lending Instrument: Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Municipal finance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
190.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
90.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Local Development Investment Fund Project (LDIFP) aims to improve effectiveness of 
LDIFs in leveraging private sector financing for municipal infrastructure, and to strengthen 
LDIFs# financial, technical, and social and environmental safeguards management capability, 
consistent with operational framework as instructed and mandated by the Project Manual.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project consists of an Investment Capital component and a Project Management Support 
component for the Project Management Unit of the Ministry of Finance.  
 
A
Qualification process, approved by MOF, will be conducted annually to determine which 
LDIFs will be eligible for funding.  The qualification criteria are to ensure the financial, 
operational, and institutional soundness of LDIFs before they can use ODA funds to invest in 
subprojects.  The assessment of institutional capacity vis-
à-vis safeguards included criteria to 
ensure that the qualified LDIFs had adequate staff with safeguards management skills, and 
Page  2
adequate institutional experience involving projects that required management of safeguards 
related risks.  The LDIFs that have qualified for Year-1 funding are:  
 
#
Ho Chi Minh City Investment Fund for Urban Development (HIFU)  
 
#
Hanoi City Development Investment Fund (HANIF)  
 
#
Dong Nai Development Investment Fund (DNIF)  
 
#
Binh Duong Development Investment Fund (BDIF)  
 
#
Tien Giang Development Investment Fund (TGIF)  
 
In addition, the following funds are conditionally qualified, with funding pending fulfillment of 
outstanding requirements.  
 
#
Da Nang Local Investment Fund (DAIF)  
 
#
Dak Lak Local Investment Fund (DLIF)  
 
#
Dong Thap Local Investment Fund (DTIF)  
 
#
Khanh Hoa Local Investment Fund (KHIF)  
 
The annual qualification exercise will also identify that other LDIFs can be qualified if they 
improve their performance, and similarly, currently qualified LDIFs can be disqualified if they 
are unable to perform according to the qualification criteria.  
 
Component 1: Investment Capital (IDA US$ 185 million): A line of credit will be provided to 
the Ministry of Finance for its Program Management Unit to manage and on-lend to LDIFs for 
investment in cost-recovery-oriented municipal infrastructure investments in partnership with the 
private sector.  The Project Manual contains Guidelines on Project Preparation and Appraisal, 
Safeguards, Monitoring, Capital Mobilization, Private Sector Participation, and Corporate 
Governance.  
 
The capital will be used to invest in municipal infrastructure, including in urban transportation, 
housing, public health, water, electricity, education, and municipal infrastructure associated with 
industrial zones.  A pipeline for possible subprojects has been identified for the five years of 
LDIFP. The possible  subprojects to be prepared and in the first year of Project implementation 
include a water-supply system, school, and underground power line.  
 
Component 2: Project Management Support (IDA US$ 5 million): The PMU of the MOF will 
be the agency responsible for monitoring, regulating, and supervising the LDIFs and the 
performance of LDIFP overall.  The PMU will receive support in the development of its 
regulatory and institutional capacity in the areas of: establishment, capacity building, and 
operational support of the PMU organization; monitoring and qualification of LDIFs; monitoring 
of LDIFs# safeguards compliance; analysis of LDIF investment in subprojects; development of 
information systems; and auditing of PMU and LDIFs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is nationwide and fund operations and investments in subprojects will cover the 
provinces in which LDIFs operate.  It is likely that most of the subprojects will be located in 
urban areas, by private sector, so involuntary resettlement and ethnic minority issues would 
likely not occur, or the level of impact would likely be insignificant.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To be determined and strengthened during project preparation/implementation.  
Page  3
The yes/no responses in the above table refer to the safeguards expected to be triggered for 
most of the subprojects to be financed under the line of credit.  Screening mechanisms as 
specified in the Safeguards Guidelines will be applied to investment pipeline subprojects in 
determining safeguard triggers for OP 4.04, 4.09, 4.10, 4.11, and 4.36. An exclusion list 
identifies at screening the types of projects, which would trigger OPs 4.04, 4.09, 4.10, 4.11, or 
4.36, to be excluded from LDIFP financing, or to require prior review and approval by the Bank.  
 
The safeguards screening category is S2, which means one or more safeguard policies are 
triggered but impacts are limited and technically/institutionally manageable.  The Project is 
determined to be an environmental screening category FI.Subprojects# environmental screening 
categories will vary.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The yes/no responses in the above table refer to the safeguards expected to be triggered for 
most of the subprojects to be financed under the line of credit.  Screening mechanisms as 
specified in the Safeguards Guidelines will be applied to investment pipeline subprojects in 
determining safeguard triggers for OP 4.04, 4.09, 4.10, 4.11, and 4.36. An exclusion list 
identifies at screening the types of projects, which would trigger OPs 4.04, 4.09, 4.10, 4.11, or 
4.36, to be excluded from LDIFP financing, or to require prior review and approval by the Bank.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The safeguards screening category is S2, which means one or more safeguard policies are 
triggered but impacts are limited and technically/institutionally manageable.  The Project is 
determined to be an environmental screening category FI.Subprojects# environmental screening 
categories will vary.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/01/2009 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguards related studies will be undertaken as part of project preparation.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kamran M. Khan 
05/31/2006 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/04/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
05/04/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
