Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/15/2009 
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P094055 
Project Name:  VN-Local  Development Investment (LDIFP) 
Task Team Leader:  Kamran M. Khan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (100%) 
Theme:  Municipal finance (100%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
190.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
90.00
90.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Local Development Investment Fund Project (LDIFP) aims to improve effectiveness 
of LDIFs in leveraging private sector financing for municipal infrastructure, and to 
strengthen LDIFs' financial, technical, and social and environmental safeguards 
management capability, consistent with operational framework as instructed and 
mandated by the Project Manual.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of an Investment Capital component and a Project Management 
Support component for the Project Management Unit of the Ministry of Finance.  
 
A
Qualification process, approved by MOF, will be conducted annually to determine 
which LDIFs will be eligible for funding.  The qualification criteria are to ensure the 
financial, operational, and institutional soundness of LDIFs before they can use ODA 
funds to invest in subprojects.  The assessment of institutional capacity vis-
à-vis 
safeguards included criteria to ensure that the qualified LDIFs had adequate staff with 
safeguards management skills, and adequate institutional experience involving projects 
48617
Page  2
that required management of safeguards related risks.  The LDIFs that have qualified for 
Year-1 funding are:  
 
-
Ho Chi Minh City Investment Fund for Urban Development (HIFU)  
 
-
Hanoi City Development Investment Fund (HANIF)  
 
-
Dong Nai Development Investment Fund (DNIF)  
 
-
Binh Duong Development Investment Fund (BDIF)  
 
-
Tien Giang Development Investment Fund (TGIF)  
 
In addition, the following funds are conditionally qualified, with funding pending 
fulfillment of outstanding requirements.  
 
-
Da Nang Local Investment Fund (DAIF)  
 
-
Dak Lak Local Investment Fund (DLIF)  
 
-
Dong Thap Local Investment Fund (DTIF)  
 
-
Khanh Hoa Local Investment Fund (KHIF)  
 
The annual qualification exercise will also identify that other LDIFs can be qualified if 
they improve their performance, and similarly, currently qualified LDIFs can be 
disqualified if they are unable to perform according to the qualification criteria.  
 
Component 1: Investment Capital (IDA US$ 185 million): A line of credit will be 
provided to the Ministry of Finance for its Program Management Unit to manage and on-
lend to LDIFs for investment in cost-recovery-oriented municipal infrastructure 
investments in partnership with the private sector.  The Project Manual contains 
Guidelines on Project Preparation and Appraisal, Safeguards, Monitoring, Capital 
Mobilization, Private Sector Participation, and Corporate Governance.  
 
The capital will be used to invest in municipal infrastructure, including in urban 
transportation, housing, public health, water, electricity, education, and municipal 
infrastructure associated with industrial zones.  A pipeline for possible subprojects has 
been identified for the five years of LDIFP. The possible subprojects to be prepared and 
in the first year of Project implementation include a water-supply system, school, and 
underground power line.  
 
Component 2: Project Management Support (IDA US$ 5 million): The PMU of the 
MOF will be the agency responsible for monitoring, regulating, and supervising the 
LDIFs and the performance of LDIFP overall.  The PMU will receive support in the 
development of its regulatory and institutional capacity in the areas of: establishment, 
capacity building, and operational support of the PMU organization; monitoring and 
qualification of LDIFs; monitoring of LDIFs' safeguards compliance; analysis of LDIF 
investment in subprojects; development of information systems; and auditing of PMU 
and LDIFs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is nationwide and will fund operations and investments in subprojects in the 
provinces in which LDIFs operate.  It is likely that most of the subprojects will be located 
in urban areas, by the private sector, so involuntary resettlement and ethnic minority 
issues would likely not occur.  
Page  3
The yes/no responses in the table for Safeguards Policies Triggered (Item 6.) refer to the 
safeguards expected to be triggered for most of the subprojects to be financed under the 
line of credit.  Screening mechanisms as specified in the Safeguards Guidelines will be 
applied to exclude subprojects that will have potential impacts on Natural Habitats, Pest 
Management, Indigenous Peoples, Physical Cultural Resources, and Forests.  
 
The Project is determined to be an environmental screening category FI.  Subprojects' 
environmental screening categories will vary.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment):  
 
The Project is classified as Category FI.  The complexity of subprojects evaluated for 
investment is varied.  All subprojects will need to pass initial review and screening 
against the GOV and WB/exclusion lists.  Project categorization to meet GOV 
environmental regulations and WB environmental safeguards will be determined for each 
subproject based on known and potential environmental impacts.  The LDIFP is expected 
to have mostly positive environmental and public health impacts contributing to 
improvement of the cities' infrastructure, safe water supply, solid waste management, 
efficient and safer transport systems, health care and on-site sanitation services. Adverse 
impacts could arise through: (a) temporary pollution (dust, noise, vibration, surface run-
off), excavation work, and disturbances to local transport, waterways or drainage 
systems, that could occur during construction; (b) wastewater discharge and disposal of 
sludge from the waste treatment plants; (c) disposal of dredged/excavated material; and 
(d) transportation and disposal of solid waste in the landfill sites.  
 
Page  4
Environmental review of the year 1 subprojects:  
 
Three subprojects have been identified and will be prepared during the first year of 
implementation under the LDIFP.  All necessary safeguards instruments will be prepared 
and necessary assessments conducted in accordance with the Project Manual. Including 
the Safeguards Guidelines, before IDA credit is released for these and any other 
subprojects in the first year of implementation.  All subprojects prepared in the first year 
of Project implementation will require prior review and approval by the Bank. In 
addition, the first subproject prepared by each qualified LDIF (regardless of the year in 
which subproject is prepared) will be require prior review and approval by the Bank.  
 
The three subprojects in Year 1 would have overall positive environmental and social 
impacts by better supply of clean water to meet industrial and domestic demands (An Tay 
warter supply); meeting the high demand of education room (Phan Chu Trinh Secondary 
school); and meeting requirements of power supply (Underground power line).  The 
investments in infrastructure have the potential for short-term and site-specific impacts of 
construction work on resident areas around the subproject areas.  Key environmental 
issues during construction work under the three subprojects would be noise and dust 
pollution, traffic congestion, transportation and disposal of construction waste, 
transportation of filling soils, temporary disturbance to local traffic and drainage in urban 
and residential areas. Major environmental impacts during the operation phase would 
include waste generated at the school and the sludge from the water treatment facility, if 
not managed properly.  
 
The environmental screening shows that all three subprojects are of low risk to the 
environment. Therefore an environmental assessment will be carried out in accordance 
with the Safeguard Guidelines of the Project Manual.  
 
OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement):  
 
LDIFP will mostly have positive impact on the society through improving infrastructure 
and living environment for the respective cities/provinces and their citizens.  However, 
the Project will also potentially have some adverse impacts related to land acquisition and 
involuntary resettlement.  
 
Two of the year-one subprojects have no land acquisition issues.  The underground 
power line subproject will involve some resettlement and compensation, and a 
resettlement action plan is being prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Overall, the LDIFP Project will help address urban and infrastructure development, 
current environmental sanitation problems, and is expected to have a positive impact on 
existing environmental and social conditions.  Adverse potential indirect and long-term 
impacts could arise through improper operations of the constructed facilities.   
 
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative analysis is required as part of full EIAs to be prepared only for high-risk 
subprojects.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Detailed Guidelines on Environmental Safeguards, acceptable to the Bank, has been 
included in the Project Manual's Safeguards Guidelines and approved by the MOF and 
other agencies.  The Manual will be used by LDIF staff in carrying out environmental 
safeguard (ES) work to meet the requirements of GOV and the Bank for the subprojects 
that would be financed by the line of credit provided to LDIFs through the Project.  
 
The Safeguards Guidelines of the Project Manual include a process, including 
environmental screening, preparation of EIA or Register for Meeting Environmental 
Safeguard (RMES) per the GOV regulations and Bank environmental safeguard policies, 
due diligence assessment of EIA reports, or RMES (if already available), followed by a 
risk management plan of subprojects that pass the screenings and Government 
environmental approval, and institutional arrangements for EA works.  As identified from 
the environmental screening, EA work for subprojects with high environmental risk 
(Bank's A-category) will be subject to Bank's prior review.  
 
The Safeguards requirements included in the Project Manual will apply only to 
subprojects financed with the IDA credit.  These Safeguards requirements will apply to 
all subprojects financed with the IDA credit, regardless of whether they were identified 
by the LDIFs or proposed by the private sector.  The first subproject prepared by each 
qualified LDIF (regardless of the year in which subproject is prepared) will require prior 
review and approval by the Bank.  
 
All three subprojects that have been identified for preparation in the first year of Project 
implementation are shown in the environmental screening as of low risk to the 
environment.  According to GOV regulations, RMESs are required for these sub-projects. 
In addition, for the Bank review, there would be a requirement of a detailed 
environmental review in accordance with the Safeguard Guidelines of the Project 
Manual.  Detailed documentation of the assessments will be prepared by the consultants 
in due course. At a request from IDA, a risk management plan will be developed for each 
of the subprojects if the assessment finds it necessary. Those plans will be signed 
between the qualified LDIFs and the borrowers as a MOU prior to the disbursement of 
LDIF funds to the borrower.  The MOU clarifies that by receiving the LDIF funds the 
borrower is signing on a commitment to implement the Plan.  
 
The Safeguards Guidelines of the Project Manual will apply to the preparation of all 
other subprojects which the LDIFs expect to finance through the line of credit provided 
under the Project.  The PMU and LDIFs will implement and work with the Bank team 
and the consultants to be hired as part of Component 2 of the Project to continuously 
improve the Safeguards Guidelines of the Project Manual.  
Page  6
Social safeguards: The Project Manual guides LDIFs and their investment partners in 
minimizing and mitigating the impacts to the people and environment.  A Resettlement 
Policy Framework for the project has been adopted by the PMU and LDIFs and has been 
submitted to Prime Minister for approval.  The guidelines will be applied to preparation 
of all proposed subprojects that LDIFs will finance through the line of credit provided 
under the Project.  
 
For the three year-one subprojects: there are no land acquisition issues for two of the 
subprojects, since the land is already available to the subproject investors (they either 
have their own land or bought land in 2008).  For the third subproject, involving 
construction of an underground power line, a resettlement plan is being prepared. It is 
estimated that about 19.7 ha of land will be acquired with 74 households to be affected 
and 16 of them to be relocated.  
 
Assessment of institutional capacity to implement Safeguards Guidelines:  Qualified 
LDIFs have deployed staff responsible for ensuring that subprojects comply with the 
Bank's safeguards requirements.   In order to strengthen the funds' capacity to implement 
Bank safeguards requirements, MOF will hire consultants to conduct independent 
monitoring of LDIF and subprojects for environmental compliance with WB 
requirements, as part of Project Management Support under LDIFP (TOR for these 
consultants have been prepared and are included in Project Manual).  These consultants 
will monitor (or provide technical assistance to LDIFs in hiring independent monitoring) 
the implementation of EMP, RMES, or RMP in each subproject, and will prepare semi-
annual environmental compliance progress reports submitted to MOF and IDA.  The 
consultants will also provide advice to the LDIFs and borrowers in internal supervision 
and reporting on the implementation of mitigation measures as specified in the EMPs or 
RMPs. In addition, WB specialists will provide safeguards training on an ongoing basis 
to Qualified LDIFs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The Safeguards Guidelines of the Project Manual specify when and how various 
safeguards documents need to be disclosed, as well as when and how public consultation 
has to take place for each subproject.  If subprojects are found to be high risk to 
environment, public consultation per Bank's requirements (OP 4.01) is conducted in 
addition to the consultation as required by the Government regulations, for which 
consultation with the local (commune/ward level) authority and the Fatherland Front is 
sufficient.  
 
Specifically, a consultation mechanism has been developed in the RPF to be applied 
during RP preparation and implementation to ensure the needs and wishes of all related 
stakeholders be reflected. The RPs will detail the plan for consultation, including the 
procedures, methodologies, and subjects of consultation and information disclosure.  The 
RP will also describe the grievance redress mechanism with the steps and procedures for 
Page  7
grievance filing as well as the responsible institutions and timeframe for receiving and 
addressing the grievances.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/07/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/07/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  8
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kamran M. Khan 
04/29/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran 
04/29/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
04/28/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/15/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
04/29/2009 
Comments:   
