Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/21/2008 
Report No.:  AC2856
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P090374 
Project Name:  VN-GEF-Coastal Cities Project 
Task Team Leader:  William D. Kingdom 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other environment and 
natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.69 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.69 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Objective is to reduce river pollution in Quy Nhon City in a financially and 
environmentally sustainable manner through piloting of a new low cost wastewater 
treatment technology and thereby improving the marine and coastal ecosystems along the 
coastline of Vietnam.  
 
This project is linked to the Coastal Cities Environmental Sanitation project (CCESP) 
which was approved in December 2006 and the Phase 1 activities have been commenced.  
The GEF grant will finance only the construction of a wastewater treatment plant 
(WWTP) whilst the sewerages and household connections feeding the plant will be 
provided under the CCESP.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Construction of Chemically Enhanced Treatment Plant (CEPT)  
 
The component consists of the construction of a 7,000m3/d capacity Chemically 
Enhanced Primary Treatment (CEPT) plant with secondary treatment by trickling filters 
Page  2
serving an estimated 60,000 people. The plant will be connected to a sewerage system 
financed under the IDA Coastal Cities Environmental Sanitation Project (CCESP).  
 
Component 2: Public Communication and Replication Strategy. This component 
consists of two main parts: (i) a public communication program aimed to dialogue 
between public institutions and citizens to raise public awareness and understanding of 
the key issues related to the project; and (ii) a program of dissemination and replication 
of project achievements.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. This component 
comprises funding for M&E and other project management activities related specifically 
to the CEPT plan. Most project management activities will be covered by IDA financing 
under CCESP.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Quy Nhon is located in the south-central region of Vietnam. It is the capital city of Binh 
Dinh Province with a total population of 252,000 and an urban population of 232,000 in 
2003.  
 
The CEPT plant will be established in Nhon Binh Ward, north of Ha Thanh River, 
north-west of the coastal city of Qui Nhon to serve a population of about 60,000 people 
in the first phase and with a treatment capacity of 7,000 cubic meters per day. Ha Thanh 
river flows into the Thi Nai lagoon, which is a wetland with intensive aquaculture and 
fishing activities and is being proposed for a marine protected area. The lagoon is 
connected with the East sea.  
 
Environmental. The city is located in coastal areas of South Vietnam.  The city has 
attractive beaches and other natural or historic attractions which makes it important 
tourist destinations.  Urban land use is intense and this limits space for the provision of 
wastewater facilities.  The city has an environmental sanitation system consisting of 
combined sewers that are generally in poor condition. Flooding due to poor drainage 
systems, poor wastewater management with no treatment facilities and environmental 
sanitation issues are the major concerns of people living in Qui Nhon.  
 
Social. The project will bring direct social and economic benefits to an estimated 60,000 
residents living in the north-west part of the city.  Adverse social impacts mainly involve 
permanent and temporary land acquisition related to the construction of the WWTP and 
the discharge system.  No ethnic minorities groups live in the project areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP4.01 Environmental Assessment. The project would have overall positive 
environmental and social impacts by mitigating pollution caused by untreated 
wastewater. The investment has limited impacts related to construction work because the 
WWTP would be located in an agriculture land at a reasonable distance to residential 
areas. The most adverse impacts could be the effluents on water quality of the Ha Thanh 
river and Thi Nai lagoon, and air pollution on residential areas, during the operation 
phase of the WWTP. Other key environmental impacts include: earthwork related to 
land-filling for foundation, sludge disposal from the WWTP, and potential impacts from 
application of disinfection (which may be required in the future).  
 
OP4.04, Natural Habitats.  The project will not involve any conversion of natural 
habitats. Calculation of the WWTP effluent dispersion shows that the project will not 
have adverse impact on the Thi Nai lagoon because the quality of the WWTP effluents in 
all options including operational failure and maintenance will not be exceeding the 
baseline quality of the lagoon, although exceeding the national standards in some cases. 
Nevertheless, the EMP includes a monitoring requirement for water quality in the Lagoon 
near the rivermouth. Thi Nai lagoon is a wetland with intensive aquaculture and fisheries. 
The lagoon is being proposed for a marine protected area.  
 
OP4.11, Physical Cultural Resources.  Cultural property exists in the project site 
including graves and a shrine, which are located in the buffer zone. However, all the 
graves and shrine will remain in the site (buffer zone) as the shrine serve only few 
festivals in a year and the local people want to keep it there as it is. The EIA report 
suggested adequate mitigation for the shrine.  
 
OP4.12, Involuntary Resettlement.  About 12 ha of agricultural and aqua-cultural land 
in the core area and 1.7 ha of residential land and 2.2 ha of garden land in the buffer zone 
would be acquired for the construction of the WWTP. It would cause the relocation of 97 
Page  4
households from the buffer zone and loss of shrimp ponds of several households, who 
lease the public land for shrimp cultivation but the leases expire in 2007 and 2008. As the 
agricultural land in the buffer zone will not be acquired, there will not be any households 
who would be severely affected by losing more than 20% of their agricultural 
landholding. A RAP was prepared, based on the approved Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) for the CCSEP, which provides all necessary measures to minimize 
and mitigate the impact on the people.  
 
Indigenous People (OP4.10).  The socio-economic survey found there are no ethnic 
minorities groups living in the project areas. Therefore, OP4.10 is not triggered under this 
project.  
 
Public Disclosure. The Bank's disclosure requirements have been followed.  All drafts 
of the EIA, RAP, were disclosed in Washington DC and in VDIC in Hanoi by January 
15, 2008.  The Vietnamese translations were disclosed on January 14, 2008 at Nhon Binh 
ward People Committee and the PMU office accessible to local NGOs and project 
affected people.  All final versions were disclosed by [May 5, 2008].   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is expected to have significant positive benefits for the environment, public 
health and the tourism-based economy due to improved sanitation services and capacity.  
 
Wastewater treatment is new for the city, but appropriate WWT technology has been 
chosen to meet the national environmental standards.  
 
According to the proposed plan, the agricultural land in the buffer zone will not be 
acquired and the farmers will continue to cultivate in the site. It’s a fear from the people 
that the constructed WWTP would have some impact on the environment and water 
source, which could impact to the cultivation activities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The proposed project builds on the experience gained in implementing the IDA Coastal 
Cities Environmental Sanitation Project. Alternatives have included facility location and 
treatment technologies. The selected location would allow minimal resettlement. The 
treatment technology has been selected to meet environmental national standards. 
Hydraulic modeling of effluent dispersion for three secondary treatment technologies, 
namely facultative pond, trickling filter and oxidation ditch, has been undertaken to 
provide the City authorities with a comprehensive comparison of potential environmental 
impacts, land requirement, investment and operation costs.  
 
The result of water quality modeling shows that all three secondary treatment 
technologies at full capacity would allow meeting the national environmental standards, 
except for Coliforms level in the cases of the oxidation ditch and trickling filter 
alternatives at low tides. Recommendation is therefore made that provision for 
Page  5
disinfection should be included in the design of the WWTP if the technology of Trickling 
filter or Oxidation ditch is selected. The EMP suggests monitoring of residual free 
Chlorine in Ha Thanh river water and safety measures for workers working at the 
disinfection facility. Precautionary measure such as warning signs along the so that water 
from the river will not be used for drinking and bathing purposes unless the monitoring 
result has shown satisfactory level is also required.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment.  
 
The provincial Project Management Unit (PMU) has no relevant background to 
supervise the preparation and implementation of safeguard policies. To mitigate this, an 
independent environmental expert was hired to prepared the EIA report. An experienced 
international consultant which is responsible for technical design was also in charge of 
providing environmental data, assistance and advice in preparing the safeguard 
documents. The EIA report was reviewed and approved by the provincial Departments of 
Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE). Regular reporting on environmental 
compliance will be required to be submitted by PMU to both IDA and DONRE during 
the project implementation.  
 
During the project implementation, technical assistance will be included to cover 
construction supervision and institutional strengthening.  The construction management 
consultants (CMC) will be responsible for the oversight of mitigation measures. 
Independent environmental monitoring consultants (IEMC) will be hired to provide 
guidance to the CMC and also to PMU in monitoring the overall environmental impacts 
of the project and the implementation of the EMP.  As part of the CCESP, institutional 
strengthening will include capacity building for environmental management for the PMU 
staff, contractors, and other concerned local stakeholders.  
 
Social.  
 
A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared in line with the approved 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and approved by Binh Dinh PPC.  A resettlement 
site in the same ward (Nhon Binh ward) will be developed under CCESP to host the 
relocated DHs. Consultations with the DHs showed that most of them (91 out of 97 
relocated DHs) would choose to move to the proposed resettlement site. Since the 
agricultural land in the buffer zone will not be acquired, there will not be significant 
impact on the income sources of the people.  
 
There is a staff, responsible for RAP implementation in the PMU.  This staff has been 
trained on the safeguards policies and their implementation. The PMU will work closely 
with the local authorities in RAP implementation and monitoring. Regular reports on 
resettlement progress will be required to be submitted to the Bank.  
 
Implementation arrangements. The PMU will establish an office with social and 
environmental specialists to manage and supervise safeguard.  Independent consultants 
Page  6
will assist the PMU in monitoring compliance of safeguards throughout project 
implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project key stakeholders include:  
 
-
Provincial and city People's Committees- who are responsible for guiding the 
development planning of their respective areas.  
 
-
Provincial Departments of Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE), the Water 
Supply and Drainage companies and Urban Environment Companies (URENCO) who is 
responsible for providing the project-assisted environmental sanitation services.  
 
-
City's compensation, assistance and resettlement council.  
 
-
City's and ward's people committees.  
 
-
Local residents and business in the targeted service areas.  
 
-
The Fatherland Front of Nhon Binh ward, a local mass organization  
 
These key stakeholders have been directly involved in project preparation, involving 
planning meetings and consultations.  Three public meetings and one workshop were 
held during June and September 2006 to discuss environmental and resettlement issues. 
Both the PAHs, the Nhon Binh ward people Committee and the Fatherland Front had no 
further environmental concerns, rather than the ones covered in the EIA report, and 
expressed full support to the project. Consultations with the project affected people, 
including the ones to be resettled on resettlement options and rehabilitation measures 
were conducted and the mechanism for further consultations as well as grievances redress 
procedures were developed in the prepared RAP.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/11/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/10/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/14/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/14/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/15/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  7
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  8
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William D. Kingdom 
04/30/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran 
04/24/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
04/24/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
07/22/2008 
Comments:   
