Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3140 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/06/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P108885 
Project Name: VN - Agriculture Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader: Binh Thang Cao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 15, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 10, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASVS 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);General transportation 
sector (40%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Trade facilitation and market access 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S);Small and medium 
enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
55.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.50 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
13.50
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to improve the competitiveness, entrepreneurship and 
organization of farmers in the central region of Vietnam. The project would result in the increase 
in total value of sales from farmers adopting new technologies, an increase in sales by farmer 
organizations (and its members) supported under the project, and a reduction of losses resulting 
from low quality infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The total estimated cost of the project is in the order of US$75.0 million, of which external 
financing through an IDA Credit could amount to about US$55.0 million, Government 
counterpart funding (either from central government of the provincial administration) to around 
US$6.5 million, and financing from the private sector (agribusinesses, farmer organizations, 
member families) would be in the order of US$13.5 million. The project consists of four 
Page  2
components: A. Enhancing Agricultural Technology; B. Supporting Productive Partnerships; C. 
Providing Market Infrastructure; and D. Project Management and Institutional Strengthening. 
The description of each component is summarized below.  
 
Component A:  Enhancing Agricultural Technology (est. US$15 mil.)  
 
The key objective of this component is to conduct applied research and extend successful 
technologies which are responsive to market demands and incentives, cost-efficient, and that 
enhance the environmental sustainability of increasingly competitive farming practices.  
 
Subcomponent A1: Technology R&D for a Competitive Agriculture. This sub-component 
focuses on identification of applied research, development and extension of technological 
packages that directly respond to improving productivity and quality and market requirements in 
a
specific product value chain (e.g. monitoring of chemical residues in fruit or antibiotic residues 
in animal meat). The subcomponent will support the preparation and implementation of an 
applied research and extension program through participatory needs assessments at commune 
level including consultations with agribusinesses, farmers, agricultural officers and local 
authorities. While the research program will aim at developing and selecting new or improved 
technology packages that improve farming productivity and enhance quality of agricultural 
products along value chains, the extension program will be focusing on dissemination of the 
results and training of smallholders, farming groups, and agribusinesses on the proven 
technology packages available and those developed under the research program. Service 
providers under both research and extension programs will be recruited through a competitive 
selection process in which both private and public sector agencies are all eligible to participate.  
 
Subcomponent A2: Enhancing Sustainable Farming Practices. This subcomponent aims at 
developing and selecting technology packages that improve: (i) food quality and safety through 
the application of integrated pest management (IPM) or good farming practices (GAP) by 
reducing pesticide use; and (ii) sustainable use and management of land and coastal resources 
(on a communal basis) or improving soil fertility (at the farm level) to ensure long term 
sustainability of farming practices. This subcomponent will support the preparation and 
implementation of an applied research and extension program related to sustainable farming 
practices through participatory needs assessments at commune level. As for Subcomponent A1, 
service providers under the research and extension programs of this subcomponent will be 
recruited through a competitive selection process in which both private and public sector 
agencies are all eligible to participate.  
 
Component B: Support to Productive Partnerships (est. US$30 mil.)  
 
The objective of this component is to facilitate the establishment, development and operation of 
private, demand driven productive partnerships through public support provided on the basis of 
competitive and transparent procedures.  
 
Subcomponent B1: Supporting new productive partnerships. Under this subcomponent, a 
process will be established which can provide public support to productive partnerships 
involving individual smallholder farmers, their farmer organizations and agribusinesses. After a 
Page  3
competitive tendering process and transparent appraisal procedures, partnerships will be 
supported financially through the project to implement a detailed partnership business plan that 
will help the participating partners to improve their competitiveness and increase incomes. 
Partnerships will be supported by local service provides to implement their partnership plan.   
 
Subcomponent B2: Scaling up successful value chain initiatives. This sub-component will build 
on successful, ongoing value chain partnerships, helping them to scale-up in order to broaden 
their activities, outreach and impact. Many value chain initiatives, mostly launched by bilateral 
donors or occasionally undertaken by private sector interests, are currently on a small-scale, pilot 
basis only. This subcomponent will provide MARD with the means for supporting such a 
scaling-up at a national level (i.e. beyond the eight project provinces).  Some three or four value-
chain partnerships will be selected through a competitive process early during project 
implementation, giving preference to those partnerships that leverage significant additional 
donor or private sector contributions. The first or so scaling up subproject may be envisaged on a 
sole source selection basis, subject to MARD and IDA’s prior review and agreement.  
 
Subcomponent B3: Information and communications campaign. Under this sub-component, the 
project will carry out an information and communications campaign to introduce the productive 
partnership program. Besides launching the competitive ‘Calls for proposals’ associated with B1 
and B2, and transparently communicating on the operational procedures, this campaign will 
highlight the importance of increased public-private-cooperation in order to strengthen the 
competitiveness of the agriculture sector.  
 
Subcomponent B4: Fostering an agribusiness environment. The objective here is to develop the 
capacity of government agencies, in particular the Provincial People’s Committee and its 
administration, as well as local service providers to improve the agribusiness environment in the 
agricultural sector and thus contribute to market-led agricultural growth. This subcomponent will 
support provincial-level, participatory policy dialogues with key provincial stakeholders, 
especially the private sector through public private agriculture roundtables. These provincial 
roundtables (held annually) will strive to review and improve the local agribusiness regulatory 
and public service environment, guide implementation of the ACP at the provincial level, as 
possibly also contribute to the formulation of provincial agricultural competitiveness strategies. 
Additionally, the subcomponent will coordinate the establishment of a provincial agribusiness 
competitiveness ranking and the strengthening of provincial efforts to attract FDI into 
agriculture.  
 
Component C: Providing Market Infrastructure (est. US$25 mil.)  
 
The objective of the component is to contribute to increased market efficiency by reducing post 
harvest losses attributable to the poor condition or the absence of public market infrastructure.  
 
Subcomponent C1: Infrastructure Support to Productive Partnerships. Productive Partnerships 
that are supported under the project (under Component B) would also be able to apply for funds 
under Component C to address critical public infrastructure constraints that directly limit their 
agricultural business activities. This would be made available to both: (a) the partnerships 
established prior to the start of the project which will be supported under sub-component B2; and 
Page  4
(b) the new partnerships that will be established under the project under sub-component B1. The 
funds provided under Component C1 would be in addition to support received under Component 
B
(including possible initial support for infrastructure associated with B1 and B2).  
 
Subcomponent C2: Support for Local Market Infrastructure Priorities. Under this sub-
component the project would support critical infrastructure needs that have been assessed at the 
district and commune level against criteria that would ensure priorities are met.  
 
Component D: Project Management and Institutional Strengthening (est. US$5 mil.)  
 
The objective of this component is to provide (1) the inputs to allow for an effective 
management of the project with due consideration to ethnic minorities; and (2) to strengthen the 
institutional capacity in key areas, particularly at provincial, district and community level to 
monitor and evaluate project activities and sustain project interventions.  
 
Subcomponent D1: Project management will support office renovations, office goods and 
equipment, training, and operating costs to ensure effective coordination and good project 
management at PCU and PPMU levels including monitoring and evaluation of project impacts, 
safeguards, financial management and audits, reporting and supervision.  
 
Subcomponent D2: Ethnic Minority Development Plan will support activities that enhance the 
participation of ethnic minority groups in the project area. They include the preparation and 
implementation of ethnic minority communication plans, and training and capacity building.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is currently proposed to be implemented in eight provinces in the central region of 
Vietnam: Binh Dinh, Binh Thuan, Dak Lak, Gia Lai, Lam Dong, Ninh Thuan, Nghe An and 
Thanh Hoa.  Implementation is envisaged to take place over five years. Implementation of 
Component B will be initiated in the provinces of Binh Thuan, Lam Dong, Ninh Thuan and Dak 
Lak (to be confirmed) during the first two to three years of implementation and subsequently 
extended to the remaining provinces during the later years of project implementation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has demonstrated its capacity for IDA project preparation and implementation, 
including safeguard policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASVS) 
Ms Quynh Xuan Thi Phan (EAPCO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Component A: Enhancing Agricultural Technology: This component includes research and 
extension activities. There will be no land acquisition. However, there may be some small-scale 
civil works (<$5,000 per scheme) needed for on
-
farm demonstration sites, such as fencing, 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
roofing, watering systems, and others. These schemes will be constructed by farmers on their 
own farms as a "demonstration site" and they are not expected to result in significant negative 
environmental impact.  
 
The potential insignificant impacts related to the activities carried out under this Component 
shall be mitigated through the application of relevant measures proposed in the Project 
Environmental Framework which its final draft version will be available by appraisal. The 
Framework should also identify specific environmental criteria/Code of Practice to be 
incorporated into Component A activities in order to enhance positive impacts of IPM and GAP 
applications.  
 
Component B: Support to Productive Partnerships: This component will provide financial 
assistance to co-finance the implementation of partnership business plans. The component will 
also support scaling up successful value chain initiatives which were developed by bilateral 
donors and private sector firms. Activities included in agribusiness plans may be agricultural 
production, processing, and marketing activities. During implementation, an operational manual, 
which will be developed at appraisal, will guide the implementation, which set the criteria for 
screening the proposals to exclude land acquisition and significant environmental impact. The 
eligible proposals should also include appropriate plans for treatment of waste water and solid 
wastes as well as mitigating measures for other possible environmental impact.  
 
Component C. Providing Market Infrastructure: This component will finance small-scale 
civil works, such as rural roads, bridges, and market place (<$50,000 per scheme) for improving 
the condition of critical public market infrastructure. An operational manual will be developed at 
project appraisal to guide the implementation of the component, which set the criteria for 
screening the schemes to minimize land acquisition and environmental impact. The feasibility 
study of eligible schemes should include a section of environmental management plan which 
follows the government's existing regulations and is acceptable to IDA. The environmental 
management plan will be subject to prior review by DONRE and post review by IDA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The subcomponent of Enhancing Sustainable Farming Practices will be designed to promote 
the application of integrated pest management (IPM) and other good farming practices (GAP) to 
improve sustainable use and management of land and coastal resources. Since the IPM has been 
practicing in Vietnam over the past decade, the project will support and coordinate with the 
Department of Agriculture of MARD and DARD in implementing the IPM activities. The 
project support may include provision of technical assistance, training, and equipment for 
effective implementation of the IPM programs.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
The proposed project area is located in the central highlands, central coastal and nearby 
provinces, where there are ethnic minorities living. An Ethnic Minority Development 
Framework (EMDF) will be developed by MARD before appraisal and reviewed by IDA to 
enhance the participation of ethnic minority groups.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project may acquire some private land through development of small scale rural 
infrastructure. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed by MARD before 
appraisal and reviewed by IDA.  
 
An Operations Manual will be developed for each of the components and includes (or refers 
to) all relevant safeguards instruments (RPF, EMDF, EMP, promotion of IPM practices etc.). 
And, these instruments and Resettlement Plans, EMPs, EMPDP etc., for first year sub-projects 
shall be disclosed locally and in Bank Infoshop before commencing appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/11/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Preparation for safeguards-related studies started in September 17, 2007 and is expected to be 
completed by December 15, 2007.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Binh Thang Cao 
11/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
11/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
12/06/2007 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
