Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/29/2009 
Report No.:  AC3584
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P103238 
Project Name:  Vietnam Renewable Energy Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anh Nguyet Pham 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 16, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: March 26, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Climate change (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
152.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
AUSTRALIA: Australian Agency for International Development 3.00 
 
Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies 
37.50 
 Sub-borrower(s) 
46.90
87.40 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to increase the supply of electricity to the 
national grid from renewable energy sources on a commercially, environmentally and 
socially sustainable basis.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will have three components: (1) the investment project implementation 
component, (2) the regulatory development component, and (3) the pipeline development 
component. Each component is outlined below:  
 
Component 1: Investment Project Implementation Component  
 
Subcomponent 1: Credit to Support Renewable Energy Investments (total financing 
$235.55 million, of which IDA $149.2 million). This sub-component will provide a re-
financing facility to participating commercial banks (PBs) for loans to eligible 
renewables-based projects not exceeding 30MW developed by private sponsors.  The 
facility would refinance up to 80 percent of the loans made by PBs to eligible projects.  
Page  2
Subcomponent 2:  Technical Assistance for Investment Project Implementation (total 
financing $2.43 million, of which $2 million from IDA). This sub-component will 
provide technical assistance for application review and project management by MOIT 
and for building the capacity of participating banks and project sponsors to prepare, 
appraise, finance, and implement renewables-based projects according to international 
best practices.  
 
Component 2: Regulatory Development Component (Total financing $1.02 million 
equivalent of which $0.8 million from IDA and AU$0.35 million co-financed by TF). 
This component will provide technical assistance for developing the regulatory 
infrastructure and building the requisite capacities of MOIT, the Electricity Regulatory 
Authority of Vietnam and other relevant government agencies for renewable energy 
development particularly for grid-connected electricity generation projects not exceeding 
30 MW.  
 
Component 3: Pipeline Development Component (Total financing $3.32 million 
equivalent of which AU$3.15 million financed by TF). This component will support 
activities to facilitate the development of further renewable energy projects contributing 
directly to building a pipeline of renewable energy projects.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Except for few subprojects selected upfront, all renewable energy subprojects will be 
identified during implementation. Majority of the subprojects would be small hydro 
power plants which are typically located in hilly or mountainous areas in the Northern 
and Central regions. Biomass subprojects would be located in the Southern delta areas 
while wind subprojects are likely situated in Central coastal areas.  
 
The five subprojects selected for the first year implementation are located in Lao Cai 
and Yen Bai provinces of the Northern Mountainous Region and in Lam Dong and Gia 
Lai province of the Central Highland   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (EASRE) 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASTE) 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
Ms Yen Thu Thi Cao (EASVS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Renewable energy projects provide additional energy to the grid to improve the quality 
and availability of power, especially in rural remote areas, where they are generally 
located. Hence, such projects lead to improvements of local productive capacity, business 
environment as well as social, educational and cultural life. Construction and operation of 
RE facilities are likely generate employment opportunities and improve access of rural 
communities. The positive direct and indirect social benefits to rural development are 
well recognized in Vietnam and supported by central and local governments, mass 
organizations and individuals.  
 
Previous in-country experience in developing renewable energy projects, especially 
small hydropower plants shows that these projects cause some change in land use and 
impact the lives of people living in the project areas. These sub-projects are also likely to 
be located in hilly areas where, in Vietnam, ethnic minorities live.  However, no major 
issues have been identified in the first five subprojects appraised so far.  
 
Renewable energy displaces thermal generation, and thereby avoids emissions of local 
and global pollutants resulting from burning coal, gas and oil.  The costs from local 
emissions, mainly in the form of damage to people's health, is likely to increase as 
Vietnam's levels of electricity consumption and urbanization increase.  Renewable energy 
provides low emission electricity, but can have other local environment consequences, 
including impacts on natural habitats and forests, flora and fauna, and to landscapes. it 
can result, in the case of biomass based projects in local emissions.  The renewable 
energy subprojects are not expected to have major impacts as the screening exercise will 
exclude all subprojects with large adverse impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Small-scale hydropower projects typically require building of temporary and permanent 
access roads, small barrage for storing water, delivering water through canals to the 
Page  4
power generation point, installation of power generation plant, offices and other 
temporary structures, roads for connecting these associated structures, and security 
perimeter along the transmission lines and surrounding areas of tower foundations.  Land 
requirements for these structures, including water reservoir area may require temporary 
or permanent acquisition of forest, residential, agricultural and tree-crop land in extent 
depending upon the scale of the proposed operation. In some cases use of explosives 
during the construction phase may also requires temporary clearance of residential 
structures within the safety zones for such operations.  
 
Although large scale displacement of population is not envisaged, loss of agricultural 
and tree crop land and sources of incomes of some households residing in the area cannot 
be ruled out. In most cases, the scale of impacts is likely to be marginal. Additionally, 
there are likely to be some adverse impacts during the construction phase of such 
projects.  
 
The subprojects can also give rise to a variety of environmental impacts. The potential 
environmental impacts can be associated with the power production facilities as well as 
ancillary infrastructure including construction work camps; temporary and permanent 
access roads; offices and other temporary structures; substations and transmission lines.  
 
Potential environmental impacts of such infrastructure include those associated with 
land clearing and construction activities; those associated with land conversion to a 
reservoir or changing downstream environmental flows; downstream impacts to water 
quality and aquatic biodiversity, aesthetic impacts of wind turbines; impacts associated 
with sourcing, collecting transporting and storing biomass for fuel; land use conflicts 
over production of biomass or construction of reservoirs and operational impacts such as 
noise and waste management.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The alternatives to the grid connected  renewable energy power plants are thermal power 
generation. The proposed project is superior environmentally because it produces low 
emission electricity, and therefore reduce overall local and global pollutants resulting 
from thermal power generation. The environment benefit of the project has even greater 
value to Vietnam given the increasing reliance of the country to the coal fired generation 
to meet its electricity demand. Renewable energy generation is also superior in social 
terms compared to large thermal power plants because it catalyzes economic 
development in rural and disadvantaged areas through creation of associated 
infrastructure and employment opportunity.  
 
At the subproject level, each developer is required to consider alternative options to 
minimize adverse social and environment impacts during design and execution, including 
selection of sites for its subproject facility and infrastructure. The requirements are 
included in the safeguard frameworks that each participating developer has to follow in 
order to get access to the project financing.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The REDP uses a programmatic approach which means that except few subprojects 
prepared upfront, all subprojects will be identified during implementation.  
 
Based on previous experiences and an assessment of present private sector hydropower 
investments, MOIT has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), an Ethnic 
Minority Planning Framework (EMPF), Environment Safeguard Framework (ESF) and 
Dam Safety Framework (DSF) that will apply to all subprojects financed under the 
REDP.  
 
The RPF conforms to the OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, and addresses the 
various types of land acquisition and resettlement that may occur during a subproject 
preparation and implementation. It lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility 
criteria of displaced persons, modes of compensation and rehabilitation, participation 
features and grievances procedures that will guide the compensation and potential 
resettlement of these persons. It further describes the planning and documentation 
requirements for such activities under the project.  The developers would need to follow 
these policy guidelines and procedures, and prepare necessary documents during the 
planning and design of the project proposals.  
 
The EMPF conforms to the OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, ensuring that the 
development of subprojects fully respects the dignity, human rights, economies, and 
culture of affected ethnic minority peoples. The subproject developer must be able to 
demonstrate that they have obtained broad community support for the subproject through 
a
process of free, prior, and informed consultations with the affected ethnic minority 
communities.  In this regard, the EMPF sets out guidelines to (a) ensure that the ethnic 
minority peoples receive social and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate; (b) 
avoid potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minority communities; and (c) when such 
adverse impacts cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such effects.  
 
The ESF conforms to the OP/BP 4.01, 4.04, 4.11 and 7.50. It provides guidance in the 
screening of subprojects for eligibility to receive funds from the REDP, and identifies 
additional information that may be needed to ensure compliance with WB Safeguards. 
Each subproject is required to prepare its Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) or 
Document for Environment Protection Certification (EPC)  in accordance with 
Vietnamese laws and regulations. At the time of application to the refinancing facility of 
the REDP the subprojects will have prepared and received official approval for either an 
EIA and/or EPC by Vietnamese government authorities. The purpose of the framework is 
to ensure that the subproject to be financed under REDP also meets World Bank 
safeguard policy requirements.  
 
For both new and rehabilitated small hydropower projects, the Dam Safety Safeguard 
Policy (OP/BP 4.37) will be applied. For any dam that is considered large by the World 
Bank and GoV will be treated as large dam and subject to the additional safety 
Page  6
requirements and the dam safety safeguards framework has been prepared to include the 
relevant requirements in accordance with OP 4.37.  
 
All the subprojects  are required to prepare Resettlement Plans (RP) and if there are 
ethnic minority people present in the project area, to prepare Ethnic Minority Plans (EP).  
The RP and EMP will have to be in full compliance with relevant Vietnamese Laws and 
regulations as well as the project RFP and EMPF.  All subprojects requiring an EIA or 
EPC under Vietnamese EA regulations will require that the developer prepare an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) in compliance with ESF. The EMP consists of a 
set of mitigation, monitoring and institutional measures to be taken during construction 
and operation in order to minimize, reduce and/or eliminate any potential adverse 
environmental impacts to acceptable levels.  It includes the entire subproject scope and 
impacts. All subprojects require public consultations on RP, EP and EMP and the results 
of the consultations require documentation in the RP, EP and EMP.  
 
The main actors and their main roles related to safeguard management are as follows:  
 
ï‚§ 
Developers – responsible for design, construction and operation of renewable 
energy subprojects, including environmental and social assessment, dam safety 
compliance  and management of subproject impacts. Responsible for preparation and 
implementation of the RP, EP and EMP in compliance with the safeguard frameworks 
requirements.  
 
ï‚§ 
Participating Banks (PB) – responsible for providing subproject financing andto 
undertake a due diligence role to ensure subproject compliance to environmental,  social 
and dam safety commitments as part of loan agreement provisions.  
 
ï‚§ 
Administrative Unit (AU) – a unit of the PMB of the Ministry of Industry and 
Trade (MOIT) responsible for administration of the refinancing facility of the investment 
component of REDP, review of refinancing applications to make sure subprojects for 
which refinancing is requested meet all refinancing requirements and an oversight role in 
regard to subproject environmental and social commitments. AU is also responsible for 
make sure that any subproject new or rehabilitation that is considered a large dam or high 
hazard dam, will be complied  with the DSF in all steps from preparation, construction 
and operation of the dam.  
 
ï‚§ 
Project Management Board (PMB) – unit of the MOIT responsible for overall 
coordination and management of REDP on its behalf. PMB is also responsible for the 
technical assistance including capacity building for all project participants.  
 
The capacity  and institutional arrangement of each player regarding compliance with 
the project safeguard frameworks have been assessed.  
 
Developers will rely on external consultants to prepare the safeguard documents and for  
resolving specific issues that may occur during implementation. As part of the project, 
technical assistance will be provided to subproject developers and their consultants to 
Page  7
prepare and implement RPs,  EPs and EMPs and  to comply with Dam Safety 
requirements.  
 
BIDV, having  experience with WB procedure and with financing small hydro power 
projects, will develop its existing environment unit to take responsibility concerning the 
safeguard requirements under REDP. Other PBs, having less experience in these areas, 
will need more support and capacity building to carry out their responsibilities. Each PB 
will appoint at least one staff responsible for the safeguard issues, who will receive 
training to be offered as part of the project. PBs will use external consultants to provide 
technical advisory support to appraise the safeguard documents. Training will also 
provided to PBs staff at branch level on safeguard supervision and monitoring.  
 
The Administrative Unit will be set up within MOIT PMB before the project 
effectiveness. The AU will be supported by experienced social and environment 
specialists. A Dam Safety Panel to support AU on dam safety compliance has been 
established and will be kept for the whole project life. The AU will hire consultants to 
carry out independent monitoring of RPs, EPs and EMPs implementation for all 
subprojects financed by the project.  
 
PMB has experience in implementing WB projects and is familiar with WB safeguard 
requirements. PMB is responsible for organizing relevant training programs for all 
project participants. PMB will also organize training on REDP safeguard requirements 
for national consultants, through which, a pool of trained consultants will be created for 
PBs and developers' reference and use.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are developers, participating banks, affected communities and NGOs, 
relevant district, provincial and central governments. Consultation on the project design 
and requirements with the key stakeholders has been carried out during preparation. 
Consultation workshop for dam safety framework was held in October 2007. 
Consultation workshop for social and environment policy frameworks was held in 
November, 2008. The frameworks were circulated for comments among concerned 
ministries before approved by MOIT.  
 
All safeguard frameworks will be disclosed at the provincial people's committees of the 
affected provinces. In addition, RPF will be disclosed at the affected district people’s 
committees. The frameworks will be posted at MOIT website.  
 
At subproject level, public consultation with potentially affected people on social and 
environment impacts of each subproject is mandatory for all participating developers as 
an important requirement of the safeguard frameworks. The consultation results are 
required to be documented in the RP, EP and EMPs, which will be checked by PBs and 
AU. The developers will also be responsible for disclosing the EMPs,RPs and EPs at a 
public location near the subproject sites and in the offices of the Provincial DONRE 
and/or over the Internet.  If the subproject is located in more than one province, the 
Page  8
documents shall be disclosed at public locations nearest the subproject site in each 
province and at the local offices of  DONRE.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/06/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/06/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/20/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/06/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Page  9
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anh Nguyet Pham 
12/29/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
01/15/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui 
12/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Lars C. Lund 
12/29/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
01/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
01/23/2009 
Comments:  Reviewed and approved.  Ready for disclosure. 
