Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3147 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/22/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P095275 
Project Name: Central North Health Support Project 
Task Team Leader: Bukhuti Shengelia 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 2, 2010 
Managing Unit: EASHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (90%);Non-compulsory health finance (10%) 
Theme: Health system performance (67%);Population and reproductive health (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
62.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.20
6.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project development objective is to strengthen district-level curative and preventive health 
services and improving their accessibility for the economically vulnerable population. This is 
going to be achieved through the following intermediate objectives:  
 
Increasing health insurance coverage among the near-poor population;  
 
Upgrading capacities of district hospitals and preventive health centers;  
 
Improving supply and quality of health care personnel.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
COMPONENT ONE: Supporting health insurance for the economically vulnerable population 
($8.6 mln)  
 
This component aims to expand access to health insurance for near-poor households in the 
North Central region and to improve the system's capacity to manage health insurance. It will do 
so by (i) subsidizing health insurance for the near-poor, (ii) conducting a social marketing and 
Page  2
Information-Education Campaign, and (iii) strengthening institutional capacities for the 
administration of health insurance. Specifically, this component will finance all or part of the 
out-of-pocket price faced by near-poor households with the objective of increasing the take-up of 
health insurance among this group. In addition, it will entirely sub-contract the social marketing 
component to an international TA firm that will provide technical assistance on social marketing 
techniques to the HIEC and VSS. Activities to be financed include behavior change 
communication, such as the preparation and printing of promotional material, mass media 
campaigns and focus group discussions.  Finally, a Joint Working Group on Health Insurance 
will be established in order to foster national-level engagement by key stakeholders and to 
increase capacity-building.  
 
COMPONENT TWO: Strengthening district health services ($32.2 mln)  
 
This component aims to: (i) improve the capacity of district hospitals to provide basic curative 
health services to the population, and (ii) strengthen the capacity of district preventive health 
centers to carry out basic public health functions. The component will achieve its objectives by 
upgrading medical equipment in the district hospitals, providing equipment and training to 30 
district preventive health centers (PHCs), building the technical and administrative blocks of 
PHCs and piloting performance-based financing mechanisms to incentivize health care providers 
to perform better and more efficiently. The component will focus only at district level, except for 
Quang Tri province, where the project will also invest in a Provincial General Hospital. This 
hospital, unlike other provincial hospitals, has not received any investment from either 
Government sources or external donors, although its medical equipment stock is mostly outdated 
and dysfunctional.  
 
COMPONENT THREE: Improving supply and quality of human resources for health ($15.59 
mln)  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of existing medical educational 
institutions and to improve skills and knowledge of already practicing medical personnel. More 
specifically, it will support the transformation of Nghe An medical college into a medical 
university, and the improvement of teaching facilities in four other medical colleges. In addition, 
the Project will support the training of clinical staff of district hospitals, personnel of district 
preventive health centers, as well as hospital administrators. In Quang Tri province, the training 
plan will include the provincial general hospital, which will be upgraded. The Project will 
finance four types of training modalities: short term training; Level 1 specialty training; on-the-
job training for assistant doctors and pharmacists to upgrade them to full-fledged doctors and 
pharmacists; and Master's degree training. Lastly, this component will provide support to the 
implementation of a new high priority HR policy of the Government, embedded in Decision 
1816 of MoH. This policy envisages rotation of qualified medical personnel from the higher 
level facilities to district hospitals in order to temporarily address health personnel shortage and 
at the same time ensure the transfer of knowledge and skills to district level hospital personnel.  
 
COMPONENT FOUR: Project management, monitoring and evaluation ($8.6 mln)  
 
The aim of this component is to ensure adequate management structure, processes and human 
resource capacities for the Project, and to setup mechanisms for effective monitoring of activities 
and evaluation of results. Under this component, the Project will fund the operation of project 
management units at the central and provincial levels. To the extent possible, existing health 
Page  3
information systems and data collection mechanisms in the MoH and in provinces will be relied 
upon in order not to impose unnecessary burden on the country. However for certain statistics, it 
will be necessary to design specific data collection instruments and conduct independent data 
collection (e.g. small scale household surveys, patient exit interviews, hospital surveys). M&E 
will consist of two components: (i) monitoring of the Project#s implementation progress, and (ii) 
monitoring of the Project#s results indicators and performance of the pilots. Given the presence 
of performance-based financing pilots in the project design, which requires regular monitoring of 
the performance of health care providers participating in the pilot, the Project shall set up an 
adequate independent audit system to verify performance. In order to ensure unbiased 
monitoring and evaluation for the pilots, and monitoring of project result indicators, a consulting 
firm will be engaged.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Thanh Hoa province: 
 
-
Lang Chanh district 
 
-
Thuong Xuan district 
 
-
Quan Hoa district 
 
-
Quan Son district 
 
-
Muong Lat district 
 
-
Nhu Xuan district 
 
-
Ba Thuoc district 
 
Nghe An province: 
 
-
Que Phong district 
 
-
Tuong Duong district 
 
-
Ky Son district 
 
-
Nghia Dan district 
 
-
Quynh Luu district 
 
-
Thanh Chuong district 
 
-
Nam Dan district 
 
Ha Tinh province: 
 
-
Nghi Xuan district 
 
-
Ky Anh district 
 
-
Huong Son district 
 
-
Huong Khe district 
 
Quang Binh province: 
 
-
Minh Hoa district 
 
-
Tueyn Hoa district 
 
-
Bo Trach district 
 
-
Quang Trach district 
 
Quang Tri province: 
 
-
Da Krong  district 
 
-
Gio Linh  district 
Page  4
-
Hai Lang district 
 
-
Vinh Linh district 
 
Thua Thien Hue province: 
 
-
Phong Dien district 
 
-
Phu Vang  district 
 
-
Huong Tra district 
 
-
Phu Loc district   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Borrower will need technical assistance in defining safeguards issues and policies   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
Mr Huy Toan Ngo (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project intends to build preventive health centers (approximately 600 square meters of 
total floor space per building) in 30 districts. The client needs to ensure that contractors follow 
appropriate construction guidelines, which need to be disclosed prior to appraisal.  
 
The project also intends to upgrade medical equipment in 30 district hospitals. This is likely 
to increase the utilization of health services and the volume of medical waste. The bank will 
review healthcare waste management and sanitation guidelines applicable to the hospital that will 
receive support from the project. If the guidelines are not adequate they should be modified 
taking into account international standards/good practices. Participating hospitals should commit 
to follow the agreed guidelines.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The client shall acquire sites (land plots) for 30 preventive health centers prior to appraisal. 
These sites have been already identified and are currently vacant. However, in some cases, land 
acquisition is likely to result in the loss of land use rights and the loss of assets on the land. In 
order to address these impacts the client should provide the Bank with information on the 
procedures that will be used to acquire the sites for these facilities. The bank shall review these 
procedures and ensure that they are consistent with the objectives and requirements of OP4.12. 
Before appraisal the bank must verify that all land acquisitions have taken place according to the 
agreed procedures and that there are no outstanding issues.   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguards related studies will be launched in July 2009 and completed by November 
2009.  
 
Specific tasks include the following:  
 
-
The bank shall provide the client with a sample of 'good practice' guidelines for 
environemtnally friendly construction. The Client shall submit to the Bank the actual 
guidelines that will be followed during the construction. Such guidelines will be disclosed.  
 
-
The Client will conduct an assessment of environmental impact of the construction of 
preventive health centers and upgrading of medical equipment of district hospitals.  
 
-
The bank will review healthcare waste management and sanitation guidelines applicable to 
the hospital that will receive support from the project. If the guidelines are not adequate they 
will be modified taking into account international standards/good practices.  
 
-
The client will provide to the Bank a description of the procedures for land acquisition. If 
such procedures are not acceptable from the OP.4.12 point of view, the Bank will advise the 
client on appropriate revisions needed to the land acquisition procedures. Adherence to the 
proper procedure will be monitored and disclosed.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Bukhuti Shengelia 
06/24/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
07/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juan Pablo Uribe 
07/16/2009 
Comments:  The team has incorporated safeguards recommendations. 
