Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3770 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/10/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P110693 
Project Name: Vietnam New-Model Universities Project 
Task Team Leader: Jeffrey Waite 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
270.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will:  (a) increase the quality of research and research-based teaching;  and (b) 
improve the efficiency of governance and management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A.  Policy and regulatory framework:  Implement specific arrangements for 
governance, financing and quality assurance procedures of new-model research universities (in 
harmony with sector-wide framework being developed under the Second Higher Education 
Project currently under implementation).  In particular, this model would give wide autonomy to 
the universities regarding degrees and programs, recruitment and management; with ex-post 
rather than a-priori monitoring by MOET.  
 
Component B.  University establishment and development:  Design, build and equip two new-
model research universities; establish management systems (including governance, financing and 
quality assurance systems); develop and deliver training program for leadership, management, 
teaching and research staff.   The Vietnam-German University will be a completely new multi-
disciplinary science-oriented institution, created from a partnership between the Ho Chi Minh 
City National University and a consortium of German universities (with a strong German input 
Page  2
in the areas of governance, teaching and research);   the Can Tho University sub-project will 
likely involve the upgrading and reforming of part or all of the existing Can Tho University.  
 
Component C.  Project implementation management:  Manage project; monitor performance 
and results.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ho Chi Minh City; Can Tho   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) has executed World Bank and ADB 
projects in the education sector involving infrastructure development (with the concomitant 
social and environmental issues), the scope of the infrastructure development in the present 
project is larger than in our previous projects.  MOET and the local sub-project teams would 
require support to develop needed safeguards institutional capacity.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Since the university sub-projects will likely finance infrastructure and equipment supply, 
including construction of new buildings and modern research laboratories and equipment, project 
preparation will need to address the potential impacts that could occur during the construction 
phase and operation phase, including air pollution, waste water and solid waste.  As such, sub-
projects will trigger the Bank’s policy on Environmental Assessment (BP/OP4.01).  The 
Government willneed to prepare an Environmental Assessment as part of project preparation, 
which would describe all impacts causing during preconstruction, construction and operation 
phases with their mitigation measures for each.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
It is not likely that this policy is triggered as university construction or rehabilitation will take 
place in fully converted habitats. Nevertheless, further information is needed on precise siting of 
construction sites.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will neither procure pesticides nor result in an increased use of pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Screening mechanisms in EA and consultation with 
 
local office will determine whether this policy is 
 
triggered or not.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 
X
A
social assessment should be a part of the project preparation to enhance the social 
outcomes of the projects in terms of participation of the stakeholders and equity opportunities for 
currently disadvantaged groups (women, ethnic minority youth, young people living with a 
disability) in having access to the project benefits. However, it is likely that the IPP would not be 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
For HCMC, where the university has access to cleared land, a due diligence report on the 
compensation and resettlement process would need to be prepared;  for Can Tho, if the site is not 
identified during project preparation, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) would need to be 
developed to guide future land 
acquisition to meet the Bank’s involuntary resettlement policy 
objectives.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
N/A   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
N/A   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
October-December 2008   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jeffrey Waite 
06/17/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr James A. Stevens 
06/18/2008 
Comments:  I approve the ISDS without comments. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
