Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/08/2009 
Report No.:  AC3512
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P090723 
Project Name:  Vietnam Livestock Competitiveness and Food Safety 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaolan Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 3, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: November 10, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Animal production (55%);Health (35%);Agricultural extension and research 
(10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Rural policies and institutions 
(40%);Other rural development (20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.00
13.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives (PDO) are to increase the production efficiency of 
household-based livestock producers, to reduce the environmental impact of livestock 
production, processing and marketing, and to improve food safety in livestock product 
supply chains (mainly meat) in selected provinces.  The project would contribute to the 
achievement of the higher-level objective of improving the overall competitiveness of the 
domestic livestock production.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will operate at both national and provincial levels and consists of three 
components:  
 
Component A: Upgrading Household-Based Livestock Production and Market 
Integration (US$68.21 million).  This component would support the improvement of 
competitiveness of household-based livestock production, food safety and hygiene along 
the meat supply-chain linking household producers, slaughterhouses and local meat 
markets, and environmental management of livestock waste. This would be achieved 
Page  2
through three sub-components implemented by the Departments of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (DARDs) in each of the project provinces.  
 
Component B: Strengthening Central-Level Livestock and Veterinary Services (US 
$4.19 million).  This component would support strengthening capacity of the Department 
of Livestock Production (DLP) and Department of Animal Health (DAH) under MARD 
in developing and monitoring the implementation of animal health including livestock 
disease, bio-security, animal production technology, food safety, and livestock waste 
management policies and technical standards.  The component would finance: (a) 
consultant services to review and update the GAHP standards and guidelines and to carry 
out strategic studies; (b) the training of trainers in GAHP (e.g., production efficiency, 
disease control and prevention, regulatory enforcement for DLP, and, integrated risk 
management and meat inspection for DAH); (c) piloting of innovative approaches (e.g., 
breed quality certification, true-labeling feed quality certification); (d) equipment and 
incremental costs for DLP to monitor livestock breed and feed quality and for DONRE to 
monitor livestock waste management and environmental compliance; and (e) equipment 
and incremental costs for DAH to support disease surveillance and prevention and meat 
inspection at the provincial level, as well as upgrading of collection and monitoring of 
zoo-sanitary and food safety data.  
 
Component C: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$6.66 million). 
This component would support project implementation through the strengthening of 
coordination of the various government agencies at central, provincial and district levels, 
and the monitoring and evaluation of project activities and impact.  This component 
would be implemented by a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) appointed by MARD at 
national level and Provincial Project Management Units (PPMUs) at the provincial level. 
The component would finance: (a) an international Chief Technical Assistant (CTA) and 
national consultants to strengthen the project management capacity of the PCU and 
PPMUs; (b) equipment and incremental staff and operating costs for PCU and PPMUs; 
and (c) project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) through consultant services, training, 
workshops and studies.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project will be implemented in 12 cities and provinces.  Four provinces or 
cities namely Ha Noi, Ho Chi Minh City, Thai Binh and Dong Nai will participate in the 
first phase of the Project.  
 
Ha Noi,  the Capital of Vietnam  is located along the banks of the Red river.  Ha Noi 
covers an area of 3.3 millions square kilometers, with a population of 6.23 millions 
people.  National highway No.1 runs from Hanoi to Ho Chi Minh City, highway No. 6 
joins Ha Tay with North-Western part of the country.  
 
In 2008, Hanoi has approximate 1.67 millions pigs, 224,000 cows, 27,500 buffalos and 
14 millions poultry. Pigs have been raised in 457,000 households (averaged 3-4 
pigs/households) and larger scale farms with average size of 64 heads.  In Hanoi there are 
6
commercial swine slaughterhouses and the other two at the same scale for poultry.  The 
remaining more than 200 slaughter houses have been operating in residential areas in 
Page  3
ways and conditions that hygiene and environmental standards and requirements are not 
met.  
 
Covering an area of 1,542 km2, Thai Binh province is located in a flat area and has a 
population density of 1,183 people/km2. Rural population accounts for 94,2% of the 
province's total population.  The province borders within the Gulf of Tonkin to the east, 
with Nam Dinh and Ha Nam provinces to the south and southwest, with Hai Duong, 
Hung Yen to the northwest, and with Hai Phong City to the north.  
 
Pigs account for 72% of Thai Binh's total livestock production.  The province's livestock 
production plan focus on household farms and prioritize food safety.Livestock production 
planning goes along with improved waste management from farm level to slaughtering 
house and markets.  
 
Dong Nai province is located in the southeast of Viet Nam, with an area of 5,894.73 
km2. Population in 2006 density of 380,37 people/km2.  Dong Nai is situated on the 
economic hub of southern Viet Nam. Dong Nai province has an advantage traffic system 
with many backbone national roads crossing such as National route 1A, national route 20, 
National route 51, North - South railway lines.   
 
Dong Nai Province has a river density of about 0.5 km/km2. Most of rivers and springs 
are concentrated in the northern region and along the Dong Nai River in the south - 
western region.  
 
Ho Chi Minh City is located 1,760 km south of Hanoi. The average elevation is 19 
meters above sea level. It borders with Tay Ninh and Binh Duong provinces to the north, 
Dong Nai and Ba Ria-Vung Tau provinces to the east, Long An Province to the west and 
the East Sea to the south. The rainy season, with an average rainfall of about 1,800 mm 
annually (about 150 rainy days per year), usually begins in May and ends in late 
November. The dry season lasts from December to April.  
 
In 2007, Ho Chi Minh City has 367,000 pigs, 104,000 buffaloes and 99,000 cows.Pigs 
are mainly raised in three suburban districts including Cu Chi, Binh Chanh and Hoc Mon.  
Most (98.2%) of the total 61,645 dairy cows have been raised at households level. The 
city's livestock production planning focus on breeding.  
 
Cao Bang province is located in the north east region of Vietnam, bordered with Quang 
Tay province of China to the north. Cao Bang has a total land area of 6,690 km2, mostly 
limes stone mountain mixed with earth hills.  The average elevation is 200 m above sea 
level and higher near the border with China.  The province has many dense forests.  
 
Hai Duong province is located in the Red River Delta.  The province is bordered with 
six provinces and cities namely Bac Ninh, Bac Giang, Quang Ninh, Hai Phong, Thai 
Binh and Hung Yen. The province has a developed transport system comprising of 
railway, waterway, national and provincial highway.  
 
Page  4
Hung Yen province has a natural land area of 932 km2 and a population of 1.1 millions 
people in 2008.  The province share border with five cities and provinces including Ha 
Noi, Bac Ninh, Hai Duong, Ha Nam and Thai Binh  
 
Hai Phong City is located at 102 km north of Hanoi.  Hai Phong City has a total land 
area of approximately 152 ha.  Hai Phong city is bordered with Quang Ninh Province to 
the north, with Hai Duong and Thai Binh provinces to the west and the south, 
respectively, and with the East Sea to the east. Hai Phong City has a dense river system 
with density from 0.6 - 0.8 km/km2  
 
Thanh Hoa Province is located at 150 km south of Hanoi, border with the east sea and 
three provinces.  The province has a population of 3.67 millions people. Total land area is 
approximately 1.1 millions ha. Topographically, the province is divided into three 
regions, including mountains and hilly areas, flat plains intervented with limestone 
mountains, and coastal plains with elevation averaged from 3 to 6 m.  
 
Thanh Hoa is located in area with annual rainfalls of 1,600 - 2,300 mm. There are 90 - 
130 rainy days each year.  Water resource is abundant with four major river systems 
including Hoat, Ma, Chu and Yen rivers.  The province has 484,000 ha of forested land 
which accounts for 44% total land area.  Forests are biological diverse.  
 
Nghe An province is bordered with Thanh Hoa in the North with similar physical and 
climate conditions.  Population density is at 183 people/km2.  Topographically, the 
province is lowered from northwest to southeast, hills and mountains account for 83% of 
total land areas.   Nghe An has approximately 745,000 ha of forested land and a dense 
river system (0.7 km/km2).  
 
Lam Dong province has in three highlands which are upstream of seven large river 
systems. Topographically, the province comprises of mostly high mountain intersected by 
flat valleys.  Average elevation is from 800 to 1000m. Total land area is 9,772 square 
kilometers. Road network has been developed to district centers however not all the 
communes are yet accessible by vehicles.  
 
Long An province is bordered with Ho Chi Minh City and Tay Ninh City to the south, 
with Cambodia to the north, with Dong Thap province to the west, and with Tien Giang 
province to the south.  Long An is affected by irregular semi tidal from the East Sea 
through the Soai Rap river mouth.  
 
Ethnic Population in project areas:  Ethnic minorities are found in 7 out of 12 proposed 
project provinces with the highest proportions in Cao Bang and Lam Dong provinces 
(95.3% and 22.9% respectively). Other provinces having ethnic minority population are 
Thanh Hoa, Nghe An, Ha Tay (merged with Hanoi recently) and Dong Nai. Therefore, 
OP4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is triggered. In the two rapidly urbanized provinces, Ha 
Tay and Dong Nai, however, the ethnic minority population is limited (1% in Ha Tay and 
less than 4% in Dong Nai). The Muong and Tay ethnic groups in these two provinces are 
fully integrated with the dominant Kinh group. They have adopted Kinh language, dress 
and economic systems and therefore do not maintain a distinct cultural or social identity.   
Page  5
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASVS) 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project would support the development of pilot Livestock Planning Zones 
(LPZ), an existing or proposed land area that local authorities designate for livestock 
production promotion. Project fund will be used to upgrade small access roads, electricity 
and water supply, waste and wastewater treatment facilities.  Similar investments would 
also be allocated to small scale district slaughterhouses and meat markets.  LIFSAP 
would also provide investments on non-structural works regarding animal health services 
such as vaccination, disease control and surveillance etc.  
 
The potential impacts of the proposed project include increased livestock waste and 
wastewater generation from pilot LPZs or slaughterhouses. Such waste and wastewater 
have potential to cause negative impacts on local air, soil and water, and affect public 
health due to high contents of nutrient, pathogens and gases.The Project has included in 
its design a matching grant program to design and build livestock waste and wastewater 
treatment facilities for farms in LPZs and slaughterhouses.  
 
The type of chemicals to be provided under LIFSAP for pest control purpose shall be in 
compliance with MARD Decision No. 23/2007/ QD-BNN dated 28 March 2007 in which 
the lists of usable / banned pesticides in Vietnam was included.  Storage, transport, usage, 
disposal of such chemicals shall comply with the relevant articles regulated in the 
Ordinance on Plant Protection and Quarantine issued at Decision no 36/2001/pl-ubtvqh10 
by the National Assembly on 25 July 2001, and MARD Decision No. 145/2002/QD-BNN 
dated 18 December 2002.  
 
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement  
 
Page  6
The project is expected to have marginal adverse impacts with respect to land 
acquisition and resettlement. Involuntary resettlement could potentially occur as a result 
of: (i) land acquisition for small-scale infrastructures; and (ii) transfers of land between 
farmers, on a less than voluntary basis, to form or consolidate a designated LPZ. It was 
anticipated that limited level of land acquisition will be entailed as the result of the 
investment in small scale infrastructures (eg. road, electricity, and water and sewage 
schemes) in the LPZs and for the meat-market upgrading. Each of the small 
infrastructures is anticipated to have low-intensive impact. Land for the LPZs would 
mainly take the form of voluntary self-exchange among farmers who have land in the 
potential zones and those who are outside but wish to do livestock production in the 
zones. Three main forms of self-arrangements were practiced in the visited provinces, 
including a) selling and buying of Land Use Right Certificate by negotiation between 
farmers; b) renting of land and c) swapping of land between farmers. Therefore, 
involuntary land acquisition for the LPZs themselves will be minimized. However, if the 
consultation process indicates that some land in the designated LPZs or elsewhere is 
being vacated on a less than voluntary basis, then the land acquisition activities will 
follow the principles and approaches set out in the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
and a Resettlement Plan (RP) will be developed with specific mitigation measures for 
identified items involving involuntary land acquisition.  
 
OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples  
 
Ethnic minorities are found in 7 out of 12 proposed project provinces with the highest 
proportions in Cao Bang and Lam Dong provinces (95.3% and 22.9% respectively). 
Other provinces having ethnic minority population are Thanh Hoa, Nghe An, Ha Tay 
(merged with Hanoi recently) and Dong Nai. Therefore, OP4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is 
triggered. In the two rapidly urbanized provinces, Ha Tay and Dong Nai, however, the 
ethnic minority population is limited (1% in Ha Tay and less than 4% in Dong Nai). The 
Muong and Tay ethnic groups in these two provinces are fully integrated with the 
dominant Kinh group. They have adopted Kinh language, dress and economic systems 
and therefore do not maintain a distinct cultural or social identity  
 
While the proposed LIFSAP is anticipated to have positive impacts on the incomes of 
ethnic minorities through strengthened household-based producer food chain and 
livestock production, attention is needed to ensure that ethnic minorities are informed and 
consulted on the project activities and that they participate and benefit from the project.  
 
Government of Vietnam's policy on Ethnic Minorities is similar to the World Bank 
policy OP 4.10.  A draft Ethnic Minority Development Framework (EMDF) has been 
developed for the project.  The draft EMDF will be reviewed and found satisfactory to 
IDA. Each participating province having ethnic minority population must formally adopt 
the EMDF before it is eligible for project financing and subsequent Ethnic Minority 
Development Plans will be developed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
potential long term indirect impact to be considered in the project is the safety of the 
humans and the environment when dealing with animals or chemicals during daily 
Page  7
livestock production practice (in contact with animal, manure handling or using 
chemicals for fly or pest control).  Mitigation measures to address potential issues during 
design, construction and operation phases have been included in EMF to minimize these 
impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In addition to the matching grant program to supports household farms to build bio-
digesters for livestock waste and wastewater treatment facilities, the Project would also 
consider secondary treatment options through lagoons or fishponds.  Recycling of manure 
would also be carried out under the proposed project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment: An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared in 
line with the existing Vietnamese environmental management requirements and the 
Bank's environmental safeguard policies.  The EMF proposes a framework for 
environmental management in LIFSAP, which covers: (i) environmental activities 
incorporated into project design; (ii) mechanisms for environmental screening, 
requirements on environmental assessment and management procedures for LPZs and 
slaughterhouses; (iii) environmental checklists and management plans for infrastructures 
provided by LIFSAP; (iv) the measures to mitigate the potential environmental impacts 
related to non-structural investments.  
 
LPZs and slaughterhouses are classified into two groups based on MONRE's Decree 
21/2008 in order to identify environmental document preparation requirements. The EMF 
provides detailed guidelines on both screening and classification and on the preparation 
of environmental assessment documents:  
 
-
LPZs containing 1000 pigs or 20,000 poultry equivalent will have to prepare 
EIAs. No physical investments in the LPZs will be financed in the first year of the 
project.  All EIAs will be subjected to the World Bank's review and approval.  
 
Environmental Protection Commitments (EPC) would be required for smaller LPZs.The 
first four EPCs, one from each province/city participating in the first phase of the Project, 
will be subjected to WB review.  
 
-
LIFSAP will not fund slaughterhouses that would require an EIA (capacity 
exceeding 1000 heads per day).  Therefore Environmental Protection Commitments 
would be required.  
 
Checklists and samples of environmental management plans have been developed for 
other small infrastructure to be financed by LIFSAP.  These checklists and plans shall 
form parts of the EPC which is required for small-scale infrastructure.  The EMF also 
included specific measures for mitigating potential environmental impacts related to non-
structural works under LIFSAP.  The mitigation measures such as provision of protective 
equipment or training on safety rules etc. will be applied as needed.  
 
The Borrower is the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD).  MARD 
has assigned the Department of Livestock Production (DLP) of preparing and 
coordinating LIFSAP project.  The Borrower possesses adequate capacity for 
Page  8
implementing the Project's Environmental Management Framework described above, 
given their extended experience in previous IDA/other internationally funded projects.  
DLP has also set up its Livestock Environment Management Division (EMD) in April 
2008.  
 
On the other hand, an Environmental and Social Safeguard Officer will be appointed at 
the Central Project Management Unit. He/she, together with EMD staff, will take part in 
the implementation of the project's environmental activities and be responsible for 
implementing and supervising the project's social and environmental safeguard 
procedures. An international environmental/ livestock waste management specialist and a 
qualified national environmental consultant will be recruited to provide technical inputs 
for the detail design and implementation of the environmental activities and management 
framework.  
 
At provincial level, technical staff at DONRE/DARD will also be assigned to take part 
in environmental capacity building, monitoring and management activities.  Adequate 
budget has been allocated for the implementation of the environmental activities, 
mitigation measures and monitoring.  
 
Social: During the project preparation, an international consultant team with social 
development expertise was hired to carry out the Social Assessment and to help PCU to 
develop a Resettlement Policy Framework and an Ethnic Minority Development 
Framework. The preparation of the Resettlement Plans and Ethnic Minority Development 
Plans will be guided by these policy frameworks.  
 
Training will be provided to project staff for implementing/supervising the 
Environmental Management Plans, Ethnic Minority Development Plans and Resettlement 
Plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders of the Project are:  
 
-
The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD)  
 
-
The Department of Livestock Production (DLP) under MARD  
 
-
The Department of Animal Health under MARD (DAH)  
 
-
The Provincial Department of Livestock Production (DARDs)  
 
-
The Provincial Department of Natural Resource and Environment (DONRE)  
 
-
The Provincial /Regional Veterinary Department  
 
-
Household Farm owners at the existing and proposed LPZs  
 
-
Slaughterhouse owners and workers  
 
-
Management boards and meat businessmen at meat market financed by LIFSAP  
 
-
Other people affected by the construction and operation of small-scale infrastructure 
financed by LIFSAP  
 
The draft EMF, EMDF and RPF have been disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop and 
Vietnam Development Information Center.  The Vietnamese version of such documents 
will be further disclosed at provincial level before Project negotiation.  
Page  9
Public consultation will be conducted during the preparation of safeguard documents for 
LPZs and other physical investments such as Environmental Management Plans, 
Resettlement Plans and/or Ethnic Minority Development Plan, where applicable.   The 
final draft of these documents shall be shall be disclosed at public accessible place in 
project commune.  The EIA and EMP of LPZs shall be disclosed at the Bank.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/28/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/29/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/29/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
No stand-alone Pest Management Plan was prepared but relevant issues were addressed 
in the Environmental Assessment.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  10
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  11
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaolan Wang 
05/19/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu 
05/04/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen 
05/04/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
06/02/2009 
Comments:   
