Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2009 
Report No.:  AC4290
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P113495 
Project Name:  Rural Energy II-Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Hung Tien Van 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 2, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
38.80 
 Local 
Communities 
11.80
50.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to support Vietnam's efforts towards socio-economic 
development by improving access to good quality, affordable electricity services to rural 
communities in an efficient and sustainable manner.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will provide additional financing to Second Rural Energy Project (REII, 
P074688, Cr. 4000 VN).  REII consists of (a) upgrading and /or expansion of rural power 
networks in about 1200 communes; (b) conversion of current ad-hoc local electricity 
management systems to local distribution utilities (LDUs) as legal entities recognized 
under Vietnamese law; and (c) capacity building assistance for the LDUs, provincial 
national authorities, participating regional power companies, and national authorities 
involved in the planning and regulation of rural electrification.  
 
The additional financing is required to allow: (a) completion of the original project 
activities.  Subprojects to electrify about 968 communes are under way.  To complete 
these and to add a further 232 and hence achieve the original objective of 1,200 
communes, an estimated additional $90 million is required; and (b) To allow 
Page  2
implementation of additional activities that will scale up the project's impact and 
development effectiveness.  Since implementation has been satisfactory, and the 
mechanisms and institutions are in place, it will be relatively easy to add a further 300 
communes and raise the number of communes covered to 1,500 for which an estimated 
$110 million is required.  
 
The project consists of five components.  One supports the rehabilitation, expansion or 
both of low voltage (LV) rural networks in about 1,500 communes throughout Vietnam.  
The component is currently implemented by 25 Provincial People's Committees (PPCs) 
and the distribution system operators, called local distribution utilities (LDUs) of which 
there are several hundred involved in the project.  Three further components are broadly 
similar, aiming to rehabilitate, expand or both, the medium voltage (MV) systems 
supplying the upgraded communes in the Northern, Southern and Central regions of the 
country.  Each is implemented by the power company (PC) that is responsible for the MV 
system in that part of the country.  The fifth is a component aimed at developing policies 
and regulations and building capacity, to ensure the financial, commercial and technical 
management of the LDUs is as efficient as possible, and is implemented by the Ministry 
of Industry and Trade (MoIT).  
 
Preparation and appraisal of the original 968 communes has taken place under the 
parent project using agreed frameworks and eligibility criteria.  Preparation and appraisal 
of the balance of 232 communes (the difference between 968 communes now under 
implementation and the 1,200 communes in the original target) and the additional 300 
communes that make up the scale up part of the financing use the same framework 
approach and eligibility criteria.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in 25 provinces of Vietnam, distributed throughout the country, 
namely: Bac Giang, Binh Dinh, Ca Mau, Cao Bang, Dien Bien, Ha Nam, Ha Tay, Ha 
Tinh, Hai Duong, Hoa Binh, Hung Yen, Lai Chau, Lao Cai, Nghe An, Phu Tho, Phu Yen, 
Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Thai Binh, Thai Nguyen, Thanh Hoa, TT Hue, 
Vinh Phuc and Yen Bai.  
 
The part of the additional financing being provided to allow completion of activities will 
take place in these provinces according to safeguards arrangements agreed and followed 
under the parent project.  Arrangements which are not substantially different from those 
will be used for the additional financing.  
 
The first subprojects using the additional financing for scale up are all for LV and will 
be implemented in the following six provinces: Binh Dinh, Dien Bien, Hung Yen, Lao 
Cai, Phu Tho, and Yen Bai.  
 
Most of the subprojects are in the remoter areas of the provinces, which are among the 
poorest in Vietnam.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS) 
Mr Anh The Hoang (EASVS) 
Mr Van Trung Nguyen (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Based on the experience with the parent project, the project's impacts are local, small and 
reversible, consistent with the project's assignment to Category B for Environmental 
assessment.  
 
Environment:  
 
The dominant land use along the rights of way (ROW) is agriculture, with other land 
being used for residential purposes and secondary forests. No subprojects in the parent 
project or the additional subprojects traverse primary forests.   Wherever possible, the 
distribution lines that connect communes are installed along existing roads and access to 
the lines and transformers is via existing roads and paths but in some cases new rights of 
way must be established.  
 
During construction, the rehabilitation and installation of the low and medium voltage 
distribution lines and associated transformers result in localized soil erosion, increased 
levels of localized dust, noise, increased traffic levels and solid waste management 
impacts. These are largely mitigated through ensuring construction takes place during the 
dry season when possible, by management of soil and excavation, the use of dust control 
by watering, limiting emissions from vehicles, ensuring construction takes place during 
daytime to avoid intrusion by noise and similar management techniques. Some MV 
subprojects may result in transformers being taken out of service and some may contain 
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs). The PCs are familiar with the requirement to label and 
store potentially contaminated equipment separately until methods to test and dispose of 
Page  4
PCB-contaminated equipment are put in place in Vietnam. The Government of Vietnam 
is developing new guidelines and procedures for management of PCBs under a World 
Bank GEF-financed project, due to start in 2009. At some future time these guidelines 
could supersede these project-specific guidelines.  
 
In the parent project, subprojects in Ha Tinh and Vinh Phuc provinces serve communes 
that are located in the buffer zone of national parks.  No subprojects to be financed by the 
additional financing are expected to be in heritage areas, proposed or actual nature 
reserves or other environmentally sensitive sites.  
 
Ethnic Minorities:  
 
Subprojects do not cause any specific impacts on the communities of ethnic minorities. 
Although there are people from ethnic minorities in the areas of several participating 
provinces and some of them are adversely impacted by land acquisition, the impacts do 
not cause community-wide or severe socio-economic effects. Members of ethnic 
minorities receive electricity service on an 'equal access' basis.  
 
For the six identified subprojects that form the scale-up part of the project, four involve 
people from ethnic minorities.  
 
In addition to their entitlement to compensation (discussed below) effects on people 
from ethnic minorities are mitigated through providing special programs to disseminate 
information on the subprojects which include subproject timings and implementation 
schedules, training on electrical safety and first aid, education on the benefits of 
electricity, and access to credit through training courses.  People from ethnic minorities 
also participate in the community monitoring programs.  
 
Resettlement:  
 
The Project will entail land acquisition and resettlement to permit construction of new 
lines and substations. Most land impacts will be temporary during construction and will 
require only compensation for crops lost. Displaced persons (DPs) will be able to re-use 
their plots after the end of construction though with some restrictions to ensure safety, as 
set out in Decree 54/1999/ND-CP of the Government.  
 
Some permanent land acquisition is inevitable and in the 968 communes of the parent 
project, an estimated 132,000 households are affected, each with low-intensity impacts.  
Of these, no household is expected to lose more than 10 percent of its land or requires to 
be relocated. The six identified subprojects for additional financing are estimated to 
affect 5,600 households with the acquisition of about 34,000 square meters of land; as 
with the parent project, the impacts are of low intensity for each household and are 
mitigable.  
 
Mitigation includes compensation for lost crops and trees, for temporary and permanent 
losses of land and structures.  As far as possible construction takes place after crops have 
Page  5
been harvested, and alignments and siting are aimed at reducing losses to the extent 
possible.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No indirect or long term impacts are expected from the project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
There are few alternatives to grid extension if rural populations are to get access to the 
benefits of electrification.  Off-grid electrification solutions are considered as a matter of 
routine in subproject design, but are only economic where the grid is distant and small 
amounts of electricity are needed.  The project explicitly does not deal with those areas 
(such as islands and very remote areas).  
 
Designs for subprojects aim specifically at mitigating the impacts on environment and 
for individual households by ensuring alignments of MV and LV lines and siting of 
transformers minimize impacts on households during construction and operation.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), Strategy for Ethnic Minorities (SEM) and an 
Environment Guideline (EG) were prepared by the borrower for the parent project and 
reviewed by the Bank.  The RPF and SEM were approved by the Prime Minister and 
adopted by the MoIT.  The EG was approved by MoIT and adopted by EVN.  All these 
have been disclosed.  
 
Individual resettlement plans (RPs), ethnic minorities development plans (EMDPs) and 
environment screening and environment management plans (ES/EMPs) have been 
prepared for each suproject that combined deal with the 968 communes under 
implemetation. They have been cleared by the Bank before the start of any work on site 
and disclosed.  
 
The original RPF and SEM also apply for the subprojects to be financed by the 
additional financing.  The EG has been updated in the light of implementation experience 
and to take account of new and revised Government regulations.  RPs and EMDPs follow 
the existing RFP and SEM.  Those ES/EMPs that have already been prepared for the 
subprojects under the additional financing meet the requirements of the new guidelines 
and those that will be prepared will also follow them.  The same requirement for 
subproject RPs, EMDPs and ES/EMPs to be cleared by the Bank and disclosed before 
start of work at the site will apply.  
 
Safeguards performance has been rated satisfactory throughout implementation of the 
parent project.  There are no significant outstanding environment or social safeguards 
implementation issues in the existing subprojects.  Borrower capacity to plan, implement, 
and monitor the preparation of RPs, EMDPs and ES/EMPs has proven to be adequate.  A 
Page  6
system of community based monitoring is established at commune level for each 
subproject to allow continuous monitoring of contractor performance.  Capacity building 
for EVN staff, province officials, commune members and contractors is proposed and 
provided for each subproject.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the people living in the communes participating in the project. 
IDA’s interlocutors for the main project design are the Ministry of Finance (MOF); 
MoIT; Project Provincial Peoples’ Committees; EVN; and PCs No. 1, No. 2 and No. 3 
and their Project Management Boards (PMBs).  
 
The RPF, SEM and EG were consulted with key stakeholders during preparation of the 
parent project.  The revised EG has also been consulted with stakeholders.  For each 
subproject in both the parent project and those in the additional financing, initial 
consultation was conducted by the Borrower in the form of discussion and agreement 
with the respective local government agencies and communes with regard to the route 
alternatives. Further public consultation has involved potential and actual displaced 
persons and representatives of local NGOs (e.g. Women's Union, Youth Union, Farmers 
Union, Fatherland Front Association of the elderly people), as required by the Bank 
safeguard policies. When they have comments, DPs and others consulted normally 
suggest additional mitigation measures, which are incorporated into the EMPs, RPs and 
EMDPs as appropriate. Records of those discussions and written agreements are attached 
to the EA reports.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/31/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2009 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Page  7
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The original EG have been disclosed under this project ID and will be updated with 
revised EG when they have been submitted to the Bank.  The original RPF and SEM, 
which will be used unchanged for suprojects financed using the additional financing have 
been redisclosed under this project ID.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Page  8
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hung Tien Van 
04/01/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu 
04/10/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui 
04/10/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
04/08/2009 
Comments:  Approved 
