                                                                                          52808




                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS PreparedlUpdated: 09/08/09

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                           Project ID: Pl18797                             I

                                           Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: GPOBA Vietnam Education Project
Task Team Leader: Lars Johannes
Estimated Appraisal Date: TBD              Estimated Board Date: NIA
Managing Unit: FEU - Global Partnership Lending Instrument: Trust Fund - GPOBA
on Output-Based Aid (GPOBA)
Sector: Education                                                                          I

Theme: Secondary Education
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: GPOBA - US$ 3.14m
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing              Simple ]                Repeater []                     I


Is this a transferred project       Yes []                 No[l


B. Project Objectives: 

The project proposes piloting output-based subsidy to semi-public schools and private schools to 

increase access to upper secondary education for poor students. The perfonnance-based nature of 

the project is expected to provide incentives for providing quality education. The project 

involves a technical assistance component to help designing the project with a particular focus on 

developing a system to detennine a results measure that will be the basis of subsidy 

disbursement. 


C. Project Description: 

Secondary education in Vietnam is provided at two levels. Lower Secondary covering grades 6 

to 9 and catering for students in the 12 to 15 age group and Upper Secondary for grades 10 to 12. 

In recent years, the Government of Vietnam has also split grades 10 to 12 education into two 

types of school: high school with a focus on higher education, and alternatively, Professional 

secondary for grades 10 to 12 with a focus on technical education. 

    The project will give poor students who get accepted to participating schools the opportunity to
    pay a discounted school fees to enter and stay in high and professional secondary schools of their
    choices. The gap between the discounted school fee and the cost of providing service will be
    covered by an output-based subsidy. To ensure that students will be getting quality education,
    participating schools will only receive the subsidy based on a combination on demonstrated
    attendance and educational attainment. The results measurement system is to be designed by a
    technical assistance component.

    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis 

    (if known): The following provinces are being considered for project implementation: Quang 

    Nam, Quang Binh, Quang Ngai, Phu Yen, Binh Dinh, Danang, Thua Thien Hue, Bac Giang~ Bac 

    Can, and Phu Tho 


    E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Pplicies:            .

    The borrower is currently implementing a GPOBA investment operation and has sufficient 

    capacity to address any safeguard that may be triggered. 


    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team: 

    Bui Ngoc Quang 


    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPL ¥ 


    Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                 Yes          No          TBD
    Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                                           X
       The project does not envisage any civil works.
    Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                                   X

. Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                              X

                                                                                    X

    Ph sical Cultural Resources OPIBP 4.11                                          X

! Indigenous Peo(!les (OPIBP 4.10)                                                              X
!   Ethnic minority communities are present in the provinces that are targeted by the project, but the
    project will not have an impact on communities or involve interventions directed at particular
    communities. Instead, it will offer benefits to individuals (the students who receive the
    vouchers). Therefore~ it is not expected that this policy would be triggered; however this would
    be confirmed durin ro' ect re aration.
    Involunta .Resettlement OPIBP 4.12                                                X

                                                                                    X

                                             OPIBP 7.50                             X
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain w"y)                          Yes       No   TBD
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                              X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                                  X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank~
Supported Projects (OPIBP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared:

   N/A

B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS:

   December 2009

C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

Any necessary safeguards instruments will be disclosed: (i) prior to donor approval of
commitment of the GPOBA investment operation; and (ii) both at the Bank InfoShop and in a
publicly accessible location in Vietnam no later than 20 days before signature of the grant
agreement by the World Bank authorized signatory.


IV. APPROVALS




                                     Name L. Panneer Selvamr,
                                           --""""':.-.";,,,,;,...,---',?
                                            atricia Vee'WlS~er
