Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3733 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/13/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P110525 
Project Name: Multi-Donor Trust Fund to Support Public Financial Modernization in 
Vietnam 
Task Team Leader: Minh Van Nguyen 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2008 
Managing Unit: EASPV 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Tax policy and 
administration (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.38 
 
Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund 
7.00
7.38 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objectives (PDOs) are for the Bank and contributing donors to support 
the GoVN to develop capacities towards strengthened public finance management system 
through a) developing robust and efficient systems for raising and deploying resources, b) 
improving quality and effectiveness of expenditures in achieving government’s social and 
economic policies, c) supporting the introduction of market orientation for public finance 
management, and d) promoting transparency and accountability at all levels in the management 
of public finances. The PDOs are complementary to three higher level objectives of the 
country’sfour key reform pillars, namely improved business environment, social inclusion and 
governance. These will also support the achievement of the country’s Socio-Economic 
Development Plan goal of becoming a middle income country in 2010 with strengthened public 
governance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
MDTF-2 is designed to be a four-year programmatic technical assistance project.  The project 
will be administered by the World Bank and financed by a pool of funds contributed by six 
Page  2
donors. The total funding of the project, including the government counterpart funding, is 
estimated to be of US$ 7.4 million. It is expected that donors may provide additional funding to 
the project following the mid-term review (after 2 years) and other donors may join the MDTF-2 
at a latter stage.  
 
The MDTF will mainly finance technical assistance and capacity building activities, and 
analytical and diagnostic work. In principle, the activities will be initiated on the basis of seven 
key themes of the Single Strategy Document, namely state budget expenditure management, 
state budget revenue management (taxation and customs), public debt management, financial 
market supervision and bond market development, corporate finance management, public assets 
management and price control.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Technical Assistance to be provided to the public finance system is a national project so the 
entire country of Vietnam can be considered the project location.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Recipient of the funds is the Ministry of Finance. Their safeguard capacity has not been 
assessed as the Bank has identified no safeguard issues in this project or other similar 
investments with the Ministry.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/20/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Not applicable as no need for safeguard studies has been identified.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Minh Van Nguyen 
06/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
06/12/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Barbara Nunberg 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
