Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/23/2007 
Report No.:  AC3070
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P099211 
Project Name:  Rural Distribution Project 
Task Team Leader:  Hung Tien Van 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 19, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
51.50
51.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to improve the level of medium voltage service 
to targed retail electricity distribution systems.   
 
3. Project Description 
The physical investment components of the project will focus on rehabilitating and 
increasing the capacity of the rural distribution system distribution lines and substations 
and standardizing them to 110, 35 and 22kV.  The purpose is to enable them to meet the 
growing demand more efficiently, provide better quality and quantity of electric power 
for productive uses, and reduce power system losses.  The project will have seven 
components, which will be implemented by particpating Power Companies (PCs), the 
electricity distribution entities belonging to Vietnam Electricity (EVN).  
 
Six components involve physical investment.  Each of these may contain two types of 
subproject involving new construction, rehabilitation, strengthening or a combination of 
any of the three, of: (i) all of the 22 or 35 kV system requiring improvements within a 
single province falling within the territory of a participating PC; or (ii) a single substation 
or line at the 110 kV level feeding the 22/35 kV systems in rural areas within a province 
Page  2
or provinces falling in the territory of a participating PC.  A seventh component will 
support the corporate development of PCs through technical assistance.  
 
The participating PCs and the number of provinces which will be involved are as 
follows:  
 
Component No. 
   Implementing Agency      Number of provinces  
 
covered  
 
1
PC1 (northern region)    15 provinces  
 
2
PC2 (southern region)    20 provinces  
 
3
PC3 (central region) 
    11 provinces  
 
4
PC Hai Phong               1 province  
 
5
PC Hai Duong              1 province  
 
6
PC Dong Nai 
             1 province  
 
Each of these six components will be implemented in two phases.  The first phase will 
consist of those subprojects that have been appraised and are ready for implementation 
upon approval by the World Bank's Board of Executive Directors.  The second phase will 
consist of subprojects that are brought forward by implementing agencies when their 
preparation is complete.  When their appraisal by IDA has been satisfactorily completed, 
they will be financed on a first-come, first-appraised basis until all funds allocated to the 
component have been committted.  
 
The seventh component will provide technical assistance to support the corporate 
development of participating PCs.  It will focus on building capacity of the PCs so that 
they can in the future act as independent participants in the power market as it develops 
according to the Government's road map for reform.  It will achieve this mainly through 
training of middle-level managers in management, commercial and financial aspects of 
modern distribution operations.  The component will also support forward-looking 
studies with each participating PC on the options and costs for meeting the GoV's target 
of universal electrification by 2020.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The impacts of the project are spread over the territory of about 50 provinces of Vietnam.  
The physical impacts of each subproject are dependent on the location and the specific 
design needs of the subproject, including line lengths, the number and capacities of 
tranformers to be installed, and the type of land the lines will traverse.  Given the number 
of provinces and subprojects, the impacts can be expected to be mainly on rural, 
agricultural, and forest areas planted for production.  Lines will not cross or cut protected 
areas or natural habitats and substations will not encroach on such areas.  
 
Distribution lines entail the use of land for the towers or poles which support them, each 
of which typically uses between a half and four square meters of land for the foundations, 
depending on the design.  Land beneath and to the sdes of the lines must be kept clear of 
trees and other high growing vegetation, houses or other structures so that no object or 
Page  3
person can come within a prescribed safety distance of the conductors.  The right of way 
for a 110kV line extends 7.5 meters either side of the center line and 3 meters for a 
35/22kV line.  
 
Substations at 110kV level require an enclosed, levelled site free of any vegetation or 
human habitation (except for substation operators), normally measuring 25-50 meters 
square.  Transformers for 35/22kV step down to low voltage are normally mounted on 
platforms on the poles supporting the distribution lines and take up only the land area 
required for the foundation of the supporting poles.  Larger transformer posts at the 
35/22kV level are sometimes ground mounted, and typically consist of a small enclosure 
which is fenced to prevent public access.  
 
Environmental screening has identified the following potential impacts of each 
subproject: (i) temporary and permanent land acquisition; (ii) cutting down of fruit and 
other trees having economic rather than biological value; (iii) increasing water turbidity 
due to runoff from construction sites; (iv) degradation of existing rural roads due the 
heavy trucks; (v) health and safety issues for workers and community during both 
construction and operation phases.  
 
Land acquisition and resettlement process including public consultation and satisfactory 
compensation and livelihood restoration for the population residing in the project areas is 
the main social issue in the Project.  Like other rural electrification projects, the social 
impacts are scattered over large project areas and large numbers of Project Affected 
Households (PAH), but the impact on the individual PAH is normally marginal and 
limited in the acquisition of a few square meters of land, or cutting down of a few trees.  
 
Some subprojects will affect members of Ethnic Minorities, but again the impacts are 
quite marginal and limited to the acquisition of agricultural land, or cutting down tress.  
These impacts are localized and do not cause community-wide or severe socio-economic 
effects, or have a particular adverse effect that is different from those experienced by 
other, non ethnic minority PAH.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Each subproject will stand alone and will therefore require separate review of the 
safeguards issues through preparation of Environmental Assessments and Environmental 
Management Plans (EA/EMPs), Resettlement Plans (RPs) and, where necessary, Ethnic 
Minority Development Plans (EMDPs).  Appraisal of the first phase of subprojects will 
include review of subproject specific EA/EMPs, RPs and EMDPs.  A template providing 
guidance on preparation of EA/EMPs and a Policy Framework for Resettlement Plans 
(PFRP) and a Strategy for Ethnic Minorities (SEM) have been prepared and disclosed 
and are in the process of approval by the Government.  When approved, they will be 
adopted by EVN and the PCs, and will be appraised by IDA.  Second phase subprojects 
will have EA/EMPs, RPs and EMDPs prepared according to the template and 
frameworks, and will be individually appraised by IDA before being accepted for 
financing.  
 
(1) Environmental Assessment:  
 
Based on documentation furnished by EVN and the PCs, the Bank has concluded that 
impacts are likely to be site-specific, not sensitive or irreversible, and in every case, 
mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the negative impacts.All of the proposed 
project investment components are classified as Category B, as defined by paragraph 8(b) 
of OP 4.01.  Expected impacts include (i) construction of access roads, substations, and 
transmission/distribution lines, with associated tree cutting; (ii) increased levels of dust 
and noise from the use and movement of equipment; (iii) road damage and other transport 
disturbance due to the transportation of building materials; (iv) impacts on planted forest; 
(v) soil erosion and landslide; (vi) unexploded ordnance; (vii) leakage or disposal of 
polychlorinated biphenyls.  
 
(2) Resettlement  
 
Page  5
First phase subprojects will impact about 10,526 households in 647 communes. Each of 
the subprojects will have low-intensity impacts involving some temporary or permanent 
loss of agricultural, orchard, garden or residential land to transmission tower foundations, 
substations and line stringing.  Most of the impacts on land use will be temporary and 
most displaced people will be affected only temporarily.  In a few cases, residential or 
other buildings will be affected but impacts on houses will be mostly partial and 
generally will not require the relocation of families outside their residential plots.  Rights 
of way will have limitations on land use to ensure safety.  In the rights of way land use 
will be limited to agricultural purposes.  
 
(3) Indigenous People  
 
Subprojects in the first phase affect 647 ethnic minority PAH.  Based on the screening 
undertaken in the Social Assessment, the impacts on ethnic minorities are broadly the 
same as those described in the section on resettlement above.  In those subprojects where 
ethnic minorities are affected, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan has been prepared.  
Treatment of, and compensation for Ethnic Minorities will be the same as that for 
similarly-affected ethnic majority Kinh people.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The long-term impacts are broadly benign since new construction, rehabilitation and 
reinforcement of rural electricity distribution networks is an ingredient for economic 
growth in rural areas, particularly through increases in on- and off-farm productivity.  It 
also supports improved quality in numerous areas of day to day life.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Where possible existing systems are being rehabilitated or strengthened, using existing 
rights of way and therefore minimizing impacts.  Where newly-built lines and substations 
are required, alternative route alignments and siting have been analyzed to minimize 
impacts mainly on resettlement and in some circumstances on environment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has prepared EA/EMPs, RPs, and, where necessary, EMDPs for all 26 
subprojects undertaken as part of the first phase. To date 26 EA/EMPs, 26 RPs and 7 
EMDPs have been reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory  The Borrower has also 
prepared Environmental Guidelines, a Resettlement Policy Framework and an Ethnic 
Minority Development Framework, and a Social Assessment, which have been adopted 
by the Government and Electricity of Vietnam.  For Phase 2 subprojects to be appraised 
successfully,  EMPs and RPs and, where necessary, EMDPs must be prepared according 
to the Guidelines and Frameworks, appraised by IDA and disclosed.  
 
Environmental impacts will be mitigated according to measures set out in the EMPs, 
including: (i) optimizing the ROW to minimize impacts (and trading it off with 
Page  6
resettlement aspects); (ii) only cutting trees currently or potentially higher than three or 
four meters, depending on the height of the poles, to ensure the minimal clearance 
required for safety of the lines; (iii) limiting damage to vegetation by forbidding burning 
of felled trees at the site; (iv) building structures such as dykes and drainage paths for 
sites located on slopes, limiting excavation areas, prohibiting excavation work during 
heavy rain, binding excavated soils to make sure that they do not fall into water bodies 
nearby and reusing excavated materials for levelling; (v) covering trucks, loads of 
excavated soils and granular construction materials; (vi) limiting access to heavy vehicles 
on rural roads, and repairing roads promptly when they are damaged; (vii) cooperating 
with local authorities and police when necessary, for example when stringing conductors 
that cross highways; and (viii) fencing and warning at places that may have accident 
risks, conducting health and safety for construction staff, providing safety equipment and 
safe tools and equipment.  
 
Crop compensation will be delivered in cash at current market rates. Land and other 
assets will be compensated at substitution cost.  Particular attention will be paid in 
assuring that compensation amounts indicated in government tariffs have been adjusted 
to correspond to these rates.  Displaced persons who have to reconstruct their houses will 
receive a special subsidy to cover livelihood losses in the house reconstruction period.  
All displaced persons will also be assisted with allowances in order to restore their 
livelihood at least as the same level of pre-project implementation.  Impacts on houses 
will be mostly partial and generally will not require the relocation of families outside 
their residential plots.  Consultation and informed consultation has taken place with 
ethnic minorities, and the compensation and measures applied to all project affected 
households will apply.  
 
The local Departments of Natural Resources and Environment (DONREs) have been 
fully involved in the process by providing environmental certificates for first phase 
subprojects, as required by the Government.  Provincial People's Committees and District 
People's Committees have been involved in the resettlement planning.  
 
EVN and four of the six the participating PCs (PC1, PC2, PC3 and PC Dong Nai) have 
implemented a number of IDA credits including Transmission, Distribution and Disaster 
Reconstruction Project (Cr. 3034 VN), Rural Energy Project (Cr. 3358 VN), System 
Efficiency Improvement, Equitization and Renewables Project (Cr. 3680 VN), Second 
Rural Energy Project (Cr. 4000 VN) and Second Transmission and Distribution Project 
(Cr. 4107 VN).  Each of these has involved broadly similar safeguards issues and 
remedies and are experienced with IDA’s requirements regardingthe preparation of 
EA/EMPs, RPs, EMDPs and the use of frameworks to guide their preparation.  
 
Two of the participating PCs (PC Hai Phong, PC Hai Duong) which have not 
implemented IDA credits in the past have each participated in previous project activities.  
They have also prepared satisfactory EAs/EMPs and RPs for their subprojects (no EMDP 
is required for either PC).  During supervision their progress in implementing the EMPs 
and RPs will be carefully monitored.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
For the first phase projects, public consultation has been conducted effectively 
throughout the EA preparation process, including meetings with local authorities, and 
public meetings with project affected households.  Project stakeholders concerns were 
incorporated into the project design and EMP.  
 
Consultation has been conducted effectively throughout the resettlement planning 
process, including inventory and socioeconomic surveys, interviews, and public 
meetings.  The local people’s participation process is described in the RPs.  All the 
RPs/EMDP have been locally disclosed in Vietnamese.  
 
Draft EA/EMPs, RPs and EMDPs have been locally disclosed from in accordance with 
the Bank’s policy and sent to the Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi and 
the Infoshop in Washington DC from October 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/11/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/11/2007 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/10/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/05/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/11/2007 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hung Tien Van 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
 
Comments:   
