Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC3449
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P099460 
Project Name:  Vietnam PCBs Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Douglas J. Graham 
GEF Focal Area: Persistent Organic 
Pollutants 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 21, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (70%);Power (30%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.34 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
3.15 
 
SWITZERLAND: Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC) 
1.01
10.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective (PDO) is to develop national capacity in Vietnam to 
manage all PCBs and on a pilot basis in selected provinces safely store significant 
amounts of PCBs in anticipation of future disposal.  To achieve this objective, the project 
proposes to carry out a series of activities including, among others, improvement of the 
regulatory and institutional framework for PCB management, piloting of the safe 
management of PCBs in 15 demonstration facilities, and development of a prototype 
PCB management program for the ten provinces in which the 15 demonstration facilities 
are located.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project consists of five major components: (a) PCB management framework and 
action plan; (b) PCB management demonstration; (c) institutional strengthening; (d) 
monitoring and evaluation; and (e) project management.  
 
The first component aims to establish a sound policy and legal framework to effectively 
address contaminant management at every step in the PCB life cycle.  To ensure effective 
implementation and enforcement of PCB related policies and regulations, this component 
will assist Vietnam to develop technical and administrative guidelines with clear 
procedures as well as roles and responsibilities of concerned government agencies and 
industry.  To assist Vietnam to cost-effectively implement its PCB management 
framework, a national PCB management action plan will be developed.  This would 
allow Vietnam to cost out budgetary requirements and to formulate a cost recovery 
mechanism to support implementation of the action plan.  
 
The objectives of the second component are to demonstrate sound PCB management 
activities at 15 demonstration facilities (works investments for physical storage of PCBs 
would be financed by the project only at 9 sites) and to replicate experience at these 
facilities to others within the ten selected provinces where these demonstration facilities 
are located.  The ten selected provinces are: Ha Noi, Hai Phong, Hai Duong, Quang Ninh, 
Nam Dinh, Ho Chi Minh City, Dong Nai, Ba Ria 
–
Vung Tau, Can Tho, and Lam Dong – 
Da Lat.  It is expected that one of the 15demonstration facilities, the Pha Lai Power 
Generation Company, will implement sound PCBs management activities in the first year 
of project implementation.  The remaining 14 facilities will carry out PCBs management 
activities in the following years. This PCB management demonstration will cover 
activities ranging from identification to temporary safe storage of PCB oils and materials.  
 
The third component will: (i) strengthen capacity of relevant stakeholders in the 
implementation of sound PCB management; and (ii) mobilize public support for sound 
PCB management.  
 
The fourth component will monitor progress of project implementation and to evaluate 
effectiveness of various activities funded by the Project in order to determine courses of 
action to strengthen the effectiveness of the Project during the course of project 
implementation period.  It is intended that monitoring tools will form the basis for 
replication into permanent national systems.  
 
Finally, the fifth component will finance costs related to implementation of this Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented at the 15 sites in the ten selected provinces (Ha Noi, Hai 
Phong, Hai Duong, Quang Ninh, Nam Dinh, Ho Chi Minh City, Dong Nai, Ba Ria –
Vung Tau, Can Tho, and Lam Dong – Da Lat) for PCB management demonstration and 
in 54 remaining provinces for PCB inventory. One site has been confirmed during project 
preparation, the Pha Lai Power Generation Company, for PCBs management 
Page  3
demonstration in the first year of project implementation. The remaining facilities will be 
confirmed during project implementation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project essentially aims at improving the management system of PCB oils and 
equipment throughout their life cycle, which would result in lowering risks to human and 
environment. The project does, however, have some inherent environmental risks, 
specifically as related to possible PCB leakage resulting in contamination at storage sites 
and transportation of contaminated PCB wastes from demonstration sites to final disposal 
sites. These risks would be much greater in the absence of the project and the entire 
project is designed precisely to mitigate or eliminate such risks; project-generated 
impacts are thus considered minor.  
 
There may be minor and temporary impacts from the infrastructure improvement 
activities. This would include upgrading storage facilities at the 9 demonstration sites in 
the ten provinces.  
 
In an earlier stage of preparation, this project was categorized as a Category "A" 
because of potential impacts associated with disposal of PCBs but the final project design 
does not now include any financing for disposal. Virtually all PCB-containing oils that 
will be managed under the project are in very secure containers (transformers) and there 
are very few impacts that are likely to arise from their storage in existing industrial sites. 
Transport of such oils would only be conducted under strict control and mitigation 
measures as are detailed in the EA Framework. The impacts are not substantial and can 
be easily managed and mitigated; thus the project is classified as a "B" classification.   
 
Page  4
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect and long-term impacts are all considered to be positive.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives considered were a "business-as-usual" scenario, a complete 
retirement and disposal option, and an option to include disposal in the present project. 
The first would have resulted in significantly greater risks to the environment, the second 
would entail high costs of early retirement and disposal of PCB contaminated electrical 
equipment, and the latter would have also been sub-optimal from an environmental 
viewpoint because information is not yet available to choose the best technology.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project is classified as a Category B project as it will reduce or eliminate potential 
environmental and health impacts associated with unmanaged PCBs and will generate 
virtually no new impacts. An Environmental Assessment Framework (the EA 
Framework) has been prepared to assess environmental impacts associated with the 
Project. It provides an EA framework for screening and assessing potential environmental 
impacts, and identifies appropriate measures (including emergency response measures) to 
mitigate such potential impacts. It then devises a framework environmental management 
and monitoring plan to specify how the Project should monitor and mitigate potential 
environmental impacts of project activities throughout project implementation.  
 
Based on the EA Framework, an environmental assessment (EA) report was prepared 
for the Pha Lai Thermal Power Generation Company as it is expected that PCB 
management activities will be carried out in the first year of project implementation. 
Detailed site investigation and two rounds of stakeholder consultation found that 
environmental impacts of project activities at the site would be minimal. In its 
environmental management and monitoring plan, the EA report outlined measures 
(including emergency response measures) to prevent and mitigate risks of accidents 
during transportation and storage of PCBs equipment at an on-site storage facility of the 
Pha Lai Company.  
 
Following procedures outlined in the EA Framework, detailed site investigations will be 
carried out at the remaining facilities to develop their own site-specific PCB management 
plans during project implementation. Such site specific management plans will identify 
potential environmental impacts associated with project activities, identify proper 
mitigation measures, and propose management plans to monitor proper implementation 
of project activities. The Project will then support all the 15 facilities to carry out these 
plans in their daily operations.  
 
Based on assessment of site investigations on the upgrading needs for existing storage 
facilities of the 9 sites and guidance of the EA framework, separate environmental impact 
assessment (EIA) reports (including EMPs) will be prepared during project 
Page  5
implementation to address environmental impacts associated with construction and 
operations of such storage facilities, if these are considered necessary.  
 
A
series of PCB management trainings and workshops for government authorities and 
EVN staff are built into the project. Technical guidelines for PCB management at each 
step of the life cycle of PCB oils and equipment will be developed as part of the project. 
These guidelines would then be used to govern the work of consultants and/or contractors 
that will be engaged under this project to carry out the respective steps in the life cycle of 
PCB oils, equipment and wastes.  The project will also strengthen the current 
environmental policy and regulatory framework for handling PCB oils and wastes.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The general public is not exposed to any risks from the project. They are potentially at 
risk from unmanaged PCBs and it should be noted that the project includes major 
awareness-raising activities for different stakeholders such as the government, the private 
sector, the media, and the general public. Consultations were carried out during 
preparation of the EA/SA framework and the Pha Lai EA/SA report with relevant 
stakeholders. Feedback was taken into consideration when designing appropriate 
mitigation measures.  
 
Continuous stakeholder consultation will be supported by various activities under 
Components 1, 2 and 4 of the Project. In addition, Component 4 of this Project will 
support nationwide media campaigns to improve public awareness on sound PCBs 
management.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/16/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/26/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/03/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Dates above refer to the EA Framework and the Pha Lai EAI, the only site-specific EIA 
prepared for this project. Submission to InfoShop was tardy but the documents were 
disclosed locally in both English and Vietnamese in extensive public consultations.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
02/09/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui 
02/09/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/12/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
02/11/2009 
Comments:  Approved with no comments. 
