Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3386
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P108885 
Project Name:  VN - Agriculture Competitiveness Project 
Task Team Leader:  Binh Thang Cao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 19, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: September 18, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);General transportation 
sector (40%);General public administration sector (10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Trade facilitation and market access 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector development (S);Small and medium 
enterprise support (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
59.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.32 
 
Local Sources of Borrowing Country 
12.90
15.22 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective is to strengthen the competitiveness of smallholder farmers, 
with a focus on central Vietnam, in collaboration with the agri-business sector. Key 
outcomes would be that: (a) smallholder farmers adopt new market-responsive, cost-
efficient and environmentally-sustainable production technologies and management 
practices; (b) private, demand-driven productive partnerships are established with  public 
support on the basis of competitive and transparent procedures; and, (c) key infrastructure 
bottlenecks in the value chain are addressed.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project consists of four components, namely Component A: Enhancement of 
Agricultural Technology; (B) Support to Productive Partnerships; (C) Provision of 
Critical Infrastructure; and (D) Support for Project Management and Institutional 
Strengthening.  
Page  2
Component A: Enhancement of Agricultural Technology (US$16.2 million cost which 
would be financed entirely by IDA) has three subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent A1: Conducting technology R&D for a competitive agriculture. This 
sub-component would support the identification and implementation of applied research, 
and development and extension of technological packages that directly respond to the 
need to improve productivity and quality and to meet market requirements in a specific 
product value chain. This subcomponent would target smallholder farmers both within 
and outside of productive partnerships, to improve their product quality, productivity, and 
cost efficiency.  
 
Subcomponent A2: Enhancing sustainable farming practices. This subcomponent would 
finance pilot activities on a communal basis to enhance the sustainability of competitive 
agriculture practices. This would be achieved through the development and extension of 
technological packages that promote the application of good farming practices (GAP) and 
the sustainable use and management of land and coastal resources.  
 
Subcomponent A3: Monitoring and controlling chemical residues. This subcomponent 
would strengthen institutional capacity for the monitoring and controlling chemical 
residues on agricultural produce at three levels: provincial, agribusinesses, and 
smallholders. It would provide necessary equipment and technical training to conduct 
appropriate chemical residue tests at each of these levels. The subcomponent would also 
support the Provincial Plant Protection Department in preparing and publishing (with 
annual updates) a list of illegal and harmful chemicals, conducting public awareness 
raising campaigns, and carrying out farm and market surveillance to enforce regulations.  
 
Component B: Support to Productive Partnerships (US$28.5 million of which US$15.6 
million would be financed by IDA) has four subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent B1: Establishing new productive partnerships. This subcomponent 
would support the establishment of productive partnerships between farmer organizations 
(including their members) with private agribusiness enterprises. The aim is to develop a 
long-term, voluntary and commercial relationship and implement a detailed partnership 
business and investment plan that will help the participating partners to improve their 
competitiveness in terms of price, cost, productivity, quality and sales volume. Project 
support would be provided to some 100 partnerships on a matching grant basis for 
eligible expenditures (including advisory services, training, as well as goods, materials, 
and on-farm works) to farmer organizations (and their members), and partnering 
agribusiness enterprises.  Matching grants  will be allocated on the basis of a competitive 
selection process utilizing transparent appraisal procedures specifically designed and 
established under the ACP to result in the selection of commercially viable partnership 
business plans. Under this subcomponent special effort will be undertaken to strengthen 
the management and performance of farmer organizations.  
 
Page  3
Subcomponent B2: Scaling up successful value chain initiatives. This subcomponent 
would help to roll-out best practices developed by existing productive partnerships 
throughout Vietnam. It would build on and expand successful, ongoing value chain 
partnerships between farmer groups and agribusinesses, helping them to broaden their 
activities, outreach and impact. Many existing value chain initiatives, mostly launched by 
bilateral donors or those undertaken by lead private sector firms, currently operate on a 
small-scale pilot basis only. This subcomponent would provide MARD with the means to 
support such a scaling-up and better align partnerships with sector reform strategies and 
initiatives at the national level.  Value-chains eligible for scaling up would be selected on 
a
country-wide basis (i.e. beyond the confines of the eight provinces associated with this 
project).  
 
Subcomponent B3: Implementing an information campaign, networking and match 
making. This subcomponent would carry out an information and communications 
campaign to introduce the productive partnership program (associated with 
subcomponent B1) and the scaling-up initiative (associated with subcomponent B2). In 
addition, an active networking and match making would be supported to facilitate the 
establishment of farmer organizations, to reduce the search costs for farmer organizations 
and agribusinesses in identifying suitable partners, as well as to assist partnerships in 
finding public and private service providers and other support institutions.  
 
Subcomponent B4: Fostering the agricultural investment climate and improving service 
delivery. This subcomponent would support provincial-level, participatory policy 
dialogues with key provincial stakeholders, especially the private sector, through public- 
private agriculture roundtables. These provincial roundtables would strive to review and 
improve the local agribusiness regulatory environment, institutional conditions and 
service delivery systems. They would also contribute to the formulation of provincial 
agricultural competitiveness strategies, based on market opportunities and comparative 
advantage. At the central level, the project would support MARD to conduct a study 
reviewing the experience of public support to productive partnerships under ACP with 
the long term aim of possibly upgrading this approach to become a public policy 
implemented by MARD, nationwide.  
 
Component C: Provision of Critical Infrastructure (US$24.0 million of which US$22.1 
million would be financed by IDA) has two subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent C1: Supporting locally-identified infrastructure priorities. This sub-
component would support critical infrastructure needs identified at the district level, in 
collaboration with the communes and the local agribusinesses. The sub-projects would be 
small-scale and address critical infrastructure bottlenecks in production and marketing.  
 
Subcomponent C2: Providing infrastructure support to productive partnerships. 
Productive Partnerships associated with Component B could apply for support under this 
subcomponent to the project to address critical public infrastructure constraints that 
directly impact their agricultural business activities. Other than the identification and 
Page  4
screening process, this subcomponent would be implemented following similar 
procedures as under C1, above.  
 
Component D: Support for Project Management (US$6.3 million of which US$5.8 
million would be financed by IDA) has two subcomponents:  
 
Subcomponent D1: Supporting project management and institutional strengthening. 
This subcomponent would support all activities necessary to ensure that the project is 
implemented in accordance with the project implementation manual. It would ensure 
effective coordination and good project management at PCU and PPMU levels including 
safeguards, financial management and audits, reporting and supervision.  
 
Subcomponent D2: Monitoring and evaluation. This sub-component would support the 
establishment and operation of the M&E system under the project. This would include 
support to the design and implementation of the various surveys and other tools for 
monitoring and evaluating the progress of project implementation and the results of the 
project, including the level of impact on intended beneficiaries.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The ACP covers five provinces located along the coasts of Vietnam including Thanh Hoa 
and Nghe An in the north central region, Binh Dinh, Ninh Thuan and Binh Thuan in the 
south central region, and three provinces located in the highland namely Gia Lai, Dak 
Lak and Lam Dong.  
 
Environment: Six out of the eight provinces are located in regions having high average 
annual rainfall, from 1600 
–
2500 mm. Meanwhile, Ninh Thuan and Binh Thuan 
provinces are located in hot and dry area with annual rainfall is much lower, from 700 
mm (Phan Rang city) to 1100 mm. However, even in region with abundant rainfall, short 
dry periods lasting from 15 to 20 days still cause water shortage to crops and affect the 
quality of produces.  
 
All of the eight provinces have forest covered land and protected areas.  Located in 
tropical moonson region, the forests are generally rich in biodiversity.  The table below 
presents the forest area in relation to the total land area of each province.  
 
Land area     Forest land     Percentage  
 
(mil. ha)      (ha)              (%)  
 
Thanh Hoa 
  1.112         484.246            44  
 
Nghe An 
          1.649 
        745,557            45  
 
Gia Lai 
          1.554 
        800            52  
 
Dak Lak 
          1.313 
        609 
          46.7  
 
Lam Dong 
  0.977         NI  
 
Binh Dinh 
  0.603         117.000           20  
 
Ninh Thuan    0.336         160,000            44  
 
Binh Thuan    NI 
        400,000  
 
(Source: provincial websites,2007)  
Page  5
Social: Ethnic minorities are found in all the project provinces, with highest 
concentration in Gia Lai and Daklak provinces (43.7% and 31.3% respectively). Binh 
Dinh and Binh Thuan provinces have the least ethnic minority population (2% and 7% 
respectively). Therefore, ethnic minority will be one of the social safeguard issues. The 
project, however, is anticipated to mainly have positive impacts on the incomes of ethnic 
minorities through improved production technology and access to market. Some negative 
impact, if any, would only be the result of very limited level of land acquisition for the 
small scale market infrastructures which will not cause community-wide or severe socio-
economic effects.  
 
No major resettlement will be required in this project and only limited land acquisition 
might be entailed due to the investment in small scale market infrastructures. Each of the 
small infrastructures is anticipated to have low-intensive impact. Measures for impact 
mitigation have been considered which include the development of a number of project’s 
policy frameworks which guide the social safeguard implementation. Consultation with 
the affect population will also be remained throughout the preparation and 
implementation of the project. In overall, the project will greatly benefit the local 
communities, including better access to improved production technology and market.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASVS) 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:  
 
OP4.01, Environmental Assessment.  
 
Page  6
The key environmental issues include: (1) proper use and management of agricultural 
chemicals and pesticides in agricultural production; (2) management and proper treatment 
of agricultural wastes; (3) adverse impacts of construction activities of small-scale market 
infrastructure; and (4) increased encroachment risks to undisturbed/forested land or 
natural habitats.  
 
Project Environmental Assessment and Management Framework EA&EMF) has been 
prepared and approved by the client on June 26, 2008 to meet the Vietnamese 
Government and World Bank’s requirements on environmental safeguarding and 
management.  The EA& EMF proposed adequate measures to adequate the identified 
potential impacts, institutional arrangements as well as budgets for the implementation of 
the EMF.  
 
OP4.09, Pest Management  
 
This Bank policy will apply because the project directly and indirectly promotes 
agricultural intensification and diversification production through applied research and 
extension programs.  A separate Pest Management Plan is not required as the project 
design incorporates a subcomponent of enhancing sustainable farming practices to 
promote the application of IPM and GAPs in agricultural development, to mitigate its 
environmental impact, and to improve sustainable use and management of land and 
coastal resources. The project will also assist government agencies at provincial level, 
businesses and small holders to enhance capacity in monitoring and controlling chemical 
residues.  
 
OP4.12, Involuntary Resettlement  
 
Component C of the project would support critical infrastructure needs that have been 
identified at the district and commune level in collaboration with the local agri-business 
sector. These might include small scale rural roads/paths, irrigation scheme or market 
places. The project is expected to have marginal adverse impacts of land acquisition and 
resettlement.  However, a Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed and 
approved by the client on June 26, 2008 in line with relevant local laws, regulations and 
World Bank policy on involuntary resettlement to guide planning and implementation of 
mitigation measures in case of land acquisition and resettlement.  
 
OP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples (IP)  
 
The ethnic minorities account for 21 percent of the population on average in the project 
area, with Gia Lai and Daklak provinces having the largest shares of ethnic minorities in 
their province’s population with 43.7 and 31.3 percent, respectively. Ethnic minorities in 
the project area can be categorized into two main groups (i) indigenous or local ethnic 
groups (such as Coho, Churu, Ede, Giarai, Bana, Hre and Ra-glai) and (ii) migrant ethnic 
groups from the North (such as Thai, Tho, Muong, Hmong, Dao, Tay and Nung). Limited 
language skills and poor access to market information of ethnic minorities are often seen 
as their constraints in access to production technology and market. Due to the presence of 
Page  7
ethnic minorities within the project areas, Bank’s OP 4.10 will be triggered.  A 
SocialAssessment has been carried out consistent with the Bank OP 4.10. During the 
project preparation free, prior and informed consultations with the ethnic minorities has 
been carried out by the Borrower leading to broad community support to the project. 
Further, an Ethnic Minority Development Framework (EMDF) in compliance with 
Bank’s OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has been developed in consultation with the 
ethnic minority communities in selected project areas. This EMPF was approved by the 
client on June 26, 2008 and will be guiding the preparation of the Ethnic Minority 
Development Plans.  
 
All EA, EMF, RPF and EMDF documents and the Vietnamese translations were ready 
and disclosed in December 2007 for stakeholder consultantion and feedback. The Bank’s 
disclosure requirements have been followed.  All documents were disclosed locally and 
were accessible in a form, manner, and language intelligible to local NGOs and project 
affected people.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None is expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environment. The project will exclude proposals or elements of proposals regarding 
upgrading of access road within 1 km from protected forest or natural reserves.  Local 
forest management unit shall be consulted during the identification of specific sites and 
provincial/district DONRE shall take part in the verification of relevant information 
described in the proposals and evaluate the mitigation measures.  
 
Alternative water source such as providing irrigation channels to convey surface water 
to croplands shall be considered when evaluating proposals on well development.  On the 
other hand, in cases development of well is critical and need to be done, design 
consultants will be required to develop appropriate operation and maintenance procedures 
to minimize the risk of surface water leakage in to the boreholes.  On the other hand, 
siting of the boreholes will also consider the distance to farm land and other pollution 
sources in order to minimize the risks.  Close supervision on the works of contractor 
during borehole development and casing shall also be carried out.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment. Environmental Assessment and Management Framework (EA and EMF) 
has been prepared and reviewed by the Bank during the preparation of the project. It was 
approved and adopted by the client.  
 
It is supposed that the borrower have sufficient capacity to plan and implement the 
measures described above.  During implementation phase, PCU and each PPMU shall 
appoint one staff be responsible for environmental safeguarding of the Project.  A 
Page  8
qualified environmental consultant shall also be recruited to assist and provide training 
for PCU and PPMU environmental staff to plan and implement the measures described 
above.  Adequate budget has been estimated for the implementation of the mitigation 
measures as well as capacity buildings for the implementation of the Project 
Environmental Framework.  
 
Social. During the project preparation, an international consultant team with social 
development expertise was hired to carry out the Social Assessment and to help PCU to 
develop a Resettlement Policy Framework and an Ethnic Minority Development 
Framework. It was reviewed by and Bank and later approved by the client on June 26, 
2008. The Resettlement Plans and Ethnic Minority Development Plans will be guided by 
these policy frameworks.  
 
Implementation arrangements.  An environmental and social unit within PCU will be 
established to manage and supervise safeguard implementation. Each participated PPMU 
is to appoint a staff in charge of environmental and social safeguard implementation. An 
independent agency will monitor compliance throughout project implementation.  
 
Capacity. The
 Borrower possesses adequate capacity for assessing the project’s 
environmental and social impacts, and proposing mitigation measures for these, given 
their extended experience in previous IDA funded projects. Trainings will be provided to 
project staff for implementing the Environmental Management Plans, Resettlement Plans 
and Ethnic Minority Development Plans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During implementation phase, the project will be managed by a Project Central Unit 
established under MARD.  Each provincial DARD shall form a PPMU to coordinate 
project implementation activities.  
 
Consultations with various farmer groups, local business, provincial DONREs and 
forest management unit have been conducted in the form of formal and informal 
meetings during the project design and preparation of environmental and social 
safeguards documents. Presentations have taken place at inter-provincial workshop in 
January 2008 prior to finalization of the EA, EMF, RPF and EMDF.  
 
The Vietnamese version of the final draft EA, EMF, RPF and EMDF will be disclosed 
at provincial and district levels.  During the implementation phase, the document will 
also be disclosed at commune level.  Safeguard documents shall also be disclosed at 
VDIC and InfoShop in Washington DC prior to project appraisal and will be disclosed 
again in the project area after project negotiations.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Page  9
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/22/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/22/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/03/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/22/2008 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
A
separate Pest Management Plan is not required as the project design incorporates a 
subcomponent of enhancing sustainable farming practices to promote the application of 
IPM and GAPs in agricultural development, to mitigate its environmental impact, and to 
improve sustainable use and management of land and coastal resources. The project will 
also assist government agencies at provincial level, businesses and small holders to 
enhance capacity in monitoring and controlling chemical residues.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
Page  10
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Binh Thang Cao 
07/17/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ly Thi Dieu Vu 
07/17/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen 
07/17/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
07/17/2008 
Comments:  This ISDS reflects the updated project description. There is no change in safeguards. 
Page  11
