Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  44917 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/02/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Vietnam 
Project ID: P110693 
Project Name: Vietnam New-Model Universities Project 
Task Team Leader: Jeffrey Waite 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2009 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
270.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project will:  (a) increase the quality of research and research-based teaching;  and (b) 
improve the efficiency of governance and management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component A.  Policy and regulatory framework:  Implement specific arrangements for 
governance, financing and quality assurance procedures of new-model research universities (in 
harmony with sector-wide framework being developed under the Second Higher Education 
Project currently under implementation).  In particular, this model would give wide autonomy to 
the universities regarding degrees and programs, recruitment and management; with ex-post 
rather than a-priori monitoring by MOET.  
 
Component B.  University establishment and development:  Design, build and equip two new-
model research universities; establish management systems (including governance, financing and 
quality assurance systems); develop and deliver training program for leadership, management, 
teaching and research staff.   The Vietnam-German University will be a completely new multi-
disciplinary science-oriented institution, created from a partnership between the Ho Chi Minh 
City National University and a consortium of German universities (with a strong German input 
Page  2
in the areas of governance, teaching and research);   the Can Tho University sub-project will 
likely involve the upgrading and reforming of part or all of the existing Can Tho University.  
 
Component C.  Project implementation management:  Manage project; monitor performance 
and results.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Ho Chi Minh City; Cantho City   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While the Ministry of Education and Training (MOET) has executed World Bank and ADB 
projects in the education sector involving infrastructure development (with the concomitant 
social and environmental issues), the scope of the infrastructure development in the present 
project is larger than in our previous projects.  MOET and the local sub-project teams would 
require support to develop needed safeguards institutional capacity.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (EASVS) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will address both the environment 
and social issues (other than resettlement and indigenous peoples). The ESMP will include: 
(a)during design and construction drainage, water supply, landscaping etc; (b)during operation 
plan for waste management plan for both solid and liquid waste (sanitary and laboratory waste); 
and (c) social issues like accessibility for physically challenged people which are not covered 
under any resettlement plan.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
University construction or rehabilitation will take place in fully converted habitats. As such, 
the project will not significantly convert or degrade any protected areas, known natural habitats, 
or established or proposed critical natural habitats as defined in the policy.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
University construction or rehabilitation will take place in fully converted habitats. As such, 
the project will not affect critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
The project will neither procure pesticides nor result in an increased use of pesticides.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
The project will not adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological, historical, 
religious, or unique natural values. Appropriate clauses will be included in all construction 
contracts regarding the procedures to be followed in the event of chance find of culturally 
significant artifacts or sites.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
The project will not affect Indigenous Peoples as defined in the policy, and project activities 
will not limit or prevent access to natural resources vital to the sustainability of their culture and 
livelihoods. That said, if the task team determines that any of 
the land is owned or used by ethnic 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
minorities, the policy will be triggered. The task team agreed in addition to encourage the client 
to develop and maintain policies that increase the access of ethnic minorities to the project 
universities to the extent possible.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
In instances where the project will use vacant land acquired prior to project identification, the 
client will confirm that the land is free from squatters and other users.  
 
In instances where the project will use land vacant land that was recently acquired, the task 
team will conduct due diligence to ensure that resettlement and compensation procedures were 
followed and that there are no lingering claims and/or issues.  
 
In instances where the project will acquire new land and the land has already been 
identified, the client will prepare either an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (if the number of 
people to be displaced are fewer than 200) or a Resettlement Action Plan in accordance to 
OP4.12 prior to appraisal.  
 
If new land is to be acquired during project implementation, the client will prepare a 
Resettlement Policy Framework in accordance with OP4.12 prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams, nor will it rely on the 
performance of an existing dam or a dam under construction, as defined in this policy.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
There are no known project components involving international waterways.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
The project is not located in any known areas under territorial dispute.   
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
October-December 2008   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jeffrey Waite 
07/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
08/01/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
08/01/2008 
Comments:   
