Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/07/2007 
Report No.:  AC3168
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P082672 
Project Name:  Vietnam Northern Uplands Health Support Project 
Task Team Leader:  Maryam Salim 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00
6.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project is expected to contribute to the improvement of the health status of the poor 
and ethnic minorities in the Northern Uplands who are beneficiaries of Decision 139. 
This will require strengthening the capacity of the health care system to provide better 
quality health services and improving access of the Decision 139 Beneficiaries to those 
health services.  
 
The specific development objective is: Increase utilization of district health services 
among Decision 139 beneficiaries in the Northern Upland Provinces through (i) 
strengthening of district hospitals and(ii) reducing financial constraints to accessing 
health services.  
 
Key outcome indicators include:  
 
**Utilization  rates of in-patient/ outpatient services in District Hospitals among 
Decision 139 beneficiaries  
 
**Percent of population who experience catastrophic health care expenditures  
 
Page  2
**Proportion of district hospitals that offer a full set of health services according to 
national norms for the given level of care   
 
3. Project Description 
COMPONENT ONE:  Strengthening District-level Health Services (US$ 42.9 million). 
This component aims to improve the quality of district hospitals by (i) strengthening the 
health workforce capacity and developing pilot models to increase staff retention in NU 
provinces; (ii) providing basic medical equipment and selective facility repair and 
refurbishment; and (iii) improving hospital management.  
 
COMPONENT TWO: Increasing Financial Access to Healthcare Services for Decision 
139 Beneficiaries ($10.0 million)  
 
This component aims to address demand-side constraints of access to health services by 
piloting mechanisms to further reduce financial barriers for the Decision 139 
beneficiaries in the project provinces. In addition to the pilot, the project will support 
HCFP through institutional capacity building activities. The project will support 
provincial and district agencies in strengthening monitoring, reporting and supervision of 
the HCFP's implementation at all levels. In order to enhance the impact of the pilot and 
HCFP capacity strengthening, this component will finance BCC activities geared towards 
providing key information and enhancing the knowledge of beneficiaries of their benefits 
under Decision 139.  
 
COMPONENT THREE:  Monitoring, Evaluation, and Project Management (US$ 7.1 
million)  
 
This component will support the set up and management of the Central Project 
Management Unit (CPMU) and Provincial Project Management Units (PPMUs) through: 
(i) consulting services to cover technical issues as well as procurement, financial 
management, and disbursement; (ii) training of project management staff; (iii) provision 
of necessary office equipment; (iv) financing of incremental operating costs, and (v) 
monitoring and evaluation activities, including the baseline data collection, indicator 
updates, mid-term reviews, end of project completion report and audits. This component 
will also support an initiative to streamline MOH's internal procurement review and 
approval process. This is not only a necessary step to ensure successful project 
management, but also a critical initiative in the broader public procurement reform efforts 
in the sector and the country.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project is focused on the Northern Upland provinces of Bac Kan, Cao Bang, Dien 
Bien, Ha Giang, Lai Chau, Lao Cai, and  Son La.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen (EASVS) 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASVS) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Bank's safeguard policy on Indigenous People (OP4.10) is triggered. However, the 
Project is expected to have no adverse impacts on ethnic minority groups.  
 
The Northern Uplands provinces are located in the Northeast and the Northwest regions 
of Vietnam. The Northeast region stretches from the Chinese border to the Red River, 
whereas the Northwest region is linked to upper and central Laos. The Northern Upland 
provinces consist of mostly ethnic minority groups (82%) compared to the national 
average of about 13.5 %. The main and largest ethnic minority groups among around 
thirty different groups living in the project provinces include: Thai, Tay, Hmong, Muong, 
Nung, Dao, Giay and Ha Nhi. The project provinces are some of the least developed in 
the country, ranking very low in the human development index, are among the poorest, 
and are located in poorly accessible mountainous areas with very difficult terrain and 
other conditions that make them difficult to reach.  
 
There are particular issues that characterize the lives of ethnic minorities that impact 
their access to and utilization of health services. One significant issue is the cultural 
practice of the ethnic minority groups. Whereas these groups are heterogeneous and 
different, and one cannot generalize, there are certain cultural practices, beliefs and 
norms that do not encourage optimal use of health services, such as home deliveries, low 
utilization of family planning services. Other barriers to access include culture and 
language, geography (most tend to live in the mountainous areas) financial barriers, 
especially for the poor among them.  
 
It is expected that the project will help to increase demand for and utilization of health 
services by the poor and ethnic minorities by reducing the financial burden of health care 
for beneficiary households through increasing coverage of and strengthening the 
implementation of the Health Care Funds for the Poor (HCFP).  
 
Page  4
The Bank’s safeguard policy on environmental assessment (OP 4.01) is 
triggered.Project activities will include the upgrading, repair, and rehabilitation of 
facilities and the construction of technical blocks in existing district hospitals. All project 
activities will be implemented on existing sites, and there may be some impacts such as 
noise, vibration and air pollution during the construction phase.  
 
Health Care Waste Management. Management of health care wastes was identified as a 
possible area of concern in this project. The project support strengthening the provision 
of and demand for health care services is expected to result in an increased level of 
activity at the targeted district hospitals. Ensuring the proper disposal of the medical 
wastes generated at these facilities is therefore a primary concern.  
 
A
healthcare waste management (HCWM) study undertaken as part of project 
preparation found that although national HCWM regulations are in place, their 
application remains weak. The regulations require that the healthcare wastes be 
segregated, with incineration or landfilling to be used as treatment and disposal 
technologies for infectious wastes. However, many district hospitals in the project 
provinces, as in other areas of Vietnam, lack sufficient waste treatment facilities and do 
not have the resources to obtain even basic supplies such as colored bins or plastic bags. 
Therefore, in many instances, wastes are not segregated correctly, and unsegregated 
wastes are either landfilled on-site or off-site, incinerated oftentimes in rudimentary 
ovens that do not work properly or undergo open-air burning on hospital premises. 
Furthermore, the HCWM study observed that almost all district hospitals to be targeted 
by the project oftentimes discharge infectious liquid waste and blood products into the 
drainage system without treatment, and the waste can leak directly into the environment 
due to damaged drainage pipes.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Discharging hospital wastewater without treatment to the sewerage system can cause 
pollution in nearby water systems or soil pollution. Open air burning of hospital waste 
without temperature control can produce dioxin and furan which are very toxic and 
unsegregated waste also can pose threats. These above practices pose health risks to 
patients and their visitors, health care facility personnel, workers who handle health care 
wastes, and the general community.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The HCWM situation at District Hospitals (DHs) was reviewed through site visits and 
surveys. This report includes the results of assessment of legislation framework for 
healthcare waste management, institutional framework, HCWM in the Northern Uplands 
and the action plan of HCWM for DHs in these provinces. The project will assist 
hospitals to improve their handling and disposal of health care waste, and thereby avoid 
potential adverse health impacts to hospital patients, staff, and visitors, and to 
neighboring households.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
With the majority of the population in the project area being ethnic minorities, the entire 
project is considered as an Ethnic Minority Development Plan. Therefore, no free-
standing Ethnic Minorities Plan or Planning Framework was required.  However, a Social 
Assessment was done which focused on the dimensions of ethnic minority culture that 
would have a bearing on the project design with regard to both improved health service 
delivery and knowledge and access by ethnic minority groups. It also obtained 
stakeholders' views to improve the project design and to establish a participatory process 
for implementation and monitoring.  
 
To the extent feasible, ethnicity-specific analysis will be incorporated into the baseline 
survey. This quantitative assessment will be complemented by qualitative surveys during 
implementation, such as focus groups, that will be inclusive of other various ethnic 
minority groups.  The latter assessment will help monitor the impact of the project on 
various ethnic groups and allow for needed adjustments to ensure equitable distribution 
of benefits.  
 
The ethnic composition of the province will influence the design of communication 
materials and messages under the project’s BCC component to ensure messages are well 
targeted and to appropriate population groups.  
 
The Bank’s OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement will not be triggered, given 
thatland/assets acquisition was not envisaged under the investments for the 
upgrading/new construction of technical blocks at a number of district hospitals since 
these works will take place within the existing premises.  
 
The HCWM study provided recommendations on mitigation measures to be taken 
during project implementation. These measures include the preparation of specific 
HCWM plans for each district hospital under the project; training and use of information, 
education, and communication (IEC) materials on HCWM for district hospital staff; and 
providing the treatment or disposal facilities for special medical waste. More details on 
the proposed recommendations can be found in the Health Care Waste Management Plan 
report. Support for measures is included in project costs.  
 
Other Safeguard Issues. Project activities will include the upgrading, repair, and 
rehabilitation of facilities and the construction of technical blocks in existing district 
hospitals. All project activities will be implemented on existing sites, and no land 
acquisition will take place. Therefore, the project will not result in resettlement or affect 
critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats, nor will it affect sites with 
archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values.  Appropriate 
clauses will be included in all construction contracts regarding the procedures to be 
followed in the event of chance finds of culturally significant artifacts or sites. For the 
level and scope of civil works to be carried out, an environmental screening will be 
Page  6
conducted at each site and a framework applied to deal with the impacts, which are 
expected to be minor and addressed easily.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Different approaches for social impact assessment were applied to assess factors that 
exert impacts on the needs of medical examination and treatment, on capacity to provide 
health care services, and other factors that influence the behavior of the poor and the 
ethnic minority groups for healthcare. The social assessment involved an extensive 
consultation of 8 weeks with visits to 10 district hospitals in 5 provinces (Lao Cai, Cao 
Bang, Bac Kan, Son La, Dien Bien); 5 group discussions with managers and medical 
workers at provinces and district level; 20 depth-interviews with healthcare workers at 
healthcare departments and 40 interviews of patients (outpatients and inpatients) in 
district hospitals. Further to the consultation activities undertaken for the Social 
Assessment, the technical consultant team who contributed to the situation analysis and 
design of the project also conducted a large volume of consultations with different 
stakeholders during their fieldwork in the project provinces.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/02/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/29/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/03/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
No free-standing Ethnic Minorities Plan or Planning Framework was required.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
Page  7
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
N/A 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maryam Salim 
10/03/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen 
11/13/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Lan Thi Thu Nguyen 
10/19/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Fadia M. Saadah 
12/07/2007 
Comments:   
