Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/17/2008 
Report No.:  AC3315
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P095129 
Project Name:  Northern Delta Transport Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 12, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  EASTE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (80%);Roads and highways (10%);General 
transportation sector (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S);Regional integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
170.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project’s development objective is to enhance the efficiency, 
environmentalsustainability and safety of transport infrastructure and services through the 
alleviation of physical and institutional bottlenecks in Vietnam's Northern Delta Region.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project will have three main components. The costs below are base costs including 
resettlement, where applicable.  They exclude contingencies, incremental operating costs 
and taxes.  
 
Component A: Multimodal Transport Corridors (US $147.7 million)  
 
This component consists of improvements to two waterway corridors in the Northern 
Delta Region to increase the efficiency of multimodal transport and supply chains.  It has 
four subcomponents (in addition to “detailed design and supervision”):  
 
Sub-Component A1: Improvements to National Waterway Corridors (US $67.8 
million)--The investments under this subcomponent are in two corridors: (a) a northern 
Page  2
corridor between Viet Tri and Quang Ninh, a distance of 280 km; and (b) a western 
corridor between Hanoi and Lach Giang, a distance of 180 km.  The investments will be 
to improve the standard and connectivity of the river network. The corridors will be 
improved to Class I/II standards and once improved, will be able to accept convoys of 
fully loaded 4X400 DWT barges over their entire length.  The upgrading of the corridors 
will entail dredging to the required widths and depths, bend corrections, bank protection, 
shoal regulation, air clearance improvement at one bridge crossing and provision of 24-
hour aids to navigation.  
 
Sub-Component A2: Improvements to Ninh Co River Estuary and an Inter-connecting 
canal between the Day and Ninh Co Rivers with a navigation lock (US $63.1 million)--
Shallow depths at the estuaries of the Day and Ninh Co rivers restrict the size of the 
vessels that can use the rivers to about 200-600 DWT (the latter during high tide) even 
though many sections of the rivers can handle much larger vessels.  As a result, vessels 
using the coastal route on the Eastern Sea are often unable to pass through the river 
estuaries to the ports of Ninh Phuc and Hanoi.  The sub-component will include 
investments in an access channel bypassing the mouth of the Ninh Co estuary to 
accommodate 3000 DWT vessels and a canal connecting the Ninh Co and Day rivers.  
The required work will entail dredging the approach channel and connecting canal and 
construction of breakwaters, a ship lock, bank protection and other river training works.  
 
Sub-Component A3: Improvements to Provincial Ports (US $6.0 million)--This sub-
component will comprise the construction of new facilities at Viet Tri and Ninh Phuc 
ports.  Finance will be used to pilot new institutional and management arrangements and 
to support a range of physical improvements designed to increase capacity and 
demonstrate improved cargo handling methods to acceptable environmental standards.  
These investments are intended to raise the distribution efficiency of the transport 
network within the Project region in an environmentally sustainable manner and in turn 
improve the connectivity of the region to the sea ports in the north as well as to central 
and southern Vietnam.  
 
The ports of Viet Tri and Ninh Phuc could benefit from capacity expansion and were 
selected for upgrading as pilot projects. Investments will include new wharfs, storage 
areas, warehouses, road access and waste disposal facilities. The piloting of the 
investment in the two ports is planned in conjunction with an institutional component 
(C1) to support the implementation and operationalization of frameworks for the 
planning, management, operations and licensing of ports and landing stages (including 
the roles of the public and private sectors); as well as for the environmental management 
of port and vessel operations.  These frameworks are currently being developed under the 
ongoing MDTIDP.  Once the frameworks are in place, more ports and landing stages 
could be upgraded under future projects.  
 
Sub-Component A4: Pilot Maintenance Contracts (US $1 million)--Pilot maintenance 
will be carried out on corridors in the northern region to improve overall channel 
maintenance practices and help ensure that corridor improvements are sustained in the 
future. The type of pilot project will be selected based on a study of different 
Page  3
maintenance contract arrangements including performance-based maintenance contracts.  
The study will be carried out under the institutional support component (Component C1) 
during the first 18 months of the Project.  
 
Sub-Component A5: Design and Supervision (US $10.3 million)--The cost of the 
detailed engineering design and supervision for sub-components A1-A3 is estimated at 
8% of the total base cost of the civil works contracts (excluding contingencies and taxes).  
 
Component B: Ferry Boat Stages (US $5.1 million)  
 
Sub-Component B1: Improvements to Ferry Boat Stages (US $4.8 million)--This sub-
component will include physical improvements to 15-30 pilot ferry boat stages. At 
present there about 900 small ferry boat stages in the Project region used primarily by 
passengers for river crossing.  Access to these ferries from the road is often dangerous 
and has resulted in accidents and fatalities.  In conjunction with the physical 
improvements, the Project will support the implementation and operationalization of a 
framework of standards for the design and operation of the different size ferry boat 
stages.  The framework will be developed under the MDTIDP and implementation will 
be carried out under the institutional support component of this Project (Component C).  
In addition, Sub-Component B2: Design and Supervision (US $0.3 million)--The cost of 
the detailed engineering design and supervision of Sub-component B1 is estimated at 8% 
of the total base cost of civil works contracts (excluding contingencies and taxes).  
 
Component C: Institutional Support (US $5.3 million)  
 
This component consists of three sub-components:  
 
Sub-Component C1: Institutional support to VIWA (US $1.0 million)--This sub-
component will support VIWA to more effectively carry out its tasks as manager of the 
inland waterway network in Vietnam.  This will be coordinated with, and be 
complementary to, the institutional reform initiatives being undertaken under the 
MDTIDP.  The initiatives that will be addressed under NDTDP include:  
 
•
i: Support for the improved management of ports, landing stages and 
ferryboatcrossings based on frameworks for the planning, general and environmental 
management developed under the MDTIDP  (US$ 0.25million);  
 
•
ii: Support for maintenance through the piloting of new maintenance 
arrangements such as performance-based contracts. (US$ 0.50 million); and  
 
•
iii: Support for the role of community participation and supervision in project 
activities (US$ 0.25 million).  
 
Sub-Component C2: Training (US $0.5 million)--Based on the curricula developed 
under the technical assistance program of the MDTIDP, this sub-component will train 
central and provincial government transport officials involved in the waterway sector in 
the north.  
 
Sub-Component C3: Project Audit Services (US $1.25 million)--This sub-component 
will finance two types of independent audits (i) Integrated Project Implementation Audit 
Services (US $0.80 million) in which independent consultants will be procured to 
Page  4
conduct semi annual reviews and to provide heightened technical, fiduciary, safeguards, 
and general project monitoring; and (ii) Project Financial Audit (US $0.45 million) in 
which independent external financial auditors acceptable to IDA will conduct annual 
financial audits.  
 
Sub-Component C4- Preparation of Future Transport Projects (US$ 2.5 million)--A sum 
of US $2.5 million has been included for the identification and preparation of future 
transport projects.  
 
Implementation Schedule and Phasing-- The Project will be implemented over a six-
year period commencing in FY 2009 and closing in 2014. The implementation schedule 
is included in the Project Implementation Plan.  All investments under the project 
(physical and institutional) will be divided into two phases.  The phases are delineated 
according to current readiness to implement and not by year of implementation. Phase I 
investments refer to investments for which all key preparatory works (up to but not 
including detailed engineering design work) have been completed and Phase II 
investments refer to all the remaining investments for which preparation is ongoing or 
will take place during the first two years of the Project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project region is in northern Vietnam, covering a land area of approximately 
34,000km2 and consists of 15 provinces: the 11 provinces of the Red River Delta and 
four provinces from the Northeastern Region (Quang Ninh, Bac Giang, Phu Tho and 
Tuyen Quang). The investments fall in two main corridors:  
 
Corridor 1: Viet Tri 
–
Ha Noi – Pha Lai – Hai Phong – Quang Ninh, and  
 
Corridor 3: Hanoi – Lach Giang.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal (EASTE) 
Mr Quang Ngoc Bui (EASVS) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASRE) 
Ms Trang Phuong Thi Nguyen (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Project Components A and B will result in resettlement impacts due to the required land 
acquisition for rehabilitation, improvement and widening of national waterways, 
provincial waterways and roads, bridges and a ship lock. Some of the subprojects 
identified for the first year of project implementation will cause adverse impacts on 
private assets, including small businesses and households’ incomes in addition to 
temporary impacts on private land during groin construction and river bend corrections. 
Temporary land acquisition will also be necessary for depositing spoils from dredging of 
rivers. Although physical displacement of large number of households is not envisaged, 
many households stand to lose part of their agricultural land and household income due to 
the proposed rehabilitation and improvements.  Neither do the subprojects identified for 
the first year of implementation, nor the proposed development of ports have any ethnic 
minorities living within the sub-project areas.  
 
The Environmental Assessment (EA) OP4.01 is triggered because of concerns that 
project Components A and B, will finance investments that may potentially have 
significant direct adverse environmental impacts on associated and nearby riverine 
ecosystems, such as estuarial areas and inland waterway corridors, and also on land, 
because of the significant dredging and improvement works at key estuaries.  
 
Therefore, the client has undertaken an extensive EA process which was integrated into 
the feasibility study and will continue in the detailed engineering design stage. This 
process has ensured that these impacts are being thoroughly investigated and clearly 
understood and that the potentially affected people are meaningfully consulted and given 
the opportunity to participate in, and benefit from, this Project.  
 
The analysis of alternatives which was undertaken as part of this integrated EA process, 
ensured that the proposed investments were re-located and/or re-designed so as to avoid 
adversely affecting or significantly impacting any riverine ecosystems that could either 
be considered critical or significant natural habitats as defined by the Bank’s Natural 
Habitat’s operational policy OP4.04. Therefore, the location of all natural habitats within 
the likely project impact zones is clearly illustrated in the project maps.  
 
The main findings of the EA report in terms of significant environmental impacts are 
that dredging activities pose the most risk with impacts on water quality and from 
disposal of large amounts of spoil material. Other significant impacts are expected at the 
improvement works at the Lach Giang/ Ninh Co river estuary locations where the risks 
are from interruption of the littoral drift which can cause sediment deposition on the up 
drift side of the breakwater system and erosion on the down drift side, and also from 
disposal of significant dredged material.  
 
The EA process concluded that all environmental risks associated with dredging works 
are to be managed through the implementation of a Dredge Management Plan (DMP). 
Page  6
The DMP is a requirement in both the EA/EMP for Phase 1 and in Environmental 
Management Process Framework (EAMPF) for Phase 2 activities.  
 
With regards to the works at the Day and Ninh Co estuaries, further environmental 
modeling is required to get a better sense of the scale of the likely morphological changes 
in this area. This modeling will be undertaken as part of the final engineering design 
stage of these works. The cost of these measures and the monitoring of their 
implementation have been fully budgeted and included in the Project’s costs.  
 
The EA process also concluded that in some isolated cases, the physical re-location of 
some graves and burial sites will be required. This will be planned closely with the 
resettlement process and therefore, OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources has been 
triggered.  
 
Recognizing the need for more sustainable environmental management of the northern 
delta’s transport corridor as a whole (i.e beyond safeguarding this project), the project 
will support the implementation and operationalization of a comprehensive management 
framework for sustainable environmental management of waterway, port and ferry 
operations and also pilot specific investments in the ports of Viet Tri and Ninh Phuc, 
designed specifically to enhance environmental management for handling and servicing 
vessels and the storage of cargo at these locations.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The major potential long-term environmental impacts will be associated with 
hydrological changes in drainage patterns of certain sections of the northern Delta 
watershed area with implications for flood management, and also from morphology of 
the Lach Giang estuary.  
 
Overall, the Project is likely to have a net positive environmental impact due to the 
following two reasons:  
 
•
The Project investments will ensure that significant efficiencies from 
inlandwaterway transportation of large annual volumes of bulk cargo are realized. The 
cost ($ ton/km) of transporting cargo by inland waterways in Vietnam is about fifty 
percent of that of transporting the same cargo by road.  
 
•
The Project will invest in setting up and implementing a holistic and sustainable 
environmental management framework for the transport operations on the inland 
waterways, by beginning to address significant challenges such as institutional 
weaknesses within key agencies such as VIWA, improvement and subsequent 
enforcement of environmental guidelines, and the piloting of environmental measures at 
the Ports of Viet Tri and Ninh Phuc.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The decision to integrate the environmental assessment of the project as part of the 
feasibility design was extremely valuable in that it allowed for environmental issues to be 
Page  7
directly integrated and thereby become part of the decision making process. This led to 
the early identification of considerable environmental challenges with regards to some 
earlier proposed project investments. For example, one of the options considered earlier 
on included cutting out (effectively straightening) three ox-bow shaped river bends on the 
Louc river (along Corridor 2) as this would allow vessels to navigate there way inland 
with easier maneuverability, greater speeds,  and hence shorter times. However due to the 
significant environmental challenges and required mitigation measures involved with 
undertaking such works, it was agreed that these works would not be included in the 
project.  
 
The feasibility study also presented alternatives for the management of dredged material 
and also discussed how ports should be designed to better handle loading and unloading 
of bulk cargo material.  
 
Furthermore, based on economic considerations limited to the benefits of reducing the 
cost of freight movements (without taking into account environmental costs), it would 
have been better to locate the by-pass canal at the Day River mouth, but due to possible 
significant impacts on the nearby Nghia Hung Proposed Nature Reserve (a natural 
habitat) which is a sanctuary for migrating birds, this by-pass canal has been re-located 
further North, to the Ninh Co river estuary.  
 
Various investment alternatives were also considered in the Feasibility Study for 
Corridors 1 and 3.  
 
Consultations with the potentially affected and beneficiary communities and key 
stakeholders, carried out during the Social Assessment and preparation of resettlement 
plan, provided useful suggestions and feedback that was taken into account in 
considering design alternatives and formulating design parameters for the subprojects.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed in compliance with the 
requirements of the Bank’s OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement which has been 
submitted for approval by the client. The RPF will be applied for all subprojects for the 
entire project life. The RPF has been disclosed locally and through the Bank’s Infoshop. 
For phase 1 subprojects causing adverse social impacts a Resettlement Plan (RP) has 
been prepared following the provisions of the RPF.  RPs for phase 2 subprojects will be 
prepared during the first year implementation period after specific subprojects are 
identified.  The RP has been submitted to the WB for review, approval and subsequent 
disclosure locally and in the Bank’s Infoshop on Feb 12, 2008.  
 
While the locations of the Phase 2 subprojects are not clearly specified at present, they 
are unlikely to affect ethnic minority (EM) communities as the EM communities in the 
Northern Delta region are traditionally found in upland areas away from the actual river 
deltas. Consequently, OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has not been triggered.  
Nevertheless, an Ethnic Minority Planning Framework--EMPF (including procedures for 
Page  8
screening and review of future activities) in accordance with the requirements of the 
World Bank’s Policy has been prepared, reviewed by the Bank, and disclosed locally and 
in the Bank’s Infoshop. The EMPF will be followed in the unlikely event that EMs are 
affected by future subprojects.  
 
With regards to the environment, one Environmental Assessment (EA) report and its 
corresponding EMP for Phase 1 works and one Environmental Management Process 
Framework (EAMPF) for all of Phase 2 works, have been prepared by the GoV, 
consistent with the phasing approach adopted by the Project for the implementation of the 
Project’s components and activities. One executive summary report of these two EA 
reports was also produced in compliance with OP4.01. A list of the EA documents 
prepared is given below (3 documents in total).  
 
Phase: 1  
 
Component: Corridor 1  
 
EA Docs Prepared, Finalized & Disclosed before Project Appraisal:  Environmental 
Assessment (EA)/Environmental Management Plan (EMP)  
 
Phase: 2  
 
Component:  Corridor 3  
 
-Ninh Co.River Mouth/Estuary  
 
-Pilot Ports of Viet Tri and Ninh Phuc  
 
-Ferry Landing Stages  
 
EA Docs Prepared, Finalized & Disclosed before Project Appraisal:  Environ. 
Managmnt  Process Framework (EAMPF)  
 
Phase: 1 & 2  
 
Components:  All Project Components  
 
EA Docs Prepared, Finalized & Disclosed before Project Appraisal:  EA Executive 
Summary  
 
These reports have been reviewed by the Bank and the GoV, and following their 
approval by the latter and the clearance of the former, the final versions of the report will 
be disclosed locally in Vietnam and at the Bank’s Infoshop. Earlierversions of these 
reports have already been disclosed as mentioned earlier.  
 
Since the PCN stage ISDS was prepared, the project investments have been further 
defined resulting in changes in the number and content of EA reports from those 
proposed during the PCN stage ISDS meeting.  
 
With regards to the Borrower’s capacity to address environment and social safeguards 
issues, it is deemed that the Borrower’s institutional capacity to comply with these 
measures will be sufficient for the following reasons:  
 
1) Project implementation will be through the Project Management Unit-Waterways 
(PMU-W), which is currently also implementing the Bank supported Mekong Delta 
Page  9
Transport Infrastructure Development Project (MDTIDP) and has recently completed the 
implementation of the Bank funded Inland Waterways and Port Rehabilitation Project 
(IWWP). Therefore, PMU-W already has experience preparing and implementing World 
Bank projects.  
 
2) The key agencies for implementing this project, which are the PMU-W specifically, 
and VIWA more broadly, MoT to some extent, and the provincial agencies will be direct 
beneficiaries of the Institutional Support Component C of this project, which will 
address, inter alia, environmental management issues.  
 
3) The specific EA’s and EMP’s outlined above will contain capacity assessmentsof the 
relevant institutions and will propose adequate capacity building measures to ensure 
adequate capacity to sustain effective management of these issues at VWA, PMU-W, the 
Departments for Natural Resources and Environment and the Provincial People’s 
Committees.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
During EA preparation public consultation with project affected people (PAP) and other 
local relevant stakeholders will continue to be an on-going process, whereby the projects 
activities and its potential benefits and adverse effects will be discussed with these PAPs 
and their feedback taken into consideration when designing appropriate mitigation 
measures.  These discussions are documented in the EA reports and will become part of 
the project records.  
 
The main themes discussed can be summarized as follows:  
 
•
Generally, local communities expressed their full support for the 
project’sinvestments, expecting that it would improve conditions for trading and would 
foster the socio-economic development of their communities, and for communication and 
transportation.  
 
•
As the proposed widening of sections of Waterway Corridor 1 will mostly be 
carried out on its eastern (right) bank, which is located in the flood-prone area of the 
Delta, local authorities at all levels as well as local communities are concerned about the 
inundation risk in the flood season. They proposed that the project should take 
appropriate mitigation measures, including a timely rehabilitation of flood protection 
dikes, sluices, pumping facilities, either temporary or permanent, to protect local people, 
their crops and assets from possible flooding. They also proposed that the project should 
restore relevant public infrastructure before starting civil works to avoid possible 
inconveniences on local daily living and economic activities.  
 
•
Communities expressed a strong wish for continued and periodic consultations 
and for timely information on all activities that would affect them.  
 
Formal consultations have also been conducted.  Three formal workshops have been 
conducted the Inception Workshop (August 2007), the Interim Workshop, (December 
2007) and the Final Workshop (end January 2008), coinciding with each reporting stage.  
Page  10
The workshops were attended by the Ministry of Transport, Vietnam Inland Waterways 
Administration (VIWA), the Provincial Peoples’ Committees, academia, user 
associations, the port administrators, the World Bank and the consultants.  
 
During the social assessment and resettlement plan preparation, extensive public 
consultations, including focus-group discussions, with key stakeholders have been carried 
out as part of the project preparation and as an ongoing process. Besides project affected 
households, other key stakeholders included: Vietnam Women’s Union, Fatherland Front, 
Farmers Associations, trade unions and War Veterans.  Details on public consultation and 
key stakeholders will be included in the RP and Social Assessment report.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/10/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/12/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/05/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/18/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/01/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/12/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/05/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  11
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  12
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy 
03/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr James Orehmie Monday 
03/06/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal 
03/06/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
03/13/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
03/17/2008 
Comments:   
