Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC4340
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P115897 
Project Name:  VN Urban Upgrading Project Additional Finance 
Task Team Leader:  Dean A. Cira 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2009 
Managing Unit:  EASVS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (80%);Housing finance and real estate markets (10%);Housing 
construction (5%);Sub-national government administration (5%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (25%);Participation and civic 
engagement (25%);Access to urban services and housing (24%);Municipal governance 
and institution building (13%);Personal and property rights (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
160.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
250.00
250.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To assist the Borrower to alleviate poverty in urban areas by improving the 
environmental living conditions of the urban poor in the Project Cities through the use of 
participatory planning methods and the promotion of more inclusive and pro-poor urban 
planning processes.   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing would help to finance costs associated with the gap resulting 
from a failure to secure parallel financing for the Tan Hoa 
–
Lo Gom canal improvement 
sub-project and to cover a financing gap that is the result of high levels of inflation during 
2007-8 in the construction sector in Vietnam.  
 
The Parent Project consists of seven components:  
 
Component 1, Tertiary Infrastructure Upgrading and Service Improvements:  This 
component consists of the integrated upgrading of basic infrastructure such as drainage, 
Page  2
waste water collection, electricity and lighting, street access improvements and water 
supply and the provision of social services such as schools, pre-schools and health centers 
in targeted low-income communities. The hallmark of the component is the introduction 
of community participation in the development, approval and oversight of the community 
upgrading projects.  
 
Component 2, Primary and Secondary Infrastructure Improvements:  The component is 
focused on the upgrading of large primary and secondary infrastructure networks that are 
necessary to sustain the tertiary level investments.  This can include investments in roads, 
water distribution systems, drainage, and wastewater collection, among others.  
Investment priorities have largely been in the area of macro drainage and wastewater 
collection, which are among the largest infrastructure deficiencies in urban areas.  
 
Component 3, Resettlement Housing:  The upgrading of large infrastructure systems 
requires the resettlement or compensation of affected households.  Many families living 
in precarious conditions along the margins of drainage canals are required to be resettled 
both to improve their living conditions, and to accommodate space for the upgrading and 
improvement of the infrastructure networks.  This component includes the construction of 
resettlement housing and compensation of affected households.  
 
Component 4, Land and Housing Management:  This component is aimed at building 
the capacity of local government, under the decentralization of responsibilities, to better 
manage land and housing assets in the city.  It focuses on establishing electronic land 
administration and housing management information systems, the updating and 
digitization of cadastral maps and the simplification of procedures for the provision of 
land use certificates.  
 
Component 5:  The objective of this component is to provide access to poor households 
for the purpose of housing improvements or productive enterprises.  The component also 
aims to strengthen the capacity of the micro credit institutions involved in its delivery, 
specifically the Women’s Unions, Capital Aid Fund for Employment of the Poor and the 
Mekong Housing Bank.  
 
Component 6, Capacity Building:  The component is designed to provide training and 
build capacity to city officials and community groups in participatory planning, urban 
planning, community organization, community sanitation awareness, project 
management, financial management, procurement, safeguards monitoring and monitoring 
and evaluation of the projects.  
 
Component 7, Development of a National Urban Upgrading Program:  Through the 
Ministry of Construction, this component supports the development of a national strategy 
for urban upgrading, including conducting demand assessments, sharing of experiences 
and lessons learned in urban upgrading and the development of a national strategy to 
scale-up upgrading practices such as participatory planning and effective peri-urban 
development.  
 
Page  3
The Project is designed such that each of the four cities implements its own investment 
program following the decentralization policies of the Government of Vietnam.  As such, 
the Project can be viewed as four individual projects in one program, plus a national 
component implemented by the Ministry of Construction.  The Parent Project is 
implemented in Ho Chi Minh City, Can Tho, Nam Dinh and Hai Phong.  Additional 
financing will be applied in all four cities, but the bulk is to cover the new sub-project in 
Ho Chi Minh City.  
 
HCMC Sub-Project, Tan Hoa 
–
Lo Gom Canal Improvement Project  
 
The additional financing would help to finance costs associated with the gap resulting 
from a failure to secure parallel financing for the Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal improvement 
sub-project and to cover a financing gap that is the result of high levels of inflation during 
2007-8 in the construction sector in Vietnam.  
 
The only new activity to be financed under the additional financing is the Tan Hoa – Lo 
Gom Canal improvement project in Ho Chi Minh City.  The canal is used one of six 
principal drainage canals in the HCMC and in its current state is highly polluted due to 
the direct discharge of waste into the canal.  The canal is also used for light barge and 
boat traffic.  Its upgrading will improve its drainage capacity, improve the water quality 
and improve access through the construction of roads and bridges along the canal’s 
length of 7.5 KM As a new sub-projectthe social and environmental safeguards have been 
appraised as a condition for Board approval.  This ISDS focuses on this new investment.  
This sub-project includes canal dredging embankment of about 4.4km for open canal, 
construction of about 3.1km of reinforced concrete box culverts and about 12km of roads 
above the culvert or along the open canal. Additionally, about 9km of waste water 
interceptor with combined storm water overflow (CSO) chambers and waste water lifting 
pumping station will be constructed along the open canal to the approved scope of work 
to ensure completeness of investment.  In addition, the canal improvement works will 
include 10 pedestrian and/or all traffic bridges, and over 14,000 square meters of small 
landscaped parks.  The main benefits of the sub-project will include a reduction in 
flooding, improved water quality in the Tan Hoa – Lo Gomcanal (and subsequent 
environmental and health benefits that this will bring) and improved traffic flow and 
access due to the road improvements.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal is located in HCMC the largest city in Vietnam with the 
country’s highest population density and most serious environmental problemsrelated to 
sanitation and the urban management.  The canal alignment is located in the southwest 
section of the city expanding from the north to the south through several districts.  The 
Improvement of Canal, Embankment and Roads Along Tan Hoa – Lo Gom Canal 
encompasses three districts and numerous wards as follows:; Tan Phu District with 11 
Wards; District 6 with 11 Wards; and District 11 with 10 Wards.  The final section of the 
canal is connected with the Tau Hu Gom canal. The total population in the basin is about 
800,000.  The length of the Tan Hoa –Lo Gom canal is 7.4 kilometers.  Initially this is a 
Page  4
small drainage pipelinewith the length of about 3.5 kilometers discharging into Lo Gom 
canal at kilometer 4.  Bordering the Tau Ju Canal, the Tan Hoa 
–
Lo Gom canal widens to 
about 60 meters and runs about 3 meters deep.  The basin is comprised of commercial 
and industrial buildings and residential uses.  In the project area there are 6 physical 
cultural premises of which 3 pagodas, 2 small shrines and one Cao Dai oratory.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASVS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment:  The Project is classified as Category A.  The 
VUUP subprojects are expected to have mostly positive environmental and public health 
impacts by contributing to improvement of the city’s infrastructure, safe water and 
electricity supply, sanitation services, efficient and safer roads and resettlement sites. 
Adverse impacts could arise through: (a) temporary pollution (dust, noise, vibration, 
surface run-off), excavation work, and disturbances to local transport, waterways or 
drainage systems, that could occur during construction; (b) wastewater discharge from 
the sewers and canals; and (c) transportation and disposal of dredged/excavated material.  
 
The appraisal of the Tan Hoa – Lo Gom Canal improvement project was carried-outas a 
condition for appraisal of the Additional Financing.  The impacts of the investments in 
THLG canal are mainly related to the dredging activity, transportation and disposal of the 
dredged material; excavation work and transportation of materials for the construction of 
canal embankment, roads, bridges, sewerage and drainage. These impacts would include 
dust, noise, vibration, odor, disturbance to local traffic and the drains discharging to the 
canal, as well as temporary increase of pollution load in the canal water. With a system of 
a
box
culvert, and CSOs - interceptors to be built, respectively, in the canal upstream 
section and along the canal in its downstream section, water quality in the canal will be 
considerably improved.  An increase of pollution load is expected during the dry season 
Page  5
in the area of THLG canal outlet to the Tau hu - Ben nghe canal, although the total 
pollution load discharging to Tau Hu- Ben Nghe canal will remain unchanged compared 
to the baseline data.  Modeling of the pollution dispersion at the outlet area was 
conducted as to assess the extent of such an increase, with the result that 30% of BOD 
and 5% of solid suspended (SS).  The dredged material, which is contaminated by 
organics and a number of heavy metals, will be transported by water to a disposal site at 
the city's Da Phuoc waste treatment complex, which is being developed at a distance of 
17 km from the Tan hoa 
–
Lo gom canal by waterways.  Commitment of the HCMC 
URENCO allowing the disposal at this site has been secured.  
 
In addition to the standard mitigation measures to be applied by contractors to the 
construction work, the EIA report mandates constructing a screen at the THLG outlet and 
a
dyke around the unloading area of the disposal site. This would help to minimize the 
impacts of pollution dispersion to the receiving waters of the Tau hu - Ben nghe canal 
and also the waterways to be used for the transportation of the dredged material.  
 
OP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources:  The proposed additional financing for Ho Chi 
Minh City triggers an additional safeguards requirement for Physical Cultural Resources. 
There are six cultural sites located in the project area. Two small shrines would involve 
full land acquisition, while one pagoda (Thao Duong Thien Tu) would require partial 
land compensation. The remaining three premises are located in the vicinity of the 
proposed working sites and thus would be affected by impacts and pollution caused by 
construction work.  Consultation with the owners of the 6 cultural properties (pagodas 
and shrines) which would be wholly or partially affected was carried out.  As a result, 
measures mitigating impacts of construction work have been proposed in the EIA and a 
resettlement plan has been developed in the RAP.  The mitigation measures were 
consulted and agreed with the properties owners. These would include relocation and/or 
compensation for the wholly affected shrines; standard construction method statement 
mitigations, fencing and appropriate work scheduling for the pagodas which would be 
partially affected during construction.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement:  The Parent Project triggered the World Bank policy 
on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12). A Resettlement Policy Framework was 
prepared and endorsed for the whole project.  Based on it, a Resettlement Plan was 
prepared for the Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal improvement subproject.  A total of 2,201 
households with 13,206 persons will be affected, of which 1,351 HHs with about 8,106 
persons are fully affected and 850 HHs with about 5,100 persons partially affected.  
There are 215 HHs, whose business will be affected by the subproject.  Most of the 
affected HHs (82%) are concentrated in District 6 and the rest are located in Tan Phu 
(16%) and district 11 (2%) of the City.  
 
OP 4.10 Indigenous People: There are no ethnic minorities living in the project areas, as 
defined under Bank policy.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In HCMC, the canal improvement will not lead to a decline in total pollution load to the 
receiving canal (Tau Hu 
–
Ben Nghe) which is connected with the downstream of Tan 
Hoa – Lo Gom canal and is undergoing a major improvement project including a WWTP. 
Therefore, construction of a WWTP for Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal has been suggested for 
a
complete solution in the longer term. Funding is not available at this time for the 
construction of the linked WWTP for the Tan Hao – Lo Gom canal, but the HCMC 
authorities are actively seeking financing for its construction.  Until such time as the 
construction of the WWTP for Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal is attained, the quality of the 
receiving body of water, as indicated, will not improve.  But the inclusion of the 
interceptors will allow for the future connection to a WWTP.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives for the transport of the dredged material were considered.  Calculations 
show that the volume of contaminated sludge estimation is around 90,000m3 and the 
volume of excavated material is around 330,000m3.  There are several options for the 
transport of the sludge including by land, water and a combination of land and water.  
The preferred option is by water:  Lo Gom Canal to Tau Hu Canal to Can Giuoc River to 
Rach Chieu Creek to the Da Phuoc Site for a distance of 17 kilometers.  This route 
requires no transfer of the dredged material between the point of loading and unloading, 
and the avoidance of transport through city street combine to reduce potential negative 
impacts.  
 
The design of the canal improvement was also revised to improve the overall project 
impacts.  The original design called only for the construction of the canal improvements 
(dredging, embankments, roads and parks).  The revised design specifies the inclusion of 
sewage interceptors and CSOs to avoid direct discharge of sewage into the canal as per 
the original option.  This will result in a higher water quality of the Tan Hao – Lo Gom 
canal.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An EIA has been prepared in accordance with the Environmental Safeguard Framework 
(ESF). The ESF outlines the processes, roles and responsibilities for the monitoring of 
environmental management.  The Resettlement Framework specifies this for resettlement 
activities.  These procedures are being followed.  Additionally it is noted that:  
 
•
The PMU is responsible for ensuring the effective preparation, 
implementationand monitoring of the EIA, EMP, RAP and EMF.  The PMU is fully 
assessed to have the capacity to fulfill this responsibility with appropriate staff assigned 
to this task and a proven track record of competency;  
 
•
The PMUs are assisted by third party, specialist consultants in carrying out these 
responsibilities through the technical assistance activities of the Project;  
Page  7
•
PMU staff are provided with training in safeguards monitoring and 
supervisionunder Component 6 of the project;  
 
•
Independent Monitoring Consultants conduct bi-annual monitoring assessments 
and make reports to the World Bank and PMU;  
 
•
Environmental Monitoring reports are based on (i) an overall monitoring of 
project environmental changes during construction, and (ii) site environmental 
management plan (SEMP) which will be carried out weekly by a Construction 
management Consultant (CMC) for mitigation measures implemented by the contractors.  
 
•
The Bank conducts at least two full supervision missions annually that include the 
full safeguards team;  
 
•
Regular consultations between the PMU and the safeguards specialists are 
conducted as needed.  
 
There are no outstanding safeguards issues or complaints related thereto under the 
parent Project.  
 
The implementation arrangements will remain unchanged from the Parent Project as 
these have proven to be satisfactory and adequate for the activities proposed under the 
additional financing.  The PMU in HCMC has been delegated special powers by the 
People’s Committee providing it with sufficient autonomy to implement the project 
following approval of the annual investment and procurement plans.  The HCMC PMU is 
considered to be the most effective of the four implementing cities under the Parent 
Project, and is considered to have adequate capacity to undertake the activities to be 
financed under the Additional Financing. It has assigned staff responsible for 
environmental aspects, the deputy director has MSc in environment and is directly 
responsible for managing and supervising environmental issues in the PMU, the PMU is 
being assisted by an independent environmental monitoring consultant.  
 
The environmental impact assessment and the environmental management plan were 
prepared and appraised for the Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal improvement sub-project inHo 
Chi Minh City under the guidance of the EMF.  The EIA identifies the major potential 
environmental impacts of the project at all phases of the project cycle and includes 
mitigation measures.  The EMP provides the overall framework for managing the 
environmental impacts of the project before, during and after construction, defining the 
general roles and responsibilities of official authorities, contractors, subcontractors and 
consultants.  Mitigation measures will be incorporated into the bidding documents and 
construction contracts, subject to PMU review and Bank’s no objection.  
 
A
Resettlement Plan was prepared for the Tan Hoa – Lo Gom canal improvement 
subproject, based on the approved project RPF to ensure the project affected people can 
restore and improve their lost assets, living standard and income generation capacity.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The consultation with PAHs on Phase 2 activities, especially for the AF investment in 
Tan hoa – Lo gom canal, was done in accordance with OP 4.01 as well as OP4.12 for RP 
preparation and implementation.  The consultations with fully affected HHs showed that 
74% of them want to receive cash compensation for the lost assets and move on their own 
arrangement; 13.6% want to receive a land plot in the Vinh Loc B resettlement site and 
Page  8
12.4% want to get an apartment in near by areas.  Currently, there are several 
resettlement sites for the relocated DPs to choose: (i) Vinh Loc B resettlement site, 
located in the newly developed urban area with full developed infrastructure, 5-6 km far 
from the TH-LG canal with 2,024 apartments and 531 land plots, of which 500 
apartments and 281 land plots will be ready by the end of 2009 and the rest - by 2010; (ii) 
resettlement site in ward 11, district 6 with 580 apartments to be available in 2010; (iii) 
resettlement site in 243 Tan Hoa Dong, ward 14, district 6 with 656 apartments to be 
ready by 2011 and (iv) 239 apartments are available in 11 different resettlement sites 
located inside or around District 6, 11 and Tan Phu for relocated HHs to choose.  These 
sites provide enough land plots or apartments for relocated DPs to move into. In addition, 
land and housing markets in HCMC are the most developed in the country, where DPs, 
with compensation of the market prices, can find some suitable places for them to be 
relocated.  
 
Land and assets compensation prices in HCMC well reflect the market prices.  Right 
before deciding compensation prices, the PMU will hire an appraisal body to appraise the 
market prices, based on which the City PC will decide appropriate compensation prices to 
be applied for the project. This is the main reason for which a large number of DPs wish 
to receive cash compensation and arrange their own relocation.  
 
Business affected will be compensated and assisted in accordance with the RPF. In 
addition, 5% of the total compensation cost will be spent on rehabilitation measures to 
help DPs to restore income sources such as job training, job introduction to different 
enterprises, and credit access with very low interests.  
 
A
part of the TH-LG canal inside Tan Binh district has been cleared and the civil work 
has been conducted prior to the Bank agreeing to the additional financing.  There were 26 
HHs partly affected. The compensation was completed in July, 2008 with the total 
compensation cost of VND 1.7 bill.  All the DPs have repaired the houses and stabilized 
the living and were happy with the compensation. The Bank resettlement specialist has 
visited the site, talked to some DPs and confirmed these findings.  
 
In addition to consultations of the affected households, general consultations were held 
with community members to discuss the project, address concerns and actions for 
community responsibility post-project construction.  Public consultation was carried out 
twice following the Bank’s requirements. The results of communities’ opinions are 
described as presented in Annex 6.1 of the full EIA.   In addition, specific consultations 
were held with owners/stakeholders of potentially affected religious or cultural 
properties.  The list of religious or cultural sites in the project area is presented in the full 
EIA and the Resettlement Plan and all owners of such sites were interviewed through a 
questionnaire or through meetings. Most of the affected site owners are supportive of the 
THLG project (5/6 votes), apart of Thao Duong Pagoda which is supportive on the 
condition of adequate compensation.  All owners of affected religious and cultural sites 
evaluated highly the benefits that the project will bring, especially the minimization of 
flood impacts, but have concerns of construction related dust, noise and bad odors.  
 
The EIA and RP for the canal sub-project was disclosed on 15 April, 2009 on-site in 
HCMC, in VDIC in Hanoi and sent to InfoShop on April 15, 2009.   
 
Page  9
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/15/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
Page  10
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dean A. Cira 
04/24/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Phuong Thi Thanh Tran 
04/24/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham 
04/24/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
04/24/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
05/13/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
04/27/2009 
Comments:   
