Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  11/26/2007 
Report No.:  AC3255
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P108373 
Project Name:  Third Emergency Services Support Project (ESSP III) 
Task Team Leader:  Eileen Murray 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (40%);Health (30%);Other social services (30%) 
Theme:  Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
90.00
90.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project will help mitigate the deterioration in the provision of essential 
public services in education, heath and social services.  In order to do so, the Bank will 
provide a US$10 million grant from the Trust Fund for Gaza and the West Bank to 
support the PA?s Emergency Program in the Social Sectors.  The proposed project would 
mainly fund recurrent operating expenditures for the Ministries of Education and Higher 
Education, Health and Social Affairs, focusing on expenditures that will not be subject to 
Bank tendering requirements.  
 
Operating expenditures will include:  (i) rent of offices and facilities for the MOF, 
MOEHE, and MOSA; (ii) utility payments, excluding those provided by village councils 
and other local administrations; (iii) operation and maintenance of vehicles; (iv) 
communications, including, telephone, fax, e-mail; (v) maintenance of buildings and 
equipment; (vi) cleaning services; and (vii) fuel for heating and generators.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will consist of four components. Component 1 will finance the operating 
expenditures for education services including recurrent expenditures, general 
examinations costs and support to higher education institutions.  Component 2 will 
finance the operating expenditures for health services including non-medical recurrent 
expenditures, and treatment in private and non-governmental clinics.  Component 3 will 
finance the operating expenditures for social service provision, including the recurrent 
expenditures for the Ministry of Social Affairs (MOSA), and its shelters, rehabilitation 
and treatment centers.  The final component finances the management and monitoring of 
the project, and support for the management capacity of the PCU.  
 
Additional funds are being sought from donors for a next phase of the ongoing Bank 
Administered ESSP Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF). Activities will be implemented in 
parallel to the proposed operation and will help strengthen support of the PA's 
Emergency Program in the social sectors.  Both operations would fund similar 
expenditures.  To streamline project implementation, a joint work plan/implementation 
plan and budget would be prepared for the proposed operation and the ESSP MDTF.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will take place in the West Bank and Gaza in schools, universities, 
primary health care facilities, hospitals, social centers and in the district and central 
offices of the Ministries of Health, Education and Higher Education, and Social Affairs.  
There will also be close coordination with the Ministry of Finance and the Prime 
Minister's office.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not Applicable.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not Applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not Applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not Applicable.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
N/A 
Page  4
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eileen Murray 
11/26/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
11/26/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michal J. Rutkowski 
11/26/2007 
Comments:  The project was transferred to the TTL on August 29, 2007; therefore signatures are not 
needed from the Regional Safeguards Adviser.  The Project is under Category C. 
