Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  01/24/2008 
Report No.:  AC3372
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P091314 
Project Name:  GZ-NORTH GAZA SEWERAGE TREATMENT PLANT 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 22, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: February 19, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (50%);Sewerage (50%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Water resource 
management (S);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
12.00
12.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
This is an additional financing under the original North Gaza Emergency Sewerage 
Treatment Plant (NGEST) project (P074595).  The original project’s main objectives 
were to remove the immediate and gathering public health and environmental safety 
threats to the communities surrounding the effluent lake; and to provide a longer-term 
solution to the treatment of wastewater for North Gaza. Under this additional financing, 
the same objectives would remain valid and will not be modified.   
 
3. Project Description 
The original project included Parts A and B. Part A was designed to implement the 
necessary infrastructure facilities to drain the effluent lake at Beit Lahia and thus alleviate 
the immediate threats of potential failure of its embankments. The drained effluent will 
be transferred to another site further east, where new infiltration basins will be built. This 
will ensure that the immediate threat of flooding posed to the communities adjacent to the 
lake and to the existing overloaded BLWWTP is resolved. Part B will provide the longer-
Page  2
term solution to the wastewater treatment issue for the whole of northern Gaza by 
financing the construction and operation of a new wastewater treatment facility with 
improved effluent quality standard.  
 
The proposed additional grant would help finance the cost overruns associated with the 
construction of Part A of the North Gaza Emergency Sewage Treatment Plant (NGEST) 
as well as the implementation of risk management infrastructure in order to avoid any 
possible groundwater contamination as a result of effluent infiltration until the 
completion of the sewage treatment plant (Part B). The latter includes, most notably, the 
construction of 25 sixty meter deep recovery wells located around the infiltration basins 
and rehabilitation of 10 existing wells; a storage reservoir of about 5000 m3; a pumping 
station, collection and distribution pipelines; and a water quality monitoring program.  
 
The Project initial cost estimates were established at appraisal in mid 2004. The delays 
due to the political and security situation prevailing in Gaza and the West Bank, the 
global increase in energy prices and raw material costs, as well as the weakening of the 
US dollar in relation to the Euro, have significantly increased the costs for all project 
inputs.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area comprises the towns of Beit Lahia, Jabalia Beit Hanoum, Um Nasser 
located in the northern part of the Gaza Strip.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNACS) 
Mr Gregorio Bettiza (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Per the requirement of OP 4.01 for Category A projects, a full Environmental Assessment 
(EA) was prepared for the original project by an independent third party consultant. The 
additional financing will not require a separate EA, as the original EA is still relevant, 
and as the requested additional financing is to complete the unfinished components and to 
implement the risk management activities stipulated in the EMP.  
 
Major issues included in the original EA included: (i) construction impacts; (ii) 
performance of the treatment plant based on actual wastewater analyses and in 
accordance with the guidelines set forth in the Bank’s Pollution Prevention 
andAbatement Handbook; (iii) potential re-use of treated effluent and sludge for 
irrigation and soil conditioning; (iv) adverse environmental effects from non-performing 
wastewater system; (v) existing industrial facilities, type of generated effluents and 
potential impacts on the performance of the treatment plant; (vi) Quality of the aquifer 
and possible changes as a result of its recharge with treated effluent; (vii) monitoring and 
control of the operation of the treatment plant; (viii) adequate guidelines for the re-use of 
treated effluent and sludge; and (ix) remediation measures to restore the area of the 
effluent lake to its original state.  These issues have been properly captured in the 
environmental management plan (EMP) developed for the original project, and a set of 
mitigation measures were developed accordingly.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential adverse long-term impacts are not anticipated as the potential impacts can be 
easily mitigated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed as an integral part of the EA 
study, which included mitigation measures, monitoring plan and capacity building 
activities. A qualified environmental specialist was hired with the Project Management 
Unit (PMU) and is responsible for supervising the mitigation and monitoring program, 
and for discussing any issue in coordination with the relevant local governmental entities. 
Previous World Bank missions have rated the environmental performance as satisfactory 
in terms of monitoring, mitigation, and reporting. The same environmental specialist will 
continue the same role under the additional financing arrangement.  Also an emergency 
operation plan was developed to optimize the operation of all existing and emergency 
infrastructure ensued, in cooperation with the Coastal Municipalities Water Utility 
(CMWU).   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the project include the Palestinian Authority, the Palestinian Water 
Authority (PWA), the Environmental Quality Authority, the Ministry of Local 
Government, the municipalities and village councils, health centers, farmers, and the 
communities living in the areas to be served by the project. A comprehensive public 
participation program was conducted during the process of EA preparation. 
Governmental agencies, NGOs, community representatives, neighboring landowners, and 
other stakeholders were involved in the process. The consultation process was performed 
by direct interviews, questionnaires, and public meetings. The relevant environmental 
issues, including wastewater reuse, sludge reuse, socioeconomics, aquifer water quality, 
were discussed in great details. The results and findings of the EA study were presented 
through a public hearing workshop that involves the different stakeholders. All relevant 
comments and concerns were considered during the preparation of the final report.  
 
The EA was disclosed in Country on March 30, 2006 and on the World Bank’s Infoshop 
on April 10, 2006.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/29/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/10/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  5
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer 
01/10/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
01/10/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gregorio Bettiza 
01/10/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
01/10/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
01/11/2008 
Comments:   
