Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/22/2009 
Report No.:  AC4220
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P111741 
Project Name:  Municipal Development Program 
Task Team Leader:  Meskerem Brhane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 22, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (35%);Power (23%);Roads and 
highways (18%);General public administration sector (12%);Other social services (12%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (25%);Other social protection and risk 
management (25%);Municipal finance (24%);Social safety nets (13%);Pollution 
management and environmental health (13%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of Phase I of the MDP  is to improve municipal management practices for 
better transparency. This is the necessary condition for improving service delivery in 
subsequent phases. The key performance indicators are as follows: At the end of Phase I,  
 
(a) 
Percentage of municipalities that graduate up the performance category in which 
they are currently classified.  
 
(b) 
Percentage of municipalities that apply at least 2 public disclosure methods 
(publicly available SDIPs, Annual External Audits, project related data, municipal 
budgets and performance rankings).   
 
3. Project Description 
The MDP has 4 Windows through which funds will be dispersed in its first Phase (2009-
2012). In addition to the Bank, six other donors have committed to financing the program 
(AFD, Denmark, KfW, GTZ, Netherlands and Sweden). The funding amount reflected 
Page  2
below is only for commitments made in 2009 but donors are expected to put additional 
funds in the second and third years of the program.  
 
Window 1:  Municipal Grants for Capital Investment (Total US$ 58.6 million of which 
US$7.6 million will be under TFGWB financing)  
 
Window 1 allocates grants to municipalities for capital investments or operating 
expenditures for service provision, per their mandate defined in the Local Administration 
Law of 1997. The Phase 1 of the MDP will provide eligible municipalities with 
performance based grants for investments in service delivery, using an allocation formula 
designed to incentivize better management practices.  The formula allocates resources to 
municipalities in an equitable, efficient, and accountable way, based on three weighted 
criteria that determine the distribution of the funds available through MDP Phase 1: 
population (40%), needs (20%), and performance (40%). Municipalities are ranked on an 
annual basis, from levels 0 to 5, using 8 key indicators of good municipal management, 
and will receive higher or lower allocations based on their rank (further details on the 
formula are in Annex 4). Eligible sectors per the Local Administration Law of 1997 are 
as follows: (i) water and waste water services if provided by the municipality for the 
purpose of ensuring continuous supply; (ii) solid waste management; (iii) roads; (iv) 
public facilities (v) street lighting and (vi) electricity services not provided by a utility.  
The interventions could include rehabilitation, reconstruction, construction, or the supply 
of equipment and spare parts to sustain municipal service provision.  
 
Taking note of the special circumstances of municipalities in Gaza, and the continued 
closure regime, Gaza municipalities may use their allocations for recurrent expenditures 
(excluding salaries of municipal employees) as direct inputs for sustaining essential 
municipal services. Examples of eligible expenses include maintaining public health 
services such as cost of cleaning and maintaining public land, facilities and assets, water 
purification and pest control; cost of solid waste collection and disposal; cost of 
maintaining and operating municipal service vehicles, road maintenance, water supply 
and wastewater services etc). This can also include fees for temporary workers.  
 
Window 2: Support to Municipal Innovations and Efficiency (Total US$3.7m of which 
US$ 0.7 million under TFGWB financing)  
 
This window promotes learning and innovation to promote municipal development, 
including implementation of MoLG policy decisions. The two main areas of intervention 
envisaged are: (a) strengthening amalgamation of local governments and (b) piloting 
innovations that promote municipal revenue generation or cost savings.  
 
(a) 
Strengthening newly amalgamated local governments (US$2.8 million, entirely 
financed by Denmark). This activity will promote the amalgamation of local governments 
and fund the expansion of their services, including some small scale infrastructure and 
capacity building. This activity is entirely funded by the Government of Denmark, 
building on lessons learned of an ongoing operation in Jenin governorate. Under the 
MDP Phase 1, additional new areas may be included, subject to the MoLG policy for 
municipal development. All activities of this sub-window should be outside the scope of 
Windows 1 and 3.  
 
(b) 
Piloting Innovations to improve municipal revenue (Total of US$.9 million of 
which US$0.7 million in financing from TFGWB): This activity will support studies, 
Page  3
consultations, and implementation / testing of innovative approaches to enhance 
municipal revenue generation or cost savings. The three main areas of support envisaged 
are:  
 
(i) 
promoting energy efficiency to reduce municipal expenditures through an energy 
audit and some investments to increase efficient use of energy in municipal service 
delivery in 3 to 4 large municipalities, likely to most benefit from energy savings; the 
total budget is estimated at US$0.7.  
 
(ii) 
One-stop-shops: #One-stop shops# (OSS) or customer-service-centers to promote 
municipal transparency, accountability, citizen-responsiveness and public participation 
efforts in management and service delivery in 3 municipalities in Gaza  (for a total 
budget of US$200,000). The One-stop-shops will be  centers where citizens may obtain 
information about all the services provided by the municipality and how to obtain this 
service. They will also enable citizens to provide feedback on municipal services so that 
municipal leaders may improve the ways in which services are provided and make 
decisions that are citizen responsive.  
 
Window 3: Capacity Building for municipalities and the MDLF (US$3.75 in total of 
which US$0.6 million to be financed by TFGWB)  
 
For Municipalities (US$3.6 million total of which US$0.55 financing under TFGWB)  
 
This window will support municipalities to move up the performance ranking system in 
which they are currently classified. Building on the Local Government Capacity Building 
Project (LGCBP) that is currently being implemented by the MDLF,  administered by the 
Bank and financed by Denmark, it will provide technical assistance to municipalities to 
improve their (i) financial management, including revenue enhancement, (ii) planning 
capacities, with a specific focus on community participation, and (iii) technical 
capabilities, in particular for asset maintenance and improving service delivery. The 
technical assistance packages described below are demand driven and training targets are 
determined by the number of municipalities within each rank.  
 
(a) 
Improved Financial Management (US$2.20 million). Support will be provided 
for: (i) the roll out of the financial management manual which includes the basic use of 
the new chart of accounts, to a minimum 50 municipalities not yet targeted by LGCBP; 
(ii) asset registration and valuation support to a minimum of  30 municipalities;  (iii) roll 
out of the municipal budgeting procedures, developed under the LGCBP to a minimum of 
20 municipalities; (iv) promotion of municipal external audits; (v) office and IT 
equipment based on MDLF#s assessment of the municipal financial departments, already 
carried out under the LGCBP, for a minimum of 30 municipalities; and (vi) the roll out of 
an Integrated Financial Management Information System for a minimum of 20 
municipalities that are currently not covered under the LGCBP.  
 
(b) 
Strategic Development and Investment Plans (SDIP) (US$1.2 million):  This 
activity will support a minimum of 40 municipalities to develop simple strategic 
development and investment plans with the participation of communities and relevant 
stakeholders. The methodology for the development of these plans will draw upon (i) the 
manual and procedures being tested by the SDIP working group led by the MoLG with 
Page  4
members from MDLF, MoP, and municipalities, being supported by GTZ and cleared by 
MoLG, as well as (ii) lessons learned from the MDLF pilot project in the Jenin area 
under Danish financing.  
 
(c) 
Technical Assistance to Municipalities for overall improved management, 
especially for operations and  maintenance (O&M)  plans and procurement (US$0.2 
million) . This will include (i) the development of O&M guidelines and a procedural 
manual and (ii) piloting use of the manual in 5 municipalities.  
 
For MDLF (Total of US$0.2m of which US$0.05 million in financing from TFGWB)  
 
This activity will strengthen the MDLF#s capacity to implement the MDP, ensuring that 
it continues to use innovative approaches that build on international best practices. It will 
provide support for human resource development and institutional building based on the  
MDLF#s  Medium Term Strategic  Plan and its Human Resources Development Plan. 
The specific activities will be based on an annually approved detailed plan of activities by 
the Financing Partners and drawing on the Strategic and Human Resources Development 
plan.  
 
Window Four # MDP Management  (Total of US$ 6.1 million of which US$ 1.1 million 
financing from TFGWB)  
 
MDLF Management Fee (Total of US$ 4.1 million in financing of which US$ 0.7 
million is from TFGWB financing). All Financing Partners will pay a 7 percent 
administration fee on their grants to MDLF. This was estimated on the basis of a fully 
costed budget for the implementation of MDP Phase 1, taking into account its fixed and 
variable costs, including staff, equipment and operating costs.  This administrative fee 
was reviewed by the Financing Partners and assessed to be adequate.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program will be located in all 132 municipalities in both the West Bank and Gaza.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sabine W. Beddies (MNSSD) 
Mr Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The development and rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure includes roads, water 
wells, water networks, wastewater and sanitation, parks, and others. The negative 
environmental impacts associated with municipal subprojects are expected to be minor 
during the construction phase. These impacts will be mitigated by the MDLF through 
EMP implementation and the project is classified as category "B". Furthermore, the size 
of funds available to municipalities under this program limit the scope of the subprojects, 
and hence Larger scale subprojects which require a full-fledged EIA (category A) will be 
excluded (negative list) in the sub-project screening process and will not be feasible due 
to the ceilings of funds available under the project. Operational Policy 4.01 is triggered 
and requires an environmental assessment for activities that involve infrastructure 
construction. Subprojects that might trigger involunteray resettlement or cultural heritage 
operational polices will also be excluded.  Also, since municipalities will be purchasing 
some chemicals for pest control, operational policy Op 4.09 was triggered and a pest 
management plan has been prepared and annexed to the EMP.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Minor environmental impacts will occur. The EMP provides adequate guidance on 
mitigating negative impacts.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The client has an EMP prepared for a previous project and has expertise in addressing 
safeguards issues. It has a full time environmental specialist on its staff who is providing 
guidance to municipalities on environmental issues. The specialist has revised the EMP 
and incorporated the Bank's comments on the draft. The English version of the EMP has 
already been disclosed in-country on MDLF's website. The Arabic version has also been 
disclosed.  It is agreed with MDLF that the EMP will be upgraded and updated according 
to project/program needs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are municipal leaders/staff, contractors (who carry out public 
works) and communities. Municipalities have units responsible for environmental issues 
who will serve as MDLF's primary counterpart. The draft EMP was discussed with these 
stakeholders. It was also reviewed by the Environmental Quality Authority whose 
comments have been incorporated (and final version already approved).   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/01/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/31/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/01/2009 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
N/A 
Page  7
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
07/20/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Alaa Ahmed Sarhan 
07/20/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
07/20/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
07/20/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna M. Bjerde 
07/20/2009 
Comments:   
