Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3628 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P105403 
Project Name: Second Land Administration Project (LAP-2) 
Task Team Leader: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (68%);Law and justice (18%);Sub-national 
government administration (14%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights (P);Legal 
institutions for a market economy (S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
3.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
17.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims at supporting the P
A’s land administration and management reform 
agenda through institutional reform and development, human resource development, policy 
formulation, and systematic land surveying and registration. These objectives will be achieved 
through a) the re-engineering and modernizing of PLA offices, systems, and surveying and 
registration procedures; b) building the capacity of PLA staff to become more efficient; 
formulation and implementation of key policies to enable better decision making process related 
to Public and Waqf Land; and c) systematic land surveying and registration of some 200,000 – 
250,000 dunums in key selected areas in the West Bank and Gaza.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project components are:  
 
Component 1: Institutional Development and Modernization of PLA Offices  
Page  2
This component would support: a) further institutional analysis and restructuring of PLA to 
strengthen its capacity to implement its mandate; b) introduction of better service standards, 
service fees to ensure self-sufficiency; c) re-engineering and modernization of the Headquarters 
and 8 regional PLA offices.  
 
Component 2: Systematic Land Surveying and Registration  
 
Based on the learning acquired from the on-going LAP, the proposed project would support the 
PLA in a) launching systematic land registration in priority areas in the West Bank; b) finalizing 
the automation of the registration process and rolling it off to the District Offices; and c) 
launching the registration of the remaining 70,000 dunums in the Gaza Strip should the political 
conditions improve.  
 
Component 3: Land Policy Development and Execution  
 
This component would support the formulation of additional policies and execution of the 
approved Land Policy Framework to reform and build capacity of public land management that 
would provide transparent and efficient management of public land. This would be done through 
a
process of institutionalizing public land management and reform of the PLA.  Specifically, it 
would support: a) development of mechanisms for public land management and disposal, 
including: classification of public land, administration, registration and restitution of public land; 
b) establishment of an inventory of public land and Waqf land; c) formulation of guiding 
manuals for “Board of Directors for Public Land Disposal” and its ‘technical arm’ as well as 
investors manuals; assist MOP in preparing instructions manuals for the state land and municipal 
land covering at least the mandate of the ‘owner’, set up criteria for public land and describe 
‘users’ rights; d) the formulation of policies for Waqf land disposal consistent with the principles 
of Waqf as well as the national development plans and priorities; and e) clarifying and 
developing the land valuation regulations and practices.  
 
Component 4:  Training and Public Awareness.  
 
This component would support: a) strengthening the PLA staff in systematic land surveying and 
registration, b) training of land settlement judges; c) assisting the universities, polytechnics and 
technical institutes in improving the education program in surveying, land administration and 
management; d) strengthening the private sector in surveying; e) executing a public awareness 
program, and f) capacity building and training.  
 
Component 5: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
This component would support the management of the proposed operations together with 
strengthening management and technical skills necessary to implement and monitor the progress 
and impact of the project. Specifically, this component would support: a) the cost of necessary 
project management team to oversee the project; b) establishing a simple M&E system to track 
progress on the main outcome indicators; c) providing necessary project staff training and system 
development; and d) providing Technical Assistance and other expert services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
West Bank and Gaza - areas under Palestinian Authority's administrative responsibility.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
This is a first generation project following a LIL. The on-going LIL has already addressed social 
issues in a satisfactory manner to the Bank.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
Will be determined during preappraisal mission planned for June 2008.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Will be determined during preappraisal mission planned for June 2008.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/15/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/15/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The proposed project will benefit from the social reviews and assessments which are carried 
out by national and international consultants under the on-going LIL.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
05/28/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
06/11/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
06/11/2008 
Comments:   
