Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3908 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/24/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P111741 
Project Name: Municipal Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Meskerem Brhane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 24, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 17, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (35%);Power (23%);Roads and 
highways (18%);General public administration sector (12%);Other social services (12%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other social protection and risk 
management (P);Municipal finance (P);Social safety nets (S);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve management practices for the delivery 
of services in the 132 participating municipalities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will be part of Municipal Development Program to be implemented by the 
MDLF and will focus on the following four key areas:  
 
(i) 
Technical assistance to municipalities to improve planning, budgeting, procurement and 
financial management practices; and promote internal revenue generation (from taxes, user 
service charges etc) in order to reduce the subsidies necessary to sustain services. It will also 
include establishing and piloting basic service delivery standards. (The specific service/sector 
will be agreed during project preparation). As part of project preparation, a Municipal Finance 
study is currently under way (expected to be completed end of October 2008) and analyzes 
resource flows (fiscal transfers from central government, local revenue collection, and 
Page  2
expenditures) to all 132 municipalities. It will provide the analysis required to structure the 
Technical Assistance program and the baseline data for eventual program monitoring. As part of 
project preparation, the MDLF is also carrying out a diagnostic study on municipal capacity to 
determine types of Technical Assistance.  
 
(ii) 
Performance based block grants to municipalities to (i) repair, maintain or expand 
existing infrastructure stock (ii) make needed capital investments and (iii) cover some operating 
costs for services. The infrastructure grants will likely focus on the 105 municipalities in the 
West Bank. The eligible types of investments (positive list) have been identified in the PRDP but 
the municipalities identify their priorities (roads, solid waste, water/wastewater, rehabilitation of 
public lighting etc) for which US$82 million is budgeted for FY08-10. Budget support will most 
likely focus on the 27 municipalities in Gaza and a portion of the 52 municipalities in the West 
Bank which will lose cash flows from electricity provision. The Municipal Finance Study 
currently underway analyzes the fiscal impacts of losing cash flows from electricity/water on 
operating budgets and will provide clarity on the design of this intervention.  
 
The MDLF is currently designing a transparent rules and performance-based block grant 
allocation system to municipalities to create incentives for improving management practices and 
provide resources for basic service delivery (expected to be finalized by the end of October 
2008). The key elements are (i) balanced budgets (ii) audited accounts (iii) expenditures on 
maintenance etc. It builds on the MDLF’s experience of an equitable and transparent financial 
allocation systemestablished under the EMSRPII and introduces financial management and 
planning criteria. The key donors active in the sector have agreed to the principle of using such a 
system. This block grant allocation system will also inform the design of the technical assistance 
program so that it may enable municipalities to meet, overtime, the performance standards that it 
has identified.  
 
(iii) 
Promote policy dialogue and pilot innovations promoting policy priorities to improve 
quality of service delivery and resource flows to municipalities. This activity will fund some 
innovative programs that are designed to demonstrate and pilot key local government reform 
issues identified in the PRDP. The PRDP cites amalgamation of local government units as a key 
policy objective in order to achieve economies of scale and diversification of revenue sources for 
local governments (with over 400 local government units for a population of under 4 million 
people there is a need to consolidate LGUs into larger municipalities). However, limited analysis 
exists. The MDLF is piloting some approaches from which lessons may be drawn. The MDLF, 
working closely with the MoLG will provide an analysis of the most appropriate method of 
amalgamation and will design guidelines on how to achieve this objective. Second, the MDLF 
will carry out analytical studies to support the Ministries of Local Government and Finance for 
establishing intergovernmental fiscal transfers. This will draw on the Municipal Finance Study 
currently being prepared and a further detailed program of analysis will be outlined during 
preappraisal. Earlier analytical work by the Bank had recommended the establishment of an 
Intergovernmental Fiscal Commission whose primary responsibility is to coordinate among the 
central ministries (Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Local Government) as well as representatives 
of municipalities on policy and budgetary issues affecting local governments. This entity should 
also facilitate transparent and predictable information on transfers to municipalities. Third, a 
draft law on electricity has been proposed by the Palestinian Energy Authority which will 
Page  3
remove all utility functions from municipalities which contradicts the law on local government 
requires municipalities to provide electricity and water services. Therefore, the role of 
municipalities (and accountability of the utilities to citizens through municipalities) needs to be 
clarified from a legal and policy perspective.  
 
(vi)  
Institutional support and technical assistance to MDLF. This component will support the 
institutional capacity of MDLF to enable it to continue its role as the key actor in municipal 
development, learning from best practice cases in other parts of the world. MDLF will be 
responsible for collection and analysis of data, building statistical systems and data bases for 
municipal functions. As part of the project preparation the MDLF will also refine its existing 
database and conduct a baseline survey. It is currently preparing a Monitoring and Evaluation 
framework and manual.  Areas of growth might be enhanced human resource management 
systems, improved management practices etc. The MDLF is a comparatively new organization 
and needs further support, especially in strengthening its procurement capacity.  
 
The Lending instrument will be a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) for the municipal sector. 
Donors active in the sector have already expressed a keen interest in the approach, drawing on 
the positive experience of the Donor Consultation Forum of the MDLF, the institutional systems 
that are already in place (financial management, procurement, fund allocation etc). Donors and 
the MDLF recognize that although these systems are in place, donors are still financing projects 
that include earmarked funding, making it difficult for municipalities and the MDLF to have a 
long-term strategic and programmatic approach. The SWAp will provide municipalities with a 
predictable capital investment and operating budget, consistent with the PRDP’s overall 
objective of harmonizing and revitalizing aid. This operation would represent the first realization 
of such a goal.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
In all the 132 municipalities of the West Bank and Gaza.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
A
draft environmental assessment will be conducted by a consultant on behalf of the borrower, 
submitted and approved by the Bank. The environmental Assessment will assess the impacts of 
the anticipated works and activities, and suggest mitigation measures. The environmental 
assessment and the EMP will assess the institutional capacity of the borrower, the actions and 
institutional framework necessary for environmental management plan implementation and 
monitoring. To this effect, the MDLF will provide professional staff to support safety, health, 
and environmental protection commitments, will monitor and report performance in safety, 
health, and environmental protection in laision with the environmental quality authority (EQA). 
The MoLG and MDLF  will also provide training when needed to protect human, environmental, 
cultural, and physical resources   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sabine W. Beddies (SDV) 
Mr Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSSD) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EMP will be prepared prior to appraisal. It will be an update of the EMP for the Second 
Emergency Municipal Services Project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/13/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  03/02/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ToR for the Environmental Assessment and Environmental Management Plan will be 
agreed during pre-appraisal mission (mid-October). The Environmental Assessment and a 
finalized Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be submitted and disclosed by the end 
of January 2009.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
10/23/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
10/20/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna Maria Bjerde 
10/16/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
