Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/12/2008 
Report No.:  AC3196
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P104257 
Project Name:  GZ-Village and Neighborhood Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Meskerem Brhane 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 24, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (40%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);Sanitation (20%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives is, within a fragile context, to promote a local 
development approach which builds the capacity of communities to plan for and manage 
development resources.  
 
Following from this Objective, the key indicators for Project success include:  
 
•
Increased collaboration among neighboring communities as measured by the ratio 
of jointly implemented community-driven sub-projects to the total number of 
implementing communities;  
 
•
Level of functionality (effectiveness and efficiency) and coordination among local 
institutions (from Joint Service Councils to communities);  
 
Demonstrated benefits of a CDD approach to local development (as measured by time, 
financial inputs, stakeholder assessment ratings; inclusion of youth and women during the 
project implementation process)   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Implementation of micro-projects using a CDD approach (US$7 million)  
 
The VNDP will provide block grants to communities to finance projects identified 
through a participatory mechanism. The grant is not expected to meet all of the 
community needs, but rather to provide an incentive for community planning and 
collaborative implementation of activities at the local level. Through planning for and 
implementation of the microprojects, communities are expected to “learn-by-doing” and 
acquire the skills to manage their own development.   In the WestBank, the grant is 
intended to create the incentive for joint planning and implementation of activities across 
village councils (VC) with the longer term goal of establishing demand for consolidation 
of the large number of Local Government Units (LGUs). In Gaza, it will create a 
mechanism by which collaborative partnerships within and across neighborhoods can be 
developed in a context of heightened social tensions. In all cases, the proposed approach 
will promote self-help mechanisms; increase a sense of community ownership, and 
greater partnerships between communities and LGUs. It will also provide an effective 
framework for constructive interaction among community members (from different clans, 
religious affiliation etc) in designing and implementing community projects that are 
mutually beneficial thereby promoting social cohesion.  
 
The activities will vary according to community needs but they would include provision 
of (i) public goods (examples might include small scale infrastructure –such as family-
friendly parks or recreational areas, access roads, markets, small scale water supply, 
school enhancement;  social programs – design and implementation of activities in a 
youth center; cultural activities that bring together different communities; etc); and (ii)  
matching grants for livelihoods that promote local development (examples include a 
matching grant to a group of young people operating a small restaurant in a public park). 
The project will adopt an open-menu approach but will establish criteria for selection 
based on a negative list. The subprojects will be selected through a participatory process 
through which groups that have traditionally been excluded from decision making 
processes such as youth, women and the poor will also take part.  
 
Component 2: Capacity Building for Communities & LGUs (US$2 million)  
 
This component will provide resources necessary for accompanying communities 
throughout the four year life of the project in implementing component 1.  By hiring an 
Oversight Consultant, the VNDP will provide capacity building and coaching services to 
communities implementing the project. This will include facilitation and community 
mobilization to enhance community participation, preparing local development plans, 
project proposals, business plans, and networking skills. Capacity building will also 
enable communities to leverage funds from other sources (including their own resources) 
to implement the local development plans through mobilizing additional funds, 
improving coordination and harmonization with line ministries and other actors within 
the locality.  
 
Component 3:  Institutional Support for the counterpart institution (US$1 million)  
 
This component will support the MoLG to oversee and supervise the implementation of 
the project by local communities, including promoting the participatory planning 
Page  3
processes and maintaining a knowledge base for local development. It will support the 
MoLG in taking the lead on community development. Multiple community development 
methods are currently financed by donors in the WBG. The VNDP will support the 
MoLG in learning from earlier and ongoing work of such initiatives in order to 
harmonize approaches so as to promote efficiency and economies of scale, without 
sacrificing innovation and flexibility. An effective, results based monitoring and 
evaluation system will be established that will track implementation progress of CDD 
initiatives.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented throughout the  West Bank and Gaza. However, it will 
focus on rural areas of the West Bank, neighborhoods and camps in Gaza.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSSD) 
Mr Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is not expected to have large scale impacts. Through the CDD mechanism it 
will finance provision of services and small scale infrastructure projects. There may be 
some limited environmental impacts related to some small scale infrastructure 
microprojects, such as construction or rehabilitation of family-friendly parks or 
recreational areas, rural access roads, local water supply and school enhancement. Social 
impacts will be positive. Social safeguards policy will not be triggered. A negative list of 
project criteria will be included in the EMP and project Operations Manual that specify 
that those sub-projects that might involve  political or religious activities; investments 
detrimental to the environment, rehabilitation of structures of archeological or cultural 
value or involuntary resettlement will not be financed.  
Page  4
And as a precautionary measure, a provision on chance find procedures has been 
included in the Project Appraisal Document and the Environmental Management Plan.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have negative environmental impacts. The minor potential 
negative environmental impacts may result from the implementation of certain 
microprojects, particularly community infrastructures (family-friendly parks or 
recreational areas, rural access roads, local water supply and school enhancement) and 
the activities related to such constructions. The EMP will provide a negative criteria list 
for projects that that will not be financed (such as those that are Category A projects).  
 
With regard to social impacts, the project aims at having overall positive social effects. 
Through CDD, the project aims at empowering communities, promote local cohesion, 
improve trust between communities and local government and enhance inclusion of 
marginalized groups (such as women and youth) during the development process.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The exact location, scale, materials and technologies of eventual infrastructure 
microprojects is not known at this stage. However an Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) is currently being prepared by the counterpart to identify and mitigate potential 
negative environmental impacts of future microprojects.  
 
Project proposals will be designed by the communities through active participation of its 
members and in case of infrastructure based microprojects, these will be very small in 
nature. As such it will be unlikely that there will be any instance of involuntary 
resettlement. A negative list has been identified for microproject eligibility which will 
also explicitly indicate that microproject proposals which may trigger involuntary 
resettlement safeguard policy will not be financed.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Local Government, Ministry of Planning, Joint 
Service Councils for Planning and Development, local governments units, communities, 
village councils, neighborhood committees, refugee camps and community based 
organizations.  
 
Consultations have been conducted by the project team and the consultant in charge of 
the preparation of the EMP, including field visits and meetings with the Ministry of Local 
Government (MOLG), local authorities, local NGOs, and joint service councils. The 
EMP delineated the strengths and weaknesses and came up with the necessary 
Page  5
mechanisms to incorporate sound environmental practices within the design of the 
project. It also pinpointed the necessary actions and monitoring mechanisms to ensure 
adherence and full implementation of the EMP during both the construction and 
operational phases of the subprojects. During construction, the EMP will be integrated in 
all bidding documents to ensure adherence of all contractors to the environmental 
guidelines detailed in the EMP. The EMP has been disclosed in West Bank and Gaza via 
the MOLG website and hard copies are available and distributed from MOLG district 
offices. The EMP was also disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Page  6
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
12/27/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad 
12/27/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/27/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
12/27/2007 
Comments:   
