Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/02/2008 
Report No.:  AC3493
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P084461 
Project Name:  GZ-ELECTRIC UTILITY MANAGEMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Somin Mukherji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 3, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: May 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
6.30 
 
EC: European Commission 
20.00 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
70.30 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
10.00 
 
SWEDEN: Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA) 
21.50 
 Special 
Financing 
12.00
140.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective would be to reduce the fiscal burden of the sector on 
PA’s budgetary resources through interalia lower deductions from clearance revenues for 
arrears owed to IEC.  This will be possible through adoption of appropriate sectoral 
efficiency enhancement measures taken and the key performance indicators of the 
electricity distribution utilities that will include: (a) improved collection performance; (b) 
lower technical/non-technical losses; (c) reduction in payables to IEC on account of 
electricity purchase; and (d) consolidation and increase in the number of consumers.  The 
Project will also ensure that NEDCO is fully operational through financing necessary 
capacity building measures.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project would finance invest
ments related to PA’s planned investments for 
the short and part of medium terms (up to five years); this is an integral part of the 
development Plan for the electricity sector.  It would also provide essential technical 
assistance for the institutional and capacity building of the PEA and the electricity service 
providers and, at the same time promote renewable energy resources and energy 
efficiency measures by facilitating the development of necessary institutional and legal 
framework.  In general, details of the components that are presently under consideration 
include:  
 
Component 1  
 
(i)  development of four new bulk 161/33/22kV supply substations and the related 
161kV connecting lines (implementation of the conneting line will be carried out by IEC 
under separate financing arrangement) in the northern, central and southern areas of the 
West Bank as important part of the transmission system.  Most of the existing connection 
points (33kV and 22kV and 400V) supplying the Palestinian loads by IEC will be 
replaced and supplied from the new reconfigured distribution system served under these 
new 161kV substations.  This system modification will reduce the purchase tariff paid to 
IEC, since the new connection point will be at the 161kV level.  
 
Component 2  
 
(i)  development of the new distribution system in the northern, central and southern 
areas of the West Bank served by the new 161kV substation;  
 
(ii)  rehabilitation of distribution networks in all the utilities of the West Bank and Gaza; 
and  
 
(iii)  installation of prepaid meters and automatic meters reading systems in all utilities 
of the West Bank and Gaza.  
 
Component 3  
 
(i)  capacity building for all utilities in the West Bank and Gaza; this will include 
technical assistance for improved customer services;  
 
(ii)  providing consulting services to PEA for promoting the development and utilization 
of renewable energy resources and adopting energy efficiency measures.The West Bank 
and Gaza is significantly endowed with renewable energy resources. Accordingly, this 
component would consist of resource assessment of all renewable energy resources, 
particularly solar, and facilitate the development of appropriate institutional and legal 
framework.  Consulting services will also include development of the second stage of 
electricity sector reform and auditing services for the PMU;  
 
Page  3
(iii)  providing engineering consultancy services (short and long term) for procurement 
and construction supervision for implementation of the four new 161kV sub-stations and 
the related connecting 161kV lines and distribution development;  
 
(iv)  operating cost of the PMU; and  
 
(v)  start-up operating cost (for two years) for the PETL and the PERC.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
West Bank and Gaza   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSSD) 
Mr Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
According to Bank Policy OP/BP 4.01, this project is categorized as Category “B”. This 
means all components of the project with the exception of the capacity building will be 
subject to environmental assessment prior to appraisal. Considering that project activities 
will be largely confined along existing infrastructure and road alignments, conflicts with 
natural habitats and sites of cultural/historical value are unlikely. As a result it is assumed 
that additional policies such as Natural Habitat (OP 4.04) and cultural property (OPN 
11.03) are not triggered by the project activities.  
 
Main concerns for the EA will be the impacts arising from sitting/routing of substations 
and high voltage transmission lines followed by the impacts arising from the 
rehabilitation/extension of the sub-transmission and distribution networks. The bulk of 
the impacts fall under the construction phase works, mainly excavation works for site 
preparation, foundations for transmission towers and poles, and transformers, stringing 
Page  4
overhead wires. Limited negative environmental and social impacts will occur for short 
periods during these works. By careful planning, those negative impacts can be 
eliminated or minimized to acceptable levels as defined by the environmental 
management plan (EMP).  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) may be triggered because precise locations of all 
works have not yet been established. This is especially the case for the distribution 
networks component where existing structures are likely to limit access. This policy 
might be triggered due to (i) encroachments-resulting from locations where the right of 
ways of new overhead lines conflict with existing structures and properties, and (ii) 
unforeseen events, accidents, and minor changes in project specifications that may cause 
damage or loss of assets. In areas where dwellings, fences, etc are close to proposed 
infrastructure rehabilitation and access is very confined.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Overall, once the works are completed, there will be a significant net positive social and 
environmental benefit to the people of West Bank and Gaza. The major positive impact is 
the supply of energy and the consequent potential for induced development. Realization 
of the project will significantly increase the security and reliability of energy supply. The 
negative impacts will be site specific, of temporary nature, and generally within the 
operating sites of the Palestinian Energy and Natural Resources Authority (PEA) and 
utilities. Very minor negative impacts during construction will be incurred on air and 
noise quality, landscape and terrestrial ecology, grazing activities, among others. All 
these temporary impacts can be eliminated or minimized to acceptable levels by 
implementing the environmental management plan (EMP). The most significant impacts 
are related to proximity to existing built-up areas, small loss of agricultural land and 
potential reduction in stream bank vegetation and habitat for birds and livestock grazing. 
However, these impacts were reduced by sensible site selection for the construction of 
substations.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternative sites for the locations of the substations were considered and the substations 
sites that appear most advantageous from environmental and social perspective were 
chosen: i.e., sites Nablus 2, JDECO 2, and HEPCO/SELCO 1 site. At Jenin, there was no 
alternative; the identified site is considered reasonable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
A
draft Resettlement and Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared by the PEA to cater 
for all possibilities. The representative works as identified in the project are unlikely to 
call for any permenant land take or destruction of houses and will not necessitate any 
movement or resettlement of people. If assets are damaged or peoples lives disturbed, the 
framework has been prepared to compensate for these actions.  
 
Page  5
A
draft environmental assessment has been conducted by a consultant on behalf of the 
borrower, submitted and approved by the Bank. The environmental Assessment drafted 
an environmental management plan, assessed the impacts of the anticipated works and 
activities, and suggested mitigation measures. The environmental assessment and the 
EMP delineated the actions and institutional framework necessary for environmental 
management plan implementation and monitoring. It is anticipated by the EA that the 
project has a net positive social and environmental impacts, and the temporary negative 
impacts are of temporary nature, could be eliminated or reduced to acceptable levels by 
implementing the mitigation measures defined in the EMP.  
 
The PEA is committed to ensuring that construction of substations and electrical 
networks is undertaken according to the recommendations of the environmental 
assessment and environmental management plan (EMP) in a way that is respectful to the 
local people and their land and resources. PEA has undertaken to manage operations in a 
manner to protect the environment and the health and safety of employees, customers, 
contractors, and the public. To this effect, PEA will provide professional staff to support 
safety, health, and environmental protection commitments, will monitor and report 
performance in safety, health, and environmental protection in laision with the 
environmental quality authority (EQA). PEA will also provide training when needed to 
protect human, environmental, cultural, and physical resources  
 
To that effect, PEA will maintain a register logging all environmental complaints raised 
by landowners, occupiers or the general public in connection with construction activities 
and will be subject to periodic review, with the actions that were taken to rectify the 
problem.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders in the project include the Palestinian Energy Authority (PEA), the 
Environmental Quality Authority (EQA), municipalities (MCs) and village councils 
(VCs), electrical utilities and other utilities, as well as citizens in the localities and sites of 
works anticipated.  
 
Contractor management who will undertake the implementations of works and activities 
of the project are responsible for identifying any requirements for consultations, and 
laising with PEA. In this context, all stakeholders will have access to information about 
the project and its potential repercussions. This will serve the facilitation and 
collaboration from the public sector and other institutions.  
 
As a minimum, consultations should be undertaken with local authorities, property 
owners and affected communities, to ensure impacts associated with construction have 
minimal impact on their activities, agricultural practices, and verify any compensation 
claims, relevant authorities (especially EQA) with regard to the working methods and 
reinstatement of the environment, civil aviation authorities if activities or construction 
may potentially interfere with existing flight routes.   
 
Page  6
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/31/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/21/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/01/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/02/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Yes 
Page  7
Manager review the plan? 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Somin Mukherji 
04/02/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Zeyad Abu-Hassanein 
04/02/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meskerem Brhane 
04/02/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
04/02/2008 
Comments:  This project was transferred to the unit on May 22, 2007 
