Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3293 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/21/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID: P108373 
Project Name: Third Emergency Services Support Project (ESSP III) 
Task Team Leader: Eileen Murray 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 2, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: December 13, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (40%);Health (30%);Other social services (30%) 
Theme: Other human development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
90.00
90.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project will help mitigate the deterioration in the provision of essential public 
services in education, heath and social services.  In order to do so, the Bank will provide a 
US$10 million grant from the Tr
ust Fund for Gaza and the West Bank to support the PA’s 
Emergency Program in the Social Sectors.  The proposed project would mainly fund recurrent 
“operating expenditures ” /1 forthe Ministries of Education and Higher Education, Health and 
Social Affairs, focusing on expenditures that will not be subject to Bank tendering requirements.  
 
/1  Operating expenditures will include: (i) rent of offices and facilities for the MOF, MOEHE, 
and MOSA; (ii) utility payments, excluding those provided by village councils and other local 
administrations; (iii) operation and maintenance of vehicles; (iv) communications, including, 
telephone, fax, e-mail; (v) maintenance of buildings and equipment; (vi) cleaning services; and 
(vii) fuel for heating and generators.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The project will consist of four components. Component 1 will finance the operating 
expenditures for education services including recurrent expenditures, general examinations costs 
and support to higher education institutions.  Component 2 will finance the operating 
expenditures for health services including non-medical recurrent expenditures, and treatment in 
private and non-governmental clinics.  Component 3 will finance the operating expenditures for 
social service provision, including the recurrent expenditures for the Ministry of Social Affairs 
(MOSA), and its shelters, rehabilitation and treatment centers.  The final component finances the 
management and monitoring of the project, and support for the management capacity of the 
PCU.  
 
Additional funds are being sought from donors for a next phase of the ongoing Bank 
Administered ESSP Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF). Activities will be implemented in parallel 
to the proposed operation and will help strengt
hen support of the PA’s Emergency Program in 
the social sectors.  Both operations would fund similar expenditures.  To streamline project 
implementation, a joint work plan/implementation plan and budget would be prepared for the 
proposed operation and the ESSP MDTF.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project activities will take place in the West Bank and Gaza in schools, universities, primary 
health care facilities, hospitals, social centers and in the district and central offices of the 
Ministries of Health, Education and Higher Education, and Social Affairs.  There will also be 
close coordination with the Ministry of Finance and the Prime Minister’s office.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
There are no identified safeguard issues in this project.  However, potential indirect social and 
environmental impacts of the ESSPIII cannot be ignored.  Attention to such concerns will be 
carefully incorporated in the scope of the PCU’s functions.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/21/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
There are no identified safeguard issues in this project.  However, potential indirect social 
and environmental impacts of the ESSPIII cannot be ignored.  Attention to such concerns 
will be carefully incorporated in the scope of the PCU’s functions.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eileen Murray 
11/20/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
11/20/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Michal J. Rutkowski 
11/20/2007 
Comments:  The project was transferred to the team on August 29, 2007. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
