Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/11/2009 
Report No.:  48505
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  West Bank and Gaza 
Project ID:  P105404 
Project Name:  GZ-SOUTHERN WEST BANK SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT 
Task Team Leader:  Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 4, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: May 14, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Solid waste management (85%);Sub-national government administration (15%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (67%);Municipal governance 
and institution building (33%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
2.00 
 
EC: European Commission 
5.60 
 
ITALY: Dev. Coop. Department (MOFA) 
0.40 
 Special 
Financing 
12.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to improve solid waste disposal services for the 
communities and businesses of Palestinian municipalities and joint services councils in 
the Bethlehem and Hebron governorates through provision of an efficient socially 
acceptable and environmentally friendly mechanism, including (i) strengthening the joint 
services council administrative and technical capabilities for a cost-effective management 
of waste disposal services; (ii) improving the waste disposal services through provision of 
a
sanitary landfill facility and related infrastructure; and (iii) carrying out a public 
awareness campaign for promoting waste minimization, resource recovery and cost 
recovery for financial viability.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would consist of the following components:  
 
Page  2
Component 1: Institutional Strengthening (US$0.50 million): This component will 
support consultants services, workshops, study tours, campaigns and training for: a) 
improving JSC-
H&B’s institutional and human resource capacity in policy, operational 
and administrative aspects of SWM; (b) strengthening EQA in monitoring and reporting 
on environmental aspects of transfer stations, landfill facilities, and the closure and 
rehabilitation for interim use of dump sites; and c) public awareness on SWM at the 
regional and local levels.  
 
Component 2: Development and Implementation of Solid Waste Management 
Investments (US$18.00 million): This component will support: (a) Civil works 
construction of a landfill facility and associated infrastructure (including rehabilitation of 
existing associated infrastructure); b) Civil works and installation of compactors for 
Hebron Transfer Station; (c) Civil works and installation of waste recycling pilots 
(owner-supplied equipment) at the landfill; (d) supply of operational equipment for the 
landfill; (e) supply of transfer station waste containers and waste container hauling 
vehicles; (f) Rehabilitation of existing dumpsite in Yatta (in Hebron governorate) for use 
during construction of the sanitary landfill and closure of all 17 dump sites (Yatta plus 
the 16 smaller dump sites) in Hebron and Bethlehem governorates by end of construction 
period; (g) operational management contract for the sanitary landfill and transfer station; 
and (h) implementation of the ESMP and the Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans 
(ARAPs).  
 
Component 3: Innovation Window for Waste Recycling and Composting (US$0.50 
million): This component will support Consultants Services to prepare: (i) the feasibility 
and design of pilot projects for waste collection optimization, waste minimization, and 
waste recovery for recycling and composting including plans toward organizing waste 
pickers (scavengers) into commercially-viable service organizations; and (ii) 
Implementation of pilot schemes in waste recycling which will include investments 
required to launch small businesses and/or cooperatives.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, International Procurement Consultant and 
Supervision (US$1.00 million). This component will finance: (i) incremental operating 
costs of the JSC-H&B Technical Operations Unit (TOU) including mainly staff salaries, 
operational costs and travel related costs associated with training and conference 
participation; (ii) services of an international procurement consultant; and (iii) a 
consultant firm for supervision of construction and operational management contract(s).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project (landfill site) would be located at about a kilometer to the southeast of the 
outskirts of Al-Menya village in Bethlehem Governorate, southern West Bank. 
Substantial and exhaustive studies were undertaken to identify suitable sites for the 
landfill giving preference to sites within areas A and B under the PA's jurisdiction. 
However, none of the sites identified in these two areas met with the minimum criteria 
for selection particularly the environmental and social criteria. As a result, the proposed 
site situated in Area C of the West Bank was found to meet the criteria and is be the most 
Page  3
suitable for a sanitary landfill. Since Area C is still under Israeli Civil Administration 
control, the construction of a sanitary landfill will require a permit in accordance with the 
laws and procedures of Israel. It is worthy to note that the Israeli Civil Administration 
(ICA) have been consulted through the entire study process and it has issued a letter to 
the Bank which provides assurances of the ICA’s commitment to facilitate movement and 
access to the proposed sanitary landfill and the Hebron transfer station and to issue the 
necessary construction permits. The project has been designed taking into account the 
recommendations of ICA including the provisions to upgrade offsite infrastructure that 
would be affected by the proposed project. The ICA is expected to issue a construction 
permit within an 18 month period and the grant agreement makes any construction 
conditional on the obtaining of this construction permit.  
 
The waste transfer station is located in the Hebron municipality industrial zone. 
Already, another recycling activity has been recently been establish which should not 
interfer with the proposed activites related to waste transfer. The municipal owned land 
will be on lease to the JSC-H&B for nominal fee. The site has been reviewed as part of 
the ESIA and found suitable for the proposed activities.  
 
The project will also rehabilitate the current regional dumpsite in Yatta and close it 
when the new landfill is constructed and operational. Moreover, the project will close and 
rehabilitate 16 additional small scale community dumpsite throughout Bethlehem and 
Hebron Governorates.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSSD) 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
A. Environment Protection Impacts: the project aims at improving the quality of 
environment by improving the current practice of waste management. This would include 
the proper collection, disposal and treatment of municipal generated waste.  
 
i) discharge of leachate generated from the waste degradation at the proposed sanitary 
landfill into the surrounding environment and possible seepage into the ground water 
aquifer. The project design is based on the principle of "Zero Discharge" in order to 
ensure that the sanitary landfill is properly designed and constructed utilizing the 
necessary geomembrane and other sealing material and under drainage piping and 
appurtenances to prevent leachate from seeping into the ground layers. The leachate 
would be collected and stored in a properly designed and constructed seepage collection 
pond protected with the necessary lining material. The leachate pond would be sized for 
the maximum generation of seepage which would be disposed of by evaporation. 
Provision for returning leachate to the landfill cells would also be included for emergency 
cases.  
 
ii) access of wild and stray animals to the site will be prevented by the provision of 
fencing and gates. Access of wild birds would be controlled through the daily cover of 
waste with soil. The access to the site will be controlled to ensure compliance with this 
provision;  
 
B. land acquisition for the landfill and the access roads will be on vuluntary basis. The 
identified landfill site is owned by three Palestinian families who have already agreed 
with the JSC-H&B to long-term lease and/or sale for the purposes of the sanitary landfill. 
Part of the site identified for the access road site is owned by four Palestinian families 
who have already agreed with the JSC-H&B to sell for the purposes of the access road.  
 
C. Loss of income.  
 
i). Waste pickers: about 132 waste pickers have been identified at the Yatta dump site, 
although most of these work part-time on the dump site. A number of mitigation 
activities are set forth in the ARAP and are to be assessed by a consultant to be hired 
under the project. In addition, Component 3 of the project includes pilot activities to 
formalize waste recycling as well as other income generating activities. The JSC-H&B 
would be responsible for the management of these initiatives, which would be monitored 
independently by the Bank.  
 
An additional very small number of occasional/part-time pickers have been seen at a 
number of the smaller remote dumpsites. Primarily, a number of these pickers use the 
dumpsites to burn self collected waste and tires to extract metals for re-selling. The JSC-
H&B has committed to additional survey to identify and document these pickers. The 
ARAP prepared for the Yatta waste pickers will also apply were applicable in the smaller 
dumpsites.  
Page  5
ii) Land owners: The land for the proposed sanitary landfill and access road is currently 
barren and there is no agricultural or animal husbandry activity on the land that would 
generate income to the owners. However, fair compensation to land owners needs to be 
ensured. In addition, to these locations, land leased (on monthly or annual basis) by local 
municipalities for waste dumping are also identified as potential Project Affected People. 
Despite a number of the 16 locations are already closed prior to the project, the remaining 
will need be treated in accordance with the appropraite safeguard policy.  
 
iii) Herders:  Anecdotal information of occasional use of the area of both the landfill 
and the access road by wandering herders has been reported, however, herders could 
continue to use adjacent open areas in such circumstances. Nevertheless an ARAP 
discusses their situation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project will have primarily positive impacts by assisting the municipalities in 
adequate collection and disposal of waste. The project will also promote regional 
cooperation in waste management which will reduce the cost associated with the service. 
The project would also support the protection of the environment by properly 
rehabilitating and closing exist illegal dumpsites which are already causing significant 
harm to the environment.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Project alternatives have been reviewed as follows:  
 
a. waste minimization: of the key issues is to reduce generated waste to the possible 
minimum, recycle to the extent possible and therefore reduce the disposed of waste. Still, 
a
well designed and controlled landfill will be required to ensure no damage or negative 
impact is being generated from the disposal process;  
 
b. Waste Collection and Transfer alternatives: the methods have been assessed in terms 
of type of collection vehicles and whether or not the use of transfer station would be more 
feasible as to reduce the cost of waste transport to the landfill. As experienced in the 
northern West Bank project, transfer stations do reduce the cost and would be 
recommended. So far, at least one transfer stations is expected to be implemented as part 
of this project.  
 
c. Waste Disposal alternatives: in addition to the sanitary landfill operation, composting, 
bio-gas, incineration, and waste to energy have all been explored.  
 
The project would support the carrying out of a number of technical reviews which may 
lead to the implementation of pilots to explore the readiness for the communities to assist 
in the composting process, else, the process may not be economically feasible. As for bi-
gas, this process may not be feasible due to the competition with the composting process, 
storage space is still required sludge needs to be dried or tankered prior to sending it to 
Page  6
the landfill. Finally, the physical or chemical combustion of waste (incineration) may not 
be feasible due to high average moisture content of the waste and the associated high 
costs of the supporting fuel/energy required in the process.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The proposed project is a second generation in the West Bank that is being financed by 
the Bank. These two projects are within the PA's policy and strategy for solid waste 
disposal consisting of having three regional sanitary landfill facilities. The first project 
has been through the construction of the sanitary landfill in the northern West Bank. To 
date, the administrators of the northern project have been in full compliance with the 
Bank’s safeguard policies. Their experiences have been shared with the recipients of the 
new project in the southern West Bank since project inception. The key stakeholders 
from the southern West Bank have also participated in study tours to the northern project 
to learn from such experience. This experience has been instrumental in the design of the 
southern West Bank solid waste management project. Furthermore, the Environment 
Quality Authority with the support of the project have been following the northern  
 
project since inception and arrangements have been made for it to continue to do so for 
environmental oversight of the new project.   
 
Two Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) have been prepared to address 
the potential Project Affected People (PAPs). The first was for waste pickers and herders 
and the second was for land owners.  These ARAPs have been reviewed by the Bank 
safeguard specialist and cleared for in-country and in InfoShop disclosure in both English 
and Arabic. So far, all stakeholders have committed themselves to respect, comply and 
implement all measures related to safeguards.  
 
The JSC-H&B, as the main implementing institution, has established a subcommittee 
(Social Committee) which will be aided by the Technical Operations Unit (TOU) team as 
well as qualified consultants to discuss and agree with the waste pickers on grievance 
measures and process that will ensure proper treatment of their loss of income as a result 
of the rehabilitation and closure one of the main regional dumpsite in southern Hebron. 
The SC will also work closely with the technical team in the design and implementation 
of the project component designed to promote waste recycle with the participation of 
waste pickers with interest in this initiative.  
 
The JSC-H&B has also established a Land Acquisition Committee aided by the TOU 
director to meet and agree with the representatives from the land owners for the sanitary 
landfill and the access road on land value and compensation scheme. Already a 
compensation scheme has been mutually agreed to. The TOU assisted by a qualified 
lawyer are currently finalizing the land ownership file in preparation for submittal to the 
Ministry of Finance for compensation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include:  
Page  7
a. municipalities and villages of the Bethlehem and Hebron governorates in Southern 
West Bank. They will be the main beneficiaries of the project as their generated waste 
will be adequately collected by new vehicles procured by the SWM program (which will 
be funded by participating donors) and disposed off at a sanitary landfill to be constructed 
through funding from the project.  
 
b. Waste pickers who are presently operating at the existing Hebron dumpsite. They are 
about 132 waste pickers identified at the Yatta dump site, although most of these work 
part-time on the dump site.  
 
c. owners of land where the sanitary landfill and access road are expected to be located. 
Also owners of land currently leased by municipalities on monthly or annual terms for 
municipal waste disposal.  
 
d. Israeli Civil Administration in the West Bank who has control over permitting the 
construction of large scale infrastructure projects especially in Area C, still under full 
Israeli control in accordance with the signed agreements to date between the Govt of 
Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.  
 
e. other interest groups such as community groups and non governmental organizations 
involved in social and environmental issues.  
 
The consultants who were contracted to carryout the environmental and social impact 
assessments together with municipal representatives have engaged the above mentioned 
stakeholders in a number of discussions in formal and informal settings. In addition, 
interviews with key individuals and group leaders have been carried out. The consultation 
process continues as the ESIA process has not come to an end. Additional consultation 
and awareness building especially with the waste pickers is being carried out by the JSC-
H&B Technical Operations Unit.  
 
A
visit to the sanitary landfill constructed in Jenin (northern West Bank) is being 
organized to ensure that the stakeholders are fully aware of what will be implemented 
especially since the new project will replicate what has been done in Jenin.  
 
Translated drafts of the ESIA and executive summaries in English and in Arabic have 
been posted in the Hebron and Bethlehem municipal websites. Moreover, the 
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans have also been disclosed locally and in the 
InfoShop in both English and Arabic languages.  
 
A
project brief in Arabic was prepared and disseminated to the waste pickers informing 
them about the Social Committee's objective, composition and contact numbers as well as 
the TOU coordinates towards arriving at mutually acceptable grievance measures. A bank 
representative witnessed the dissemination of such brief.   
 
Page  8
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/01/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/25/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/01/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Page  9
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ibrahim Khalil Dajani 
05/08/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
05/11/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
05/11/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
05/11/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna M. Bjerde 
05/11/2009 
Comments:   
