Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3471 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/28/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: World 
Project ID: P110729 
Project Name: Central Asia South Asia Electricity Transmission and Trade Project 
(CASA 1000) 
Task Team Leader: Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 31, 2009 
Managing Unit: SASDE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
204.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Asian 
Development 
Bank 
244.00 
 
Islamic Development Bank - Al Aqsa Fund 
122.00
366.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to facilitate regional electricity trade between Kyrgyz Republic 
and Tajikistan in Central Asia and Afghanistan and Pakistan in South Asia through the 
establishment of the physical infrastructure and the concomitant institutional and legal 
framework.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
CASAREM 
–
“Central Asia - South Asia Regional Electricity Market” – is a concept for 
developing electricity trade among the countries of the two regions through a set of projects and 
concomitant investments, underpinned by the relevant institutional arrangements and legal 
agreements. The four countries which have agreed to pursue the idea of CASAREM include 
Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan in Central Asia (intended exporters), and Afghanistan and 
Pakistan in South Asia (intended importers). However, it is envisaged that other countries could 
join the initiative as the trade expands. The development of the first phase of CASAREM, which 
Page  2
is to establish the necessary transmission and trading infrastructure and systems to enable a trade 
of 1000 MW of electricity between Central Asia and South Asia, is referred to as “CASA-1000”.  
 
The CASA 1000 Project would comprise: (a) a roughly 750 km High Voltage Direct Current 
(DC) transmission system between Tajikistan and Pakistan via Afghanistan; (b) a DC to 
Alternate Current (AC) converter station in Kabul to supply Kabul area; (c) an AC transmission 
link between Kyrgyz Republic and Tajikistan to supply Kyrgyz electricity to South Asia via 
Tajikistan; and (d) the concomitant institutional and legal framework to enable such electricity 
trade.  
 
It is noted that the EA documents (Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment with country 
specific EA and Archealogical Survey and Land Acquisition Framework) will be completed and 
disclosed prior to appraisal.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The HVDC transmission line is expected to commence at Sangtuda in Tajikistan and pass 
through Kunduz, Pul-e-Khumri, Kabul and Jalalabad in Afghanistan and terminate in Peshawar 
in Pakistan.  The total length of the transmission line is estimated at 750 km of which about 16% 
passes through Tajikistan, 75% through Afghanistan and 9% through Pakistan.  In addition, a 
430 km 500 kV single circuit transmission line is expected to be partially financed under the 
project to interconnect Kyrgyz Republic to Tajikistan.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The four governments have varying capacity for managing safeguard policies, with Pakistan 
perhaps being the most experienced and Afghanistan the least. Institutional capacity and 
measures to strengthen country capacity will be assessed during project preparation.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Helen Z. Shahriari (ECSSD) 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASDS) 
Mr Asger Christensen (SASDS) 
Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS) 
Mr Wolfhart Pohl (ECSSD) 
Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDN) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASDN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The geographical extent and coverage of the project scope is expected to extend to several 
hundred kilometers and could potentially entail significant, large scale negative (and some 
positive) environmental and social impacts.  Each investment will thus require a detailed 
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the selected transmission line corridor 
which will be prepared by consultants being financed by ADB. Based on the review of the 
comprehensive environmental and social impact assessment, an environmental and social 
management plan (EMP) that includes project specific mitigation and monitoring measures will 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
be prepared. The EMP will be incorporated into the tender documents for future works contracts. 
In addition, the consultants will draft Resettlement and Land Acquisition Plans and prepare 
country specific Social Assessments in accordance with all relevant lenders’ and any applicable 
procedures or guidelines required by the cooperating Governments for each country crossed by 
the transmission line. At a minimum, stakeholder consultations in all three cooperating countries 
will be held at the outset of the ESIA process and upon completion of the draft ESIA.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
In the Tajikistan section of the corridor, more detail is required to characterize the extent to 
which wetlands and rare species of mammals may be encountered and develop mitigation 
measure if required. In the Kabul-Peshawar section, the proposed Project route does not appear 
to pass through sensitive ecological habitats or formally protected areas such as forests, reserved 
forest, wildlife sanctuaries, wet lands, etc.  During the construction phase, there will be cutting of 
some trees, disturbance to fauna during the construction and operation stages of the Project.  
More detail will be provided in the draft ESIA and resulting PMPs and social management 
documents.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
No formally protected forest areas exist up to 5 km from the proposed route of the 
transmission line.  The forested area along the Panj River may qualify as forest reserve.  More 
detail will be forthcoming in draft ESIA.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Due to the rich cultural history of the areas through which the transmission lines will pass, it 
is highly likely that physical cultural resources (PCR) and /or cultural and archeological chance 
finds will be encountered and thus special precautions will need to be taken to avoid damaging 
cultural heritage sites and property. A field based survey will be prepared as part of the ESIA and 
a
mitigation plan will be prepared which will include provisions for the use of chance find 
procedures.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
None of the four defining factors proposed under OP 4.10 to identify indigenous populations 
(paragraph 4) appear clearly applicable to people potentially affected by the project’, including 
the tribal populations of Afghanistan and Pakistan.  Therefore, OP 4.10 is not triggered.  
However, in the interests of social due diligence:  (i) the ESIA will assess potential vulnerability 
of all affected groups, (ii) the client will ensure effective consultations with, and culturally 
appropriate benefits for each group and (iii) based on the above, measures will be incorporated 
into the project design as necessary to include culturally appropriate mechanisms for 
participation and to address and mitigate any possibility of vulnerable groups being negatively 
impacted or excluded from project benefits.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
OP 4.12 is triggered due to the potential need for land acquisition relating to the various 
elements of the transmission system; the existence of physical structures and social infrastructure 
that might have to be removed; and the possibility that affected settlements might have to be 
physically displaced.  
 
Because the precise locations of the transmission lines are not yet known, the exact scope of 
the impacts cannot be determined until the technical designs are finalized. Therefore, a 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared as a condition of appraisal to guide the 
land acquisition/ resettlement process.  The RPFs will be part of the overall ESIA, but specific 
RPFs will be prepared for each of the cooperating countries as the relevant national policies, 
laws, institutions and conditions will differ. Specific Resettlement Plans (RP) and/or Land 
Acquisition Plans (LAP) will be prepared as required when precise details of transmission line 
locations (alignment, locations for pylons, substations and other structures) are available.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/29/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
 
A
preliminary environmental and social impact assessment was carried out as part of the 
Phase 1 preparatory work by ADB-financed consultants.  More detailed assessments will be 
carried out in Phase 2 to meet ADB and WB guidelines.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raghuveer Y. Sharma 
02/24/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Agnes I. Kiss 
04/08/2008 
Comments:  Co-TTLs: Julie Fraser (SASDE), Pedro Sanchez (SASDE).  South Asia Regional 
Safeguards Coordinator:  Eric Brusberg 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Charles M. Feinstein 
03/03/2008 
Comments:  The safeguards team should please coordinate with their ADB peers in order to harmonize 
safeguard requirements for the Pakistan portion. Physical access to sites in Afganistan will also be an 
issue. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
