Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3109 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/04/2007 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P107142 
Project Name: RY-RURAL WATER SUPPLY ADD. FINANCING 
Task Team Leader: Andrew Makokha 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 15, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (65%);Sub-national government administration (15%);Central 
government administration (10%);Other social services (5%);Health (5%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The original overall objective of the project was to expand sustainable rural water supply and 
sanitation coverage to about 400,000 people in rural areas in six governorates. This was to be 
achieved by: (i) introducing to Yemen a worldwide proven demand responsive, decentralized 
community-managed RWSS development approach; (ii) assisting the Government in building 
and strengthening local RWSS capacity; and (iii) helping the Government to formulate the 
agreed demand responsive approach (DRA) principles in a coherent RWS strategy and to prepare 
a
long-term (10-15 years) national RWSS investment program that could be supported by the 
Bank and other donors. We propose a slight modification to the objective to take account actual 
activities and impact of the project thus far. The newly worded objective would be to to expand 
sustainable rural water supply and sanitation coverage to an additional 270,000 people in rural 
areas in six governorates. This will be achieved by (i) mainstreaming the tested and successful 
implementation approach into governorate water activities (ii) aligning project activities with the 
National Water Sector Strategy and Investment Program (NWSSIP) including strengthening 
Page  2
capacity for sanitation and hygiene promotion activities and (iii) supporting preparation of 
studies and developmemnt of capacities for transition to SWAP.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The additional financing under this proposal is to be used to extend and deepen activities under 
the project components detailed in the PAD and outlined below.  
 
a. 
Under the water supply component, coverage is to be extended to 270,000 new 
consumers through construction of 92 water supply systems in the six governorates. The 
currently tested and successful implementation mechanisms will be used but governorate water 
branch offices will be more closely involved to ensure alignment to the branch office water 
program and prepare for future use of country systems.  
 
b. 
The environmental sanitation component will provide improved sanitation through up to 
four small sewerage systems in selected communities to serve 15,000 people, continue support to 
communal and household sanitation and strengthen capacity to carry out hygiene promotion 
activities. The component will also support the Government to finalize its sanitation strategy 
within the framework of the national rural water and sanitation strategy, by addressing issues that 
have apparently delayed cabinet approval of the current strategy.  
 
c. 
Under the institutional strengthening, project management, studies and training 
component, the funds will be used to support the Government to provide training on the newly 
approved procurement systems in the water sector, support project management, and provide 
institutional support to the six branch offices of project operation. Studies identified as key to 
successful transition to SWAP as well as implementation of sub-sector M&E systems will also 
be supported. All activities will be carried out in close collaboration with the sector lead agency 
as part of the alignment and harmonization process.  
 
Description of Ongoing Project  
 
The project as originally designed had the following components (figures include IDA, GOY 
and community contributions):  
 
(a) 
Water Supply (US$19.1 million): The water supply component was to provide a 
minimum service level including the construction and rehabilitation of  RWSS systems 
consisting of a range of technologies, i.e. hand dug wells and hand-pumps, spring protection and 
gravity supply, rain water catchments, piped schemes from boreholes equipped with either diesel 
or electric pumps and supplying communal stand-posts. Incremental costs for building metered 
yard or house connections would be entirely borne by the beneficiaries. Taking into account 
community preferences and water resources availability, the predominant technology has turned 
out to be boreholes and mechanical pumps and the mode of service demanded by communities is 
the metered household connection. Some limited rainwater harvesting is being carried out on 
pilot basis and initial evaluations indicate that it is unlikely to meet the sustainability criteria in 
terms of quantity, reliability and quality. For the additional financing, more boreholes with 
mechanized pumps will be built and other technologies only considered where feasible and 
Page  3
sustainable. The tested and successful provision mode for household connections through the 
construction contracts and paid for by households will be continued.  
 
(b) 
Environmental Sanitation (US$ 2.1 million): The component was to provide (i) incentives 
to households for the construction of household systems, i.e. simple dry pit latrines, pour flush 
latrines, flush toilet and septic tanks. Demonstration latrines at village centers and block latrines 
for schools and health centers were also to be constructed. If justified by wastewater flow and 
population density, one or two wastewater treatment systems (communal septic tank and/or 
waste stabilization ponds) were to be built as pilots. Sanitation marts where latrine components 
could be purchased, technical advise sought and builders located were to be tested in one or two 
locations, and (ii) hygiene education was to be provided by SMTs through training of community 
based hygiene specialists and teachers and by helping design simple hygiene education programs 
for schools. The project has achieved most of the above with some modifications. Sanitation 
marts were not found necessary and instead existing and trained community technicians have 
been used in latrine construction at schools and health centers subsidized by the project and, at 
individual households paid for by the families with some material support from the project. With 
additional financing, the same process will be used and four more wastewater treatment systems 
constructed.  
 
(c) 
Institutional Strengthening, Project Management, Studies and Training (US$ 8.2 million): 
This component included (i) equipment and running costs as well as technical support and 
training at central/governorate /community levels, PMU, PIU, SMT and WUAs; and (ii) TA, 
sector review and studies to formulate a RWSS sector strategy, as well as training to support 
decentralized RWSS units at governorate levels. Training and support to decentralized RWSS 
units has been limited because the anticipated assimilation of the PIUs into the governorate 
RWSS units did not occur. With the additional financing, it is proposed to remedy this situation 
through close alignment of the operations of the two entities and harmonization of approaches.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project will continue to operate in the six governorates of Ibb, Abyan, Hajja, Amran, Lahje 
and Al Dale'e.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The additional financing is for activities similar in scale and scope to those implemented under 
the original project. The environmental monitoring and mitigation plan prepared at project 
appraisal has been implemented as planned. It has been reviewed and found to be valid and will 
continue to be effectively used by the governorate units to assess and mitigate negative 
environmental impacts of sub-project investments. The gender and equity weaknesses identified 
in implementation of the social aspects of the project are being addressed by strengthening the 
PMU capacity.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Ms Samia Al-Duaij (MNSSD) 
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The additional financing is for activities similar in scale and scope to those implemented 
under the original project. The environmental monitoring and mitigation plan prepared at project 
appraisal, and aimed at mitigating negative environmental effects of increased water 
consumption and wastewater generation, is currently being effectively used. It will still be valid 
and continue to be  used by the governorate units to assess and mitigate negative environmental 
impacts of sub-project investments under the additional financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/10/2007 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
This project is providing additional financing to the ongoing Rural Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project. The environmental monitoring and mitigation plan prepared at project 
appraisal, and aimed at mitigating negative environmental effects of increased water 
consumption and wastewater generation, will still be valid and continue to be effectively 
used by the governorate units to assess and mitigate negative environmental impacts of sub-
project investments.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew Makokha 
12/04/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/04/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
12/04/2007 
Comments:   
