Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/05/2009 
Report No.:  AC4200
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P115178 
Project Name:  RY-FLOOD PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY RECONSTRUCTION 
ADDITIONAL FINANCING II 
Task Team Leader:  Sameh Naguib Wahba 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 22, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: March 24, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (50%);Flood protection (50%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Municipal governance and institution building 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.50
6.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project’s development objectives are to: (i) protect residents, economic activities and 
infrastructure from the destructive effects of seasonal flooding in Taiz, Hadramout and 
Al-Mahara; (ii) restore access to critical road infrastructure damaged by the floods and; 
(iii) strengthen the capacity of local governments and support decentralization.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is an Additional Financing to, combined with a restructuring of the 
Taiz Municipal Development and Flood Protection Project (TMDFPP), processed under 
OP8.0. The restructuring reflects the GOY’s objective of evolving the TMDFPP from a 
single city (Taiz) focus on infrastructure construction into a national level flood 
protection program.  
 
Consistent with the components of the TMDFPP, investments under the proposed 
Additional Financing would be carried out under the first and third components, covering 
flood protection and infrastructure, and capacity building respectively. No investments 
Page  2
would be allocated for the second component of TMDFPP covering resettlement 
activities, as the activities proposed to be financed under Additional Financing are not 
expected to trigger resettlement.  
 
Component 1--Flood protection and infrastructure rehabilitation (US$38.5 
millionequivalent, of which IDA share US$32.8 million equivalent).  
 
The objective of this component is to rebuild selected critically damaged infrastructure 
in the affected areas to higher standards that could withstand future flooding events.  It 
comprises of two sub-components focusing on rehabilitation and reconstruction of 
priority damaged segments of the regional road network and the flood protection system, 
as follows:  
 
Regional road rehabilitation sub-component (US$24.3 million equivalent, of which 
IDA’s share is US$20.6 million equivalent).  
 
Interventions under this sub-component include rehabilitating and reconstructing 
selected priority regional roads where critical segments have been destroyed by the 
flooding, and retrofitting with adequate storm water drainage systems. This sub-
component will finance the repairs of damages over the entire regional road network in 
the Wadi Hadramout area (the worst affected by the disaster) as well as the Riyan-Ben 
Aifan regional road in Sahel Hadramout (one of two road connections between Wadi 
Hadramout and the rest of Yemen, the other being Ben Aifan-Al-Abr). The flood-related 
damages to be tackled under the project include: (i) washout/erosion of one or both sides 
of the road caused by inadequate slope protection structures including some instances 
where the whole road has been damaged and traffic rerouted; (ii) damages to and 
blockages of single or multi-cell box culverts and pipe culverts causing consequential 
local damages to the road; (iii) partly or fully damaged Irish crossings (cement concrete 
drifts across river beds); (iv) damages to bridges and bridge abutments; (v) minor 
damages to road pavement and shoulders due to soaking of the pavement and subsequent 
loss of load bearing capacity requiring asphalt patching and shoulder rehabilitation; and 
(vi) damages and blockages of roads due to rock fall and slides caused by extensive rain 
and which led to subsequent damages to road pavements and side drains.  
 
Specifically, 12 regional roads would be covered, totaling 40km in damage length. 
These are: Rayan-Ben Aifan, Almashad-Dawan, Alhawra-Azzaher, Ben Aifan-Alabr, 
Seiyoun-Ben Aifan, Alkhashaa-Rakhi, Seiyoun-Tarim, Tarim-Alsom, Prophet Hood 
road, Aladlos–Rasib, Algharf-Sah, and Alaleeb-Rahaba. The preparation of designs and 
tender documents is currently underway. The repairs would allow building back the 
damaged sections along the same footprint and alignment, but with adequate flood-proof 
standards. Of these US$24.3 million, US$2.4 million equivalent are estimated to be 
needed for urgent repairs of segments that cause serious risks to motorists, which thus 
call for a force account procedure since from a safety viewpoint it is not advisable to wait 
for competitive tender.  These are instances of 7-meter wide highways, where one lane 
collapsed and the other is threatening collapse due to erosion, but where the road remains 
in use.  
 
Page  3
Flood protection system rehabilitation sub-component (US$14.2 million equivalent, of 
which ID
A’s share is US$12.6 million equivalent).  
 
Interventions under this sub-component include rehabilitating and reconstructing 
selected priority components of the flood protection system in the affected areas, which 
were damaged or affected by the storm and floods, and which served to protect human 
settlements and agricultural lands.  Restoring the functioning of the main elements of the 
flood protection system is thus a key priority to protect agricultural land and 
shelter/human settlements, and thus facilitate post-disaster economic recovery and 
safeguard any future reconstruction from the effects of future flooding events.  Flood 
protection works that are both effective and labor-intensive (such as the use of Gabion 
walls) will be relied upon where feasible to enable the creation of temporary job 
opportunities for the affected communities to partly support the households that lost their 
income and livelihoods in the disaster, for the duration of the reconstruction and recovery 
period.  
 
Specifically, this sub-component will finance investments in affected areas in Wadi 
Hadramout (US$6.71 million), Sahel Hadramout (US$ 2.56 million) and Al-Mahara 
(US$5.00 million).  
 
Investments include stone works, flood protection works using gabions, dredging and 
filling works and rehabilitation of Wadi beds, and removal of the Sayssaban trees that 
block flood and storm water flow in Wadi beds.  
 
In the Wadi Hadramout region, works would be carried out in 11 Wadis: Daw’an, Al-
Ein, Ammad and Qassam, Heynun, Hathyah, Ser, Bin Ali, the main Wadi running from 
Kaoda to the west to Haid Qassim bridge to the east, Addam, Massila running from Haid 
Qassim bridge to the east to Sena west of Al-Soum, and Thabi.  
 
In the Hadramout Sahel region, works encompass a total of 30 discrete activities in eight 
different districts as follows: Daw’an, Ghail Binyamin, Aryaf Mukalla, Hajar, Al-Shihr, 
Raydah and Al-Qosseir, Yabooth, and Al-Diss Al-Sharkiya.  The works include the 
rehabilitation and construction of new small flood protection structures to protect 
agricultural land and shelter and the rehabilitation of irrigation canals, ditches and 
diversion structures/dykes damaged by the floods.  
 
In Al-Mahara, works encompass flood protection works (retaining walls and protection 
structures made of gabion walls) in 36 different sites in 12 different Wadis located in 
three districtsâ
 ”Al
-Ghaida, Haswain and Al-Massila.  
 
Component 2--Resettlement of Affected Persons (US$0.0 million equivalent).  
 
No investments would be allocated for the second component of TMDFPP covering 
resettlement activities.  
 
Component 3--Capacity Building (US$2.5 million equivalent, of which IDA share 
US$2.2 million equivalent).  
 
The objective of this component is to prepare a flood protection plan for the vulnerable 
areas of Wadi Hadramout; a storm water drainage master plan for Mukalla city; help set 
up local government capacity in disaster preparedness, mitigation and response; finance 
Page  4
the cost of design/tender document preparation and construction supervision; and cover 
Project Management expenses over the three-year implementation period.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project takes place in various affected areas in Hadramout and Al-Mahara 
Governorates.  
 
The road network rehabilitation encompasses 12 regional roads that cover Wadi 
Hadramout as well as the Riyan-Bin Aifan regional road in Sahel Hadramout region.  
 
The flood protection rehabilitation encompasses different Wadis in Wadi Hadramout, 
Hadramout Sahel and Al-Mahara as detailed in the project description.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Mario Antonio Zelaya (MNSSD) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Since all of the sub-projects to be financed are for replacement of existing structures 
located at the same place and within the same alignments and right-of-ways, the 
incremental adverse impact of the project is expected to be small.  Many adverse impacts 
have already been caused by the storm and flood disaster such as substantial erosion and 
change in alignment of natural drainage courses including damaged infrastructure.  
However, these impacts will be mitigated through the rehabilitation and reconstruction of 
damaged infrastructure and protection of drainage courses from further erosion 
particularly at places where populated and important agricultural areas are at great risk to 
flood damage.  
 
Expected environmental impacts from the project are those typically associated with 
road reconstruction and infrastructure rehabilitation. Among other potential impacts, 
Page  5
these include: (i) Temporary site disturbance associated with demolition of damaged 
infrastructure; (ii) Temporary erosion and sedimentation in streams from reconstruction 
of road foundations and associated increases in sediment loads and turbidity during 
construction; (iii) In stream temporary disturbances from blasting or excavation works for 
removal of damaged foundation; (iv) Dust and noise from operation of heavy equipment 
during construction; (v) Handling, storage and disposal of waste materials; and (vi) 
Traffic congestion or temporary re-routing and interruption of traffic around the 
construction zones.  
 
All of these impacts can be managed during construction with known mitigation 
measures included in the contracts and capacity building of supervising organizations.  It 
should be noted that each construction site, whether for road reconstruction or flood 
protection works, will be located at existing streams and crossings and at confined sites 
so as to limit and avoid incremental damage.  In this way the potential impacts will be 
very localized.  None of the sub-projects, therefore, will have large scale or regional 
environmental impacts.  One or two of the roads sections at critical stream crossings may 
require realignment. At this stage, there is insufficient information on the nature of 
realignment as the technical and feasibility studies have not yet been undertaken for the 
two road segments. The environmental impacts from the realignment are expected to be 
minimal because the rehabilitation works will be limited in scope, both from the financial 
and technical perspectives. For this reason,the environmental category per OP 4.01 will 
be “B”.  
 
In addition, the possibility of realignment of said segments of road may imply land 
acquisition. In which case, the provisions of the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 
prepared for under this project will apply. A disbursement convenant will be included in 
the credit agreement requiring Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and RFP to be 
prepared prior to the investments that will be found to require such instruments.  
 
At this stage the rating for OP4.04 for natural habitats is yet to be decided.The final 
determination of these triggers will be made during the preparation of the Environmental 
Management Plan.  
 
As for OP4.11, during the construction phase, vigilance will be ensured for chance find 
procedure.  
 
No resettlement issues are expected in any of the proposed sub-projects under the 
emergency Project.  If the unlikely event that OP4.12 is triggered, Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plans (ARPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), as may be 
applicable, will be prepared for specific sub-projects in accordance with the project’s 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP), which was prepared by the Project Coordination 
Unit (PCU) and submitted on January 30, 2009, for IDA’s review and clearance.  These 
RAPs if needed will be prepared during implementation upon the completion of the 
detailed design studies.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Close attention will be paid in the preparation of the EMP and during implementation to 
any potential adverse impact that may result from flood protection rehabilitation works--
construction debris or dust, etc--on sensitive coastal natural habitats, especially for 
rehabilitation works in Wadis that are close to coastal areas.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As mentioned above, the incremental adverse impact resulting from the project is 
expected to be small, since all activities to be financed are replacement of existing 
structures located at the same place and within the same alignments and right-of-ways.  
 
Given that many adverse impacts have already been caused by the storm and flood 
disaster such as substantial erosion and change in alignment of Wadis (natural drainage 
courses) and damaged protection infrastructure, the alternative of doing nothing would 
leave Wadi courses vulnerable to further erosion and put populated areas and agricultural 
areas at a greater risk of flooding and further damage and loss of livelihoods.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower's existing implementing agency, the TMDFPP Project Management Unit 
(PMU), will be restructured to reflect the expanded geographic scope of this project. It 
will comprise of a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) based in Sana'a and staffed with the 
existing Project Director and fiduciary staff, which will be supported by Project 
Implementation Units (PIU) based in Taiz (with the existing rest of the staff to implement 
the ongoing Additional financing) and in Hadramout (to be set up for implementation of 
the new proposed project).  
 
The TMDFPP PMU--whose same management and staff, complemented with additional 
staff will constitute the implementating unit of this project--has over 15 years experience 
and strong track record in implementing IDA projects. Specifically, the PMU has 
extensive demonstrated experience in implementing safeguards: it has implemented a 
resettlement component to resettle 244 households that lived in flood paths and which 
was rated Highly Satisfactory and its environmental safeguards implementation is also 
rated satisfactory.  
 
The environmental management plans, which will be prepared during the course of 
implementation based on the completed Environmental and Social Screening and 
Assessment Framework (ESSAF) will be carried out by the implementing agency. The 
latter includes a full-time Environmental and Safety Officer (ESO) in the Taiz office and 
would recruit a new Environmental Officer for the to-be-established PIU in Hadramout. 
The environmental officer would oversee the preparation of and implement the EMP and 
the environmental aspects included in the Project’s Operations Manual. The ESO was in 
charge of supervising similar work under the original TMDFPP and the ongoing AF.  The 
Page  7
environmental officer would continue to act in the same capacity for the proposed 
additional financing.  
 
Given the limited possibilities of triggering OP4.12 in light of the project scope, the 
TMDFPP PMU’s highly experienced social and resettlement officer, who would be based 
in Taiz, would be relied upon as may be needed to address social and resettlement issues 
that may arise.  Should such instances arise, which would likely be of a very small scale 
based on a prior assessment of the sites by several experts, a draft RAP, satisfactory to 
IDA, would be prepared as a condition of disbursement.  Monitoring day-to-day 
construction activities to ensure that no resettlement issues would be triggered would be 
the responsibility of the other PIU staff in Hadramout/Seiyun.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders include inter alia the affected communities and households, elected 
local councils at the Governorate and district level, and the Environmental Protection 
Authority (EPA), the agency responsible for environmental matters in Yemen.  
 
Consultations through formal workshops and meetings taking place within the project-
affected areas would take place upon the completion of the EMP in conjunction with the 
completion of the detailed designs of the different investments (which are still under 
preparation). Elected local councils at Governorate and district levels will be called upon 
to facilitate local consultations and in regards to dissemination and disclosure 
requirements.  
 
In addition, the RPF and ESSAF are publicly available through the Ministry of Public 
Works in Sana'a and in the General Department of Public Works and Highways in 
Mukalla and Seiyun (Hadramout) and Al-Ghaida (Al-Mahara) and the World Bank 
Information Center (Infoshop). The Arabic version of the documents will be disclosed by 
February 16, 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/04/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/05/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/05/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 No 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
EMP will be prepared during the course of implementation on the basis of the ESSAF 
(which was prepared by IDA and discussed and confirmed with the implementing 
agency). Clearance by IDA of the EMP represents a disbursement condition for all 
works.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameh Naguib Wahba 
01/30/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
02/05/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Knut Opsal 
02/05/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
02/05/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anna Maria Bjerde 
02/05/2009 
Comments:   
