Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/05/2007 
Report No.:  AC3306
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P107142 
Project Name:  RY-RURAL WATER SUPPLY ADD. FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Andrew Makokha 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 26, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 15, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (65%);Sub-national government administration (15%);Central 
government administration (10%);Other social services (5%);Health (5%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original overall objective of the project was to expand sustainable rural water supply 
and sanitation coverage to about 400,000 people in rural areas in six governorates. This 
was to be achieved by: (i) introducing to Yemen a worldwide proven demand responsive, 
decentralized community-managed RWSS development approach; (ii) assisting the 
Government in building and strengthening local RWSS capacity; and (iii) helping the 
Government to formulate the agreed demand responsive approach (DRA) principles in a 
coherent RWS strategy and to prepare a long-term (10-15 years) national RWSS 
investment program that could be supported by the Bank and other donors. We propose a 
slight modification to the objective to take account actual activities and impact of the 
project thus far. The newly worded objective would be to to expand sustainable rural 
water supply and sanitation coverage to an additional 270,000 people in rural areas in six 
governorates. This will be achieved by: (i) mainstreaming the tested and successful 
implementation approach into governorate water activities; (ii) aligning project activities 
with the National Water Sector Strategy and Investment Program (NWSSIP) including 
Page  2
strengthening capacity for sanitation and hygiene promotion activities; and (iii) 
supporting preparation of studies and development of capacities for transition to sector 
wide approach (SWAP).   
 
3. Project Description 
The additional financing under this proposal is to be used to extend and deepen activities 
under the project components detailed in the project appraisal document (PAD) and 
outlined below.  
 
a) 
Water Supply Component: The water supply component was to provide a 
minimum service level including the construction and rehabilitation of  RWSS systems 
consisting of a range of technologies, i.e. hand dug wells and hand-pumps, spring 
protection and gravity supply, rain water catchments, piped schemes from boreholes 
equipped with either diesel or electric pumps and supplying communal stand-posts. 
Incremental costs for building metered yard or house connections would be entirely borne 
by the beneficiaries. Taking into account community preferences and water resources 
availability, the predominant technology has turned out to be boreholes and mechanical 
pumps and the mode of service demanded by communities is the metered household 
connection. Some limited rainwater harvesting is being carried out on pilot basis and 
initial evaluations indicate that it is unlikely to meet the sustainability criteria in terms of 
quantity, reliability and quality. For the additional financing, more boreholes with 
mechanized pumps will be built and other technologies only considered where feasible 
and sustainable. The tested and successful provision mode for household connections 
through the construction contracts and paid for by households will be continued. Water 
supply coverage is to be extended to 270,000 new consumers through construction of 92 
water supply systems in the six governorates. The currently tested and successful 
implementation mechanisms will be used but governorate water branch offices will be 
more closely involved to ensure alignment to the branch office water program and 
prepare for future use of country systems.  
 
b) 
Environmental Sanitation Component: This component was to provide (i) 
incentives to households for the construction of household systems, i.e. simple dry pit 
latrines, pour flush latrines, flush toilet and septic tanks. Demonstration latrines at village 
centers and block latrines for schools and health centers were also to be constructed. If 
justified by wastewater flow and population density, one or two wastewater treatment 
systems (communal septic tank and/or waste stabilization ponds) were to be built as 
pilots. Sanitation marts where latrine components could be purchased, technical advise 
sought and builders located were to be tested in one or two locations, and (ii) hygiene 
education was to be provided by social mobilization teams (SMTs) through training of 
community based hygiene specialists and teachers and by helping design simple hygiene 
education programs for schools.  
 
The project has achieved most of the above with some modifications. Sanitation marts 
were not found necessary and instead existing and trained community technicians have 
been used in latrine construction at schools and health centers subsidized by the project 
Page  3
and, at individual households paid for by the families with some material support from 
the project.  
 
With additional financing, the same process will be used. Four more small sewerage 
systems in selected communities to serve 15,000 people will be constructed. Support to 
communal and household sanitation and strengthening capacity to carry out hygiene 
promotion activities will also continue. In addition, the component will support the 
Government to finalize its sanitation strategy within the framework of the national rural 
water and sanitation strategy, by addressing issues that have apparently delayed cabinet 
approval of the current strategy.  
 
(c) 
Institutional Strengthening, Project Management, Studies and Training: This 
component included (i) equipment and running costs as well as technical support and 
training at central/governorate /community levels, project management unit (PMU), 
project implementation unit (PIU), SMT and water user associations (WUAs); and (ii) 
TA, sector review and studies to formulate a RWSS sector strategy, as well as training to 
support decentralized RWSS units at governorate levels. Training and support to 
decentralized RWSS units has been limited because the anticipated assimilation of the 
PIUs into the governorate RWSS units did not occur.  
 
With the additional financing, it is proposed to remedy this situation through close 
alignment of the operations of the two entities and harmonization of approaches. The 
additional funds will be used to support the Government to provide training on the newly 
approved procurement systems in the water sector, support project management, and 
provide institutional support to the six branch offices of project operation. Studies 
identified as key to successful transition to SWAP as well as implementation of sub-
sector M&E systems will also be supported. All activities will be carried out in close 
collaboration with the sector lead agency as part of the alignment and harmonization 
process.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will continue to operate in the six governorates of Ibb, Abyan, Hajja, Amran, 
Lahje and Al Dale'e.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Ms Samia Al-Duaij (MNSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project was reviewed and designated Environmental Category B as there are no 
major adverse environmental issues involved. Furthermore, there are no land acquisition, 
involuntary resettlements, indigenous people or cultural heritage issues involved and 
there is no impact on international water ways. The main areas of  environmental concern 
were identified as Excreta and Wastewater Disposal, Gray Water (or sullage) Disposal, 
Reuse of Dried Sludge and Effluent, Sanitary Protection of Wells and Boreholes, Water 
Quality Testing and Surveillance, Solid Wastes Disposal and Storm Water Drainage. 
These areas were addressed in the Environmental review and recommendations on how 
to address them made as part of the environmental mitigation and monitoring measures 
that were part of the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The additional activities are similar in scale and scope to those implemented under the 
original project, covering the same governorates but in new communities. The 
environmental monitoring and mitigation plan prepared at original project appraisal, and 
aimed at mitigating negative environmental effects of increased water consumption and 
wastewater generation, has been applied effectively and there is adequate capcity for this. 
The current project's EMP which has been reviewed and updated will be applied by the 
governorate units to assess, mitigate and monitor negative environmental impacts of sub-
project investments under the additionl financing.   
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the people living in the project governorates and particularly 
those in communities where the project will intervene. Other stakeholders include 
organizations that have an intertest in the environment and government agencies with 
responsibility for environmental and social affairs. The borrower has requested that the 
Bank publicly discloses the Environment Review which includes the Environmental 
Mitigation Plan as well as the Environmental Monitoring Program in the Bank 
INFORSHOP and to the Bank’s Executive Directors. On his side, the client is making 
available to the public copies of the Review at the Bank’s Country Office in Sana’a as 
well as at the Ministry of Planning and International Cooperation  and at the offices of the 
National Environmental Protection Authority in Sana’a and at other places in the project 
area. Consultation will continue to be held with individual sub-project target communities 
and agreement reached on the environmental activities that will be necessary as part of 
sub-project implementation.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/28/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/01/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/28/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Yes 
Page  6
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Andrew Makokha 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
 
Comments:   
