Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3738 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/05/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P110733 
Project Name: Higher Education Project II 
Task Team Leader: Gillian M. Perkins 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 23, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Tertiary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed objective of the project is to improve the quality and relevance of selected 
programs in Yemen’s universities and to maintain the momentum on longer term reform of 
university finance and governance.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Develop Quality Programs in Priority Areas - The objective of this component 
would be to raise the quality of selected higher education programs in Yemen’s universities in 
fields that are particularly critical to the country’snational development and employment needs. 
The component would finance capacity building in the universities and provide grants for new or 
upgraded programs, based on international standards, to prepare graduates in identified priority 
fields contributing to national or regional economic priorities and the needs of private and public 
sector employers. Grants would cover the costs of developing and introducing the new programs, 
including TA and training for program renewal and faculty upgrading, visiting professorships, 
equipment and learning resources, and refurbishment of existing buildings where necessary. New 
construction would not be included.  
 
Page  2
Component 2:  Build Capacity for Implementation of Reforms under the National Strategy - 
The objectives of this component would be (a) to maintain momentum on longer term 
institutional reform and (b) to strengthen capacity for project management and for coordination 
of donor assistance to meet priority needs.  
 
(a) Maintain momentum on longer term institutional reform. Based on work carried out under 
the first project, activities have been initiated for reform of university governance and finance, 
development of a quality assurance mechanism, individual university development plans, and 
centrally-driven restructuring plans for the university sector as a whole. The need at this stage is 
to fully define the piloting, capacity building, legal/regulatory and policy actions and time 
needed to implement these challenging reforms effectively.  This subcomponent would finance 
TA, training and workshops at central and university levels to help implement priority elements 
of the National Strategy in the areas of governance, finance and quality assurance and to help 
integrate structure and policy for the tertiary level.  
 
(b) Strengthen capacity for project management and coordination of development assistance.  
Learning from the experience of the first project, more attention and resources would be given to 
ensuring the necessary capacity in the Ministry of Higher Education and universities for all 
aspects of project management, and for coordination of development assistance. This 
subcomponent would finance local and international TA to strengthen this capacity as well as 
funding essential equipment and operating costs for the unit.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Capital city and other districts/governorates to be confirmed during project preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Capacity is weak but the project will not have any major safeguard issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
Page  3
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/30/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Gillian M. Perkins 
01/15/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
01/21/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
01/15/2009 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
