Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/03/2009 
Report No.:  AC4493
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P114253 
Project Name:  Education for All Fast-Track Initiative Catalytic Fund Phase III 
Task Team Leader:  Ayesha Y. Vawda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 13, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 9, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (100%) 
Theme:  Education for all (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative 
20.00
20.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project Development Objective is to increase access of children, especially girls, to 
primary education in 7 underserved governorates out of 21 governorates.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1:- Increasing access to primary education in targeted districts of project 
governorates.  
 
The objective of Component 1 is to provide about 11,700 new primary school student 
places (mainly for girls) and extension and rehabilitation of primary schools and 
classrooms in the 7 selected Governorates.  Component 1 will provide construction of 
about 240 primary classrooms in 30 districts and rehabilitation of about 250 classrooms 
in 50 primary schools.  In addition, about 44 primary schools will be extended with a 
total of about 130 classrooms.   This component will be implemented by Yemen#s Public 
Works Project (PWP, in close collaboration with the PAU) according to existing and 
approved social and environmental guidelines.The PWP and PAU will coordinate 
planning, supervision and monitoring activities and a Memorandum of Understanding 
(MoU) will be signed by August 31, 2009, to articulate the roles and responsibilities of 
each of the agencies.  
 
Page  2
Component 2:- Improving enrolment and retention of primary school students in project 
governorates.  
 
The objective of Component 2 is to contribute to enrolment and retention of primary 
students (especially girls) in the selected 7 Governorates.  Component 2 will procure and 
distribute about 1 million school kits to grade 1-6 primary students in the selected 7 
governorates.  Districts (111 districts are targeted) and primary schools will be visited 4 
times each year to provide support and capacity building.  About 500 female teachers will 
be contracted in rural districts / areas (based on operations manual already developed 
under the BEDP and available in project files) to support girls# enrolment and retention. 
The female contract-teachers will receive annual training in order to be qualified at the 
end of the Phase III implementation period.  An agreement between the Ministry of 
Education (MoE) and the Civil Service and Finance Ministries will be signed by October 
30, 2009, that would ensure recruitment of these contract-teachers into the civil service 
after completion of Phase III implementation.  
 
Component 3:- Supporting Grant implementation, administration and monitoring.  
 
The objective of Component 3 is to provide support to the existing Project 
Administration Unit (which is managing the BEDP and other projects) and to provide 
effective monitoring and evaluation for Phase III implementation (at central level and in 
the targeted governorate and districts where Phase 3 will be implemented).  About 40 
rural districts in the 7 target governorates will be provided with administrative equipment 
and staff training (implemented by MOE and PAU and linked to wider framework of 
ongoing BEDP activities).  The PAU will be responsible for Phase III implementation 
(including responsibility to coordinate with MOE and PWP) and will provide effective 
monitoring and evaluation (through submitting implementation progress reports with 
detailed performance indicators and analysis on a bi-annual basis).  The PAU will be 
responsible for cooperation with the PWP and integrate PWP implementation supervision 
into its bi-annual progress reports.  Component 3 will also finance a study to assess the 
impact of the all three phases of CF grants particularly Phase III including assessment of 
the impact of environmental mitigation measures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The FTI-CF Phase III Grant will be implemented in the following 7 governorates which 
contain 54 percent of out-of-school children in Yemen according to the 2005 Household 
Budget Survey (HBS): Hodeidah, Hajjah, Dhamar, Al-Baida, Ryma, Amran, Al-
Mahweet, and Al-Daleh.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSO) 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (MNSEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The EFA-FTI is rated as #Category B# and IDA#s safeguard policy on Environmental 
Assessment is triggered. Project activities relating to civil works are expected to be 
associated with minor environmental impacts which are expected to be site-specific and 
temporary in nature and can be mitigated with the implementation of an EMP.  The 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) used for FTI Phases I & II has been updated and 
improved by also taking into consideration the EMP prepared for the PWP. All potential 
environmental issues will be considered during planning, implementation and monitoring 
stages. Furthermore, necessary mitigating measures to the extent possible will be 
incorporated in the standard bidding documents and bills of quantities for contractors. 
The school design prototypes will include measures for ensuring availability of water 
supply for students, and school hygiene at all times. Such measures could include 
selection of sites to the extent possible near water sources, and addition of rooftop 
rainwater harvesting measures. Similarly, adequate sanitation systems will be included in 
the design, including upgrading of existing systems for schools that are to be 
rehabilitated. As is the practice in Basic Education Development Program (BEDP) and 
Secondary Education Development and Girls Access (SEDGAP), schools will not 
include dry latrines and as a consequence, the sanitation issues are relatively easier to 
solve. Additionally, flush-toilets will be designed for minimum water usage. Handling of 
chemical materials for school laboratories is not an issue as laboratories are not included 
in primary schools. The site-specific EMP is attached to this document.  
 
Land for new construction is community owned and will be voluntarily donated by the 
beneficiary communities as part of their contribution. However, in any specific problem 
cases relating to land acquisition, it could be that the World Bank#s operational policy on 
involuntary resettlement OP 4.12 would come into effect and the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) that has been prepared will be applied. Procedure of land donation will 
be properly documented, signed by relevant individuals from the community and stamped 
by legitimate authority.  This documentation will be filed with the Project Administration 
Page  4
Unit (PAU) and Public Works Project (PWP).  The land acquisition process will be 
completed and documented before the start of any construction.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
n/a   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
n/a   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Recipient has experience in implementing the Bank#s safeguard policies as the MoE 
has already implemented several projects in the education sector, including FTI-CF 
Phases I and II.  
 
Implementation arrangements for FTI III will be the same as for FTI I & II except that  
the civil works component for the previous two projects was implemented by MoE; in 
FTI III, the civil works component for FTI III will be implemented through the Public 
Works Project (PWP).  This is a positive step as PWP already has significant experience 
and capacity in implementing a variety of civil works, including schools. It is currently 
implementing the ongoing IDA PWP-III project. An assessment of the PWP capacity for 
environmental management concluded that it has a well established and staffed unit. It 
has well established Environmental Management procedures in place that are currently 
being adopted for all its school construction, which constitutes more than 50% of its 
activities. PWP has a well staffed project implementation unit, including an environment 
and water unit.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Selection of school sites will be done by MoE through a school mapping committee 
consisting of the following individuals: community participation officer, engineer, district 
education officer and school mapping specialist.  Specific site characteristics such as sites 
prone to earthquakes, historical areas, and flood or on rain water channel (wadi) areas, 
mountainous or flat areas, noise, and other environmental issues would be identified in 
the school-mapping database. Site selection for new school construction as well as school 
designs have been developed in consultation with community representatives, and have 
taken various environmental and social criteria into consideration. Effective 
implementation of EMP will ensure incorporation of environmental management 
measures.   
 
Both the EMP and RPF were translated into Arabic and were disclosed both in Yemen 
(July 5, 2009) and at the Infoshop in Washington (July 6, 2009).   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/05/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/05/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/09/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/05/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/05/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/09/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
Page  6
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ayesha Y. Vawda 
07/21/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Banumathi Setlur 
07/21/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Knut Opsal 
07/21/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
07/21/2009 
Comments:  The project was reviewed during concept stage by Colin Scott (social) and Gael 
Gregoire (environment).  Consequently, it was transferred on 12/28/08 to the sector unit for 
safeguards processing. 
