Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4369 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/30/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P114253 
Project Name: Yemen Education For All - Catalytic Fund III 
Task Team Leader: Ayesha Y. Vawda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 16, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative 
20.00
20.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
In line with the international commitments to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, the 
Government of Yemen has outlined, in its Basic Education Development Strategy (BEDS), a 
strategic plan to achieve 95% enrollment in Grades 1-9 by 2015.  The Medium Term Results 
Framework, developed by the Ministry of Education (MOE) for the 2006-2010 period, further 
details this strategic vision and outlines programs that would enable Yemen to reach out to the 
deprived communities in order to attain the 95% target.  
 
The EFA-FTI Grant phase III will support the GoY achieve its BEDS target of 95% enrollment 
in Grades 1-9 by 2015 by increasing access to and retention in quality education, specifically for 
girls, in selected remote areas of the country where the out of school population is mostly 
concentrated.  This is consistent with the Grant objectives for Phases I and II.  
 
Success in achieving these objectives will be linked to the outcome performance of the BEDS 
and measured by the following performance indicators:  
 
a. 
Increase in the number of students in the under-served area  
 
b.
Improvement in the retention of students   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
In the EFA-FTI CF Strategy Committee Meeting in November 2006 in Cairo, Yemen was 
granted US$20 million for the third phase of FTI-CF. The amount of allocation was decided 
based on the successful implementation of Phases I and II and the financial gap calculated based 
on the medium term goals and financial needs, by taking into consideration the population 
growth and various reform measures. The local Development Partners discussed the work 
programs for the FTI-CF Phase III with the government and endorsed the work program on 
October 6, 2008.  
 
The FTI-CF Phase III will focus on increasing access to and retention in quality education in 
selected remote areas of the country, where the out of school population is mostly concentrated. 
The Grant activities will be simple and focused. During preparation the duration of the project 
and the allocation of the Grant amounts between the three components will be discussed with the 
government and the local donor partners.  
 
Core activities under the access program include civil works (new school construction, 
rehabilitation and extension of classrooms) and distribution of school kits as successfully 
implemented by the Phases I and II grants. The Grant will finance a contract female teacher 
scheme as a lack of female teachers is identified as a key constraint in the retention of students, 
especially girls. This scheme has been developed and is currently being implemented through 
BEDP and UNICEF financing.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The FTI-CF Phase III Grant will be implemented in the following 8 governorates which contain 
54 percent of out-of-school children in Yemen according to the 2005 Household Budget Survey 
(HBS): Hodeidah, Hajjah, Dhamar, Al-Baida, Ryma, Amran, Al-Mahweet, and Al-Daleh.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has experience in implement
ing the Bank’s safeguard policies as the Ministry of 
Education has already implemented several projects in the education sector, including FTI-CF 
Phases I and II.  
 
Implementation arrangements for FTI III will be the same as for FTI I & II except that  the civil 
works component for the previous two projects was implemented by MOE; in FTI III, the civil 
works component for FTI III will be implemented through the Public Works Project (PWP).  
This is a positive step as PWP already has significant experience and capacity in implementing a 
variety of civil works, including schools. It is currently implementing the ongoing IDA PWP-III 
project. An assessment of the PWP capacity for environmental management concluded that it has 
a
well established and staffed unit. It has well established Environmental Management 
procedures in place that are currently being adopted for all its school construction, which 
constitutes to more than 50% of its activities. PWP has a well staffed project implementation unit 
including an environment and water unit.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Policy triggered by civil works component that involves new school construction, 
rehabilitation and extension of classrooms. Borrower has prepared an Environmental 
Management Plan that will be implemented.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
The project will not involve land acquisition or involuntary resettlement. Additionally, the 
school site will always be selected by an assessment team, consisting of school mapping staff, 
community participation specialist, engineer, and district officer, in order to ensure that there will 
not be any environmental damage. The site is usually pre-selected by the community as part of 
their community contribution. In these cases, the project will document in an appropriate manner 
the donation of the corresponding land parcels.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  05/10/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The existing EMP that was prepared and used by EFA FTI I and II will be revised if 
necessary to address the anticipated impacts from this operation. The EMP will be updated 
and revised as necessary and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to project 
appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ayesha Y. Vawda 
04/27/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/27/2009 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
04/27/2009 
Comments:   
