Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4035 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/18/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P106069 
Project Name: RY-MOCHA WIND PARK PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Somin Mukherji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 18, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: September 29, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
FRANCE: French Agency for Development 
50.00 
 
Islamic Development Bank - Al Aqsa Fund 
15.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
30.00
105.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Project is two fold: (i) to demonstrate the operational feasibility of 
wind power by implementing the first wind power development project in Yemen; and (ii) to add 
60 MW of clean energy to the national grid.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The wind energy potential was estimated based on the wind map developed in the wind 
assessment feasibility study.  A class II wind energy converter and the power curve of a class II 
turbine with a hub height of 50 meters and rotor diameter of 52 meters were used in the analysis.  
The theoretical potential represents the electric potential at the height of 50 meters above the 
ground level. Mountainous areas with more than 30 percent slope have been excluded in the 
calculation.  The coastal areas from Hodeidah, down to Lahj and towards Abyan (i.e. in the 
southwestern part of the country) have high potential for wind power generation.  The theoretical 
wind power potential of Yemen is estimated at more than 15,000 MW.  
 
Page  2
The proposed Project (60 MW) is expected to demonstrate the sustained financial and economic 
viability of the wind farms. Successful operation of the pilot scheme is expected to generate 
interest in the future development of wind energy along the Red Sea coast which can supply up 
to 1000 (5x200) MW.  
 
The proposed Project would consist of the following components:  
 
Component 1 - Al-Mokha Wind Farm (US$120 million):  The proposed Project will support the 
implementation of a wind farm at Al Mokha of approximately 60 MW generation capacity which 
would be connected to the PEC grid.  Preparation of the requisite feasibility studies as well as a 
model power purchase agreement were initiated under the REREDP and being scaled up through 
grant financing made available by the AFD.  The proposed Project would be wholly owned by a 
Special Purpose Company (SPC), to be created as a subsidiary of PEC.  Other donors have 
expressed interest in contributing towards financing the proposed Project; the expected IDA 
share of the cost is about US$20 million.  
 
Component 2 - Capacity Building and Market Development (US$5 million):  The proposed 
Project would include a technical assistance component to help build local capacity in the 
development and implementation of wind projects.  In addition, the component could help in 
preparing a scale-up plan for the development of wind resources in Yemen through a public-
private partnership (PPP) approach.  
 
The proposed Project is expected to help in emission reduction and should also qualify for 
additional financing from carbon funds. Accordingly, the team has initiated processing of a 
Carbon financing operation.  If successful, the carbon finance funds would be used to reduce the 
GOY contributions to the project, and also lessen the tariffs required for cost recovery.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project is located near the town of Al Mokha on the Red Sea coast of Yemen.  Transmission 
links to the national grid will primarily be located in the governorate of Taiz, although the final 
location of transmission interconnections will depend on the findings of more detailed 
transmission planning studies.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementation of a number of previous projects in Yemen, particularly in the area of public 
works and power sector development has shown that Yemen has adequate environmental 
legislation, institutional capacity, and mechanisms to deal with any environmental issues during 
project preparation or implementation.  The implementing agency, PEC, has also demonstrated 
its capacity to monitor and mitigate potential environmental impacts.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental Assessment (EA) of the project and of the various works that have to be 
undertaken will be carried out as part of the project preparation studies.  The EA will be 
consistent with the World Bank Operational Policies 4.01 on Environmental Assessment.  The 
EA will include the Environment Management Plan (EMP) for any adverse impact of the 
construction activities as well as of the operation of the project may have on the environment.  
The EMP will consist of mitigation measures, a monitoring program, and an institutional 
development/strengthening program for implementation of the EMP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be carried out as part of the project preparation 
studies.  The RPF will be consistent with the World Bank Operational Policies 4.12 on 
Involuntary Resettlement.  The RPF will include a Resettlement Action Plan for any adverse 
impact.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/10/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESIA and RPF will be completed around mid-2009.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Somin Mukherji 
12/11/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/15/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
12/11/2008 
Comments:   
