Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC3152
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P089761 
Project Name:  Secondary Education Development and Girls Access Program 
Task Team Leader:  Ayesha Y. Vawda 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 17, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: March 27, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Secondary education (100%) 
Theme:  Education for the knowledge economy (P);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.10 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
10.10 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program objectives are to: improve gender equity, quality, and efficiency of 
secondary education in selected districts with a particular focus on girls in rural areas.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed program will finance a series of interventions in 9 Governorates (Abyan, 
Aden City, Dhamar, Hadramout, Hodaidah, Ibb, Lahej, Sana’a city and Taiz).  
Approximately 90 schools in approximately 30 districts have been selected for 
intervention in component 1.  During the first phase of project implementation (to last 
about 18 months after the project launching), a maximum of 5 of the target governorates 
would benefit from project interventions, in addition to the system-wide interventions.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Selection of Target Districts, Target Governorates and Schools:   Target districts for 
intervention represent areas where the development impact of the program can be 
maximized.  In order to minimize implementation risks resulting from low capacity and 
Page  2
the subsequent need to provide intensive capacity building and monitoring, the target 
Governorates were selected on the basis of geographical concentration of target districts.  
Similarly, schools where there is a greater potential of improving efficiency, equity and 
quality have been selected for targeting.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud (MNSSD) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed program will not have any irreversible or large-scale impact since it will 
only finance new construction for expansion purposes, rehabilitation and replacement of 
physical spaces in project schools to reach the minimum levels of functional standards.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The perceived negative impacts on the environment are minor and temporary and may 
occur during the construction phase and normal use of the buildings. At secondary level, 
students will handle chemicals during their practical work sessions. Although chemicals 
mentioned in the curriculum have no negative impact on the environment, there is 
potential danger for the users, and specific safety instructions will be developed and 
provided to students and teachers.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The GoY has prepared and published an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the 
SEDGAP on the basis of lessons learnt in applying the EMP procedures under the on-
going BEDP. Based on the experience of BEDP, SEDGAP would apply similar 
measures.  
 
The SEDGAP EMP also includes environmental criteria for: the upgrade of existing 
sanitation with new facilities and/or improvement of sewage systems (no dry latrines) and 
the procurement of laboratory equipments (including chemical materials) for secondary 
level students. The EMP also contains a set of activities that would contribute to 
improved mitigation measures, focusing on building more capacity at the community, 
DEO and GEO level through trainings, workshops, and awareness campaigns. The EMP 
includes a mitigation and monitoring plan for the different stages of the project; 
responsible entities for each mitigation measure and reference to cost aspects.  
 
Under SEDGAP, the Public Works Project (PWP) will be responsible to implement the 
civil works while the MoE maintains all the responsibilities for ensuring that this EMP is 
honored. The EMP reflects responsibilities that fall under the MoE or the PWP in 
implementing and monitoring mitigation measures.  
 
The PWP is a governmental institution under the mandate of the Ministry of Planning 
and International Cooperation (MoPIC). The PWP already has an ongoing and productive 
relationship with the MoE, since about half of the investments managed by the PWP are 
actually involved in providing school facilities (including construction of secondary 
schools) in various governorates for eventual handover to the MoE.  The PWP has 
satisfactory experience in managing IDA and Donor funded projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As in BEDP, local communities are involved in selecting school sites: the selection 
committee is formed includes a member from local community, a representative from the 
project and procurement departments, as well as an engineer from the Governorate 
Education Office. In addition, the PWP has the experience of working closely with local 
communities and it responds according to their needs.  
 
The EMP will be made publicly available at the Ministry of Education, Ministry of 
Environment and in local libraries.  The EMP will also be published on-line and in local 
newspapers, and disclosed at the Bank Infoshop by December 15, 2007.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/15/2997 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/15/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ayesha Y. Vawda 
11/28/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Kanta K. Rigaud 
11/28/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad 
11/28/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mourad Ezzine 
12/06/2007 
Comments:  The project was transferred to the TTL on 07/27/06 
