Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  02/27/2008 
Report No.:  AC3472
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P107015 
Project Name:  Civil Service Modernization Project Supplemental Loan 
Task Team Leader:  Giulio De Tommaso 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: April 3, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSED 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (100%) 
Theme:  Administrative and civil service reform (P);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.80
2.80 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objectives of the original CSMP would remain unchanged.  
The Government of Yemen has adopted a comprehensive longer-term strategy for 
modernizing its civil service.  The vision of the Government is to have in place a civil 
service that efficiently and effectively provides a reduced complement of government 
services that encourages and supports the private and non-government sector; that 
operates with transparency where performance measurement serves as the key 
management tool; and where merit principle is applied in hiring and promoting staff.   
 
3. Project Description 
Investments contemplated under this extended credit will consist of scaling-up of 
activities related to development of core systems and support services in order to ensure 
sustainability of these investments over a long period and to take advantage of substantial 
economies of scale.  Additionally, the program will seek to deepen the restructuring 
work-stream by providing support for implementing earlier studies and reports.   As the 
matrix in Annex 1 indicates, the CSMP project initially sought to move forward under 
five main headings: (1) streamlining government; (2) enhancing human resource 
management; (3) implementing adjustments in the public sector labor force; (4) 
Page  2
enhancing the management of financial resources; and (5) improved performance 
management.  In response to suggestions by the Bank’s Quality Assurance Group (QAG) 
for reducing the complexity of the project, the bulk of Bank support under the extension 
will focus along two dimensions: a) core systems improvements and b) enhancing the 
effectiveness of government’s apparatus.  Both are discussed in greater detail below.  
 
1.
Core Systems Improvements  
 
A
well-functioning public administration relies upon a number of core systems to assist 
in the effective management of its human and financial resources.  Additional CSMP 
financing will support reforms that are designed to increase the transparency and 
efficiency with which public resources are used and move towards a performance based, 
professional civil service.  Additional financing will support activities designed to 
improve the processes, procedures, and policies in each of the core systems under reform 
through design and deployment of appropriate information systems using technology.  
These investments help to ensure that the current systems are used to their full capability 
and remain sustainable over the long run.  They are described in detail below.  
 
Establishing a Human Resource Management Framework:  This component seeks to 
improve employment policies and practices in a phased manner, with the aim of 
establishing a modern, merit-based public administration.  During its current phase, the 
CSMP project has focused on reviewing existing human resource policies to identify 
shortfalls; developing a human resource management strategy; developing polices and 
practices in line with this strategy; developing and implementing a new job classification 
system; and instituting a program of training designed to support the development and 
implementation of modern human resource management polices.  Additional financing 
will provide continued technical assistance in the development of a human resource 
strategy, focusing on establishment of controls and the development of transparent 
criteria for the staffing of each position within government.  It will include technical 
assistance to the Civil Service Fund, which serves as a public employee redundancy 
facility. The fund has been in operation since 2005 and has generally been performing 
well.  However, given the scope of the redundancy problem in Yemen, it will be 
important to install a process of continuous evaluation and improvement for the Fund’s 
mechanisms and outcomes.   The estimated budget for this activity is expected to be 
around US$1 million.  
 
Movement towards a Merit Based Civil Service.  The additional financing will support 
the overhaul of the current civil service law and enabling legislation to ensure the 
development of a modern civil service.  Under this expanded work stream, assistance will 
be provided to the Government in developing a testing service within the civil service to 
ensure that any staff assigned to a position is capable of undertaking the task that are 
assigned to that post.  Support for the development of a mechanism to ensure that 
identified dependent employees who are eligible to be reassigned to vacancies are 
qualified to handle the roles and responsibilities of their new jobs. Changes will be 
approved by cabinet and submitted to parliament.  In addition, assistance will be provided 
to the government in defining an action plan for the development of a performance 
enhancing wage structure which fundamentally changes performance incentives with the 
Page  3
focus on developing the modalities for implementation in a budget friendly way. The 
estimated budget for this activity is expected to be around US$1.2 million.  
 
Ensuring the Reliability and Consistency of Personnel Information Management:  The 
aim of the activity is to complete the work already undertaken in the compilation and 
verification of personnel records and their regular updating in the appropriate distributed 
physical location.  In the first phase of the project, an employee census was conducted 
and an Employee Database (EDB) was developed and populated.  Procedures to maintain 
the EDB current and the technical infrastructure necessary for this purpose were also 
developed.  Currently, permanent employee identification cards are being issued to civil 
servants using a biometrics identification system to ensure that each employee has only 
one job in the civil service.  
 
To ensure sustainability of the system, additional financing will be used to implement 
HR data archiving procedures through the development of a digitized archival system.  
The digitized records backed up by the paper version of the Human Resource files will 
ensure that Human Resource database is not lost, misplaced or tampered with and 
enhances the integrity of the system. The estimated budget for this activity is US$ 0.5 
Million.  
 
Moreover, additional financing will provide support for technical assistance, 
computerization, and training related to development of a full fledged Human Resource 
Management system, which can be updated on-line based on information entered at 
remote Regional Information Centers (RICs) located in each governorate.  The estimated 
budget for this activity is US$2.5 million, divided equally between equipment and 
technical assistance.  
 
Improving Payroll Procedures:  Additional financing will focus on the introduction of a 
computerized nominal payroll system that links the financial resource management and 
the personnel management systems.  During the current phase of the project the payroll 
procedure has been standardized and streamlined.  The architecture for the whole system 
has been developed.  The additional financing will focus on the implementation of this 
system.  The estimated budget for this activity is approximately US$0.8 million, mainly 
in equipment.  
 
Completing the Roll-out of the AFMIS System to Ministry Headquarters in 
Sana’a:Using web enabled technology and taking advantage of the biometric system 
infrastructure and hardware procured under the project, the AFMIS system will be rolled 
out to all government agencies in Sana’a.  Additionally, under the additionalfinancing an 
off the shelf Cash Management and commitment control module will be included in this 
stage of implementation. The estimated budget for this activity is approximately US$1.5 
million, divided evenly between technical assistance and equipment.  
 
2. Enhancing the Effectiveness of the Government Apparatus  
 
Page  4
This is the second pillar of reform. It will continue to focus on the need to enhance the 
quality and efficiency of specific services provided by government institutions. The 
restructuring process will aim to: (1) streamline organizational structures; (2) simplify 
business processes (work flow, policies, procedures, decision making, staffing 
requirements); and (3) put in place basic information systems.  To do this, additional 
financing will be provided in a number of key areas.  They include continuing the process 
of restructuring and reengineering in pilot agencies, consistent with the designed 
program. This will entail development the project charter, project design document and 
the project implementation plan for five of the six pilot agencies.  Finally it includes 
analyzing staff requirements, introducing job descriptions, and identifying surplus staff.  
Each is discussed below in greater detail.  
 
Reengineering of Pilot Institutions:  Under the original CSMP project, reengineering 
plans have been developed for four pilot ministries and agencies. The European Union 
proceeded with parallel financing for three agencies.  This process has led to the 
development of diagnostic studies for seven agencies.  The additional financing will 
support the phased implementation of these studies. The Ministry of Civil Service will be 
the only agency to proceed with restructuring on an expedited basis.  This ministry has 
already undertaken extensive work in the development its project charter and project 
implementation plans and is therefore ready to proceed with the remaining phases to 
complete the re-engineering process.  Additionally, given the lack of capacity evidenced 
during the current phase of implementation, it is expected that the restructured agency 
will provide dynamic management and support to the overall reform process and 
therefore obviate some of the capacity constraints that have been hampering 
implementation so far.  
 
The remaining pilot agencies will focus on developing a project charter, a project design 
document and a project implementation plan, following a consistent phased approach 
outlined in the Re-engineering Program Management Framework developed during 
implementation of the current phase.  During the initial period, the authorities will 
determine if the current pilots are still meeting the requirements of political commitment 
and progress.  Those agencies that do not effectively meet these criteria will be phased 
out of the reform process.  The additional financing will support technical assistance to 
the agencies in developing the required outputs and to support implementation of the 
project plan.  
 
The estimated budget for this activity is approximately US$6 million for technical 
assistance to five or six pilot agencies.  
 
Additionally, under this component, work will be undertaken to provide support to the 
Government Mandate Reform.  During the current phase of the reform program, with the 
assistance of an international consultant, a diagnostic study addressing the mandate and 
functions of government and possible approaches to mapping these functions into a 
streamlined government structure was completed. The next phase of the reform requires 
that their approaches and recommendations be internalized by the Yemeni authorities 
before they deliberate and arrive at a consensus on the mandate and functions of the 
Page  5
government.  To do this, the President in October 2007 appointed a Presidential 
Commission on the Mandate of the Government, headed by a very influential member of 
the Shura Council and incorporating members of the government, parliament, the 
judiciary and civil society.  The Commission will be assisted by a technical secretariat. Its 
job will be to ensure that the Presidential Commission has all the appropriate information 
and develops various options for the commission to evaluate so that the members of the 
commission can take these into account in their deliberation and perform the difficult task 
of defining the mandate of the Government that the President has entrusted to them.  
 
Under the additional financing, resources will be allocated to provide long term 
technical assistance to this secretariat. The estimated budget for this activity is 
US$500,000.  
 
Improving the Operation of the Innovation Fund:  The Innovation Fund is an important 
instrument to reward enterprising public officials and support “bottom up”reforms within 
the public sector.  Under the current phase of the project, the Innovation Fund has been 
halted because of its inefficiency and lack of resources.  There is a need to review its first 
year of implementation and invest additional resources to enable it to succeed.  If 
successful, the IF will complement and add to the portfolio of reform initiatives taking 
place to streamline, rationalize and re-engineer government operations. Additionally, the 
government could use the IF to harness and channel resources from donors interested in 
providing technical assistance to support similar reform initiatives, thereby ensuring a 
broad, overall consistency in the reform efforts, with less chance of duplication in efforts, 
and within a framework where activities and results are monitored, controlled and 
reported using a common yardstick.  
 
The estimated amount for this activity is US$1.0 million, of which US$300,000 will be 
dedicated for technical assistance and US$500,000 will consist in seed money for the 
second round of implementation of projects.  
 
Improve Monitoring and Evaluation:  Under this component, resources will be devoted 
to continue the human resource development and capacity building for a fully functioning 
reform program management structure across the government based on: (1) a clear chain 
of command and reporting structures; (2) clear job descriptions; (3) clear performance 
evaluation criteria for individual managers and implementation staff; and (4) a well-
defined, functioning program supported by a monitoring and evaluation system. On-
going technical support for program management (procurement, auditing, and project 
management) will also be provided. This component will support the development of a 
full fledged monitoring and evaluation system for the government of Yemen, building 
upon the diagnostic studies undertaken under the original program and with the benefit of 
the Bank’s just in time support in this area. This issue was highlighted by QAG as one of 
the shortcomings of the project to date.  The estimated budget for this activity is US$ 0.4 
million, mainly for technical assistance.   
 
Page  6
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Sana'a   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNACS) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Although none of the social safeguard policies are triggered, there is a possibility support 
to the Civil Service Fund may entail social and reputational risks for the Bank associated 
with managing a redundancy program.  
 
The Government has committed itself to carefully monitor any negative social impacts 
and take “proper safeguards against associated negative social consequences.” Severance 
payments, currently averaging US$14,000 ensure adequate compensation to retrenched 
employees.  Additionally, the Fund has established a monitoring system to follow up on 
their economic and social status afterwards.”  
 
Implementation activities will include the update of the Social Assessment originally 
conducted in 1999.  Budgetary allocations for this activity have been made, and they have 
been included in the Procurement Plan.  This activity is expected to be finalized by early 
2009. The results of such an assessment will be combined with the recommendations 
emanating from the TA and the procedures of the Civil Service Fund will be amended to 
reflect the findings of this social assessment.  
 
The Bank team will include a social scientist in its supervision team to: (a) assess the 
social consequences and impacts (if any) of the redundancies which occurred during the 
implementation of the CSMP, (b) assess the monitoring system established by the 
Government for mitigating the negative social impacts and (c) assist in the preparation of 
Page  7
a
TOR for the update of the social assessment which be carried during implementation 
and for which project funds have been allocated.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
N/A   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
N/A   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
N/A   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Giulio De Tommaso 
02/27/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
02/27/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad 
02/27/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
02/27/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Miria A. Pigato 
02/27/2008 
Comments:   
