Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/13/2008 
Report No.:  AC3739
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P112345 
Project Name:  Additional Financing for Third Social Fund for Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Anush Bezhanyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 26, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (40%);Water supply (20%);Primary education 
(20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme:  Social risk mitigation (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Social safety nets 
(P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 Special 
Financing 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objectives are to improve the range of services and economic opportunities 
available to the poorer segments of the population through the carrying out of community 
development, micro-finance and capacity building programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional financing will scale up activities in Components 1 and 3 of the 
SFD III and these activities will be implemented as component 4 and 5 described below:  
 
The additional financing will scale up activities in Components 1 and 3 of the SFD III 
and these activities will be implemented under two new components: 4 and 5 as described 
below:  
 
•
Component 4.  Community-based Labor-intensive Works.  This component is 
expected to transfer cash (for work) to 8,000–10,000 households within the most 
seriously affected communities. It is expected to transfer cash to help mitigate the impact 
Page  2
of increased food prices through temporary work opportunities. The Program will also 
provide needed basic infrastructure to these communities in the fields of: irrigation, water 
harvesting, soil protection, agricultural terraces rehabilitation, maintenance and 
improvement of village access earth roads, streets pavement, forestation and other types 
of labor intensive based on the demand and priority needs of each community.  
 
•
Component 5.  Capacity Building of the Social Welfare Fund.  This component 
will support: (i) a national survey to identify the poorest and most vulnerable in the 
society in order to improve targeting and expand the program; and (ii) complete a revised 
targeting system increasing the share of cash transfers received by the poorest 
beneficiaries to improve the ability of the program to reduce poverty immediately.  The 
support to SWF will complement the technical assistance being provided by the European 
Commission.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The SFD subprojects are implemented in all governorates. The proposed project is 
expected to transfer cash sufficient to cover the gap in wheat consumption for up to two 
years through temporary work opportunities. The Program will also provide needed basic 
infrastructure to these communities in the fields of: irrigation, water harvesting, soil 
protection, agricultural terraces rehabilitation, maintenance and improvement of village 
access earth roads, streets pavement, forestation and other types of labor intensive based 
on the demand and priority needs of each community.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Steven P. Maber (MNSSD) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Impacts are expected to be minor and will be studied before sub-project implementation.  
A
questionnaire will be completed so that the potential impacts can be identified, 
Page  3
appropriate environment assessment can be carried out (where necessary), and mitigation 
measure can be undertaken.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
All the measures described below which are being applied to the current project (SFD III) 
are applicable to the project activities financed through the additional financing.  
 
Each subproject to be financed under the grant will be screened by SFD staff using a 
safeguard questionnaire to determine if any environmental or social safeguard issues are 
triggered.  If so, the SFD will ensure that appropriate documents are completed for the 
subproject and include the recommendations contained therein in their supervision.  The 
Project will also ensure that SFD staff and clients are adequately trained on these 
procedures, the safeguard policies and theory behind them.  The Bank team will spot-
check the safeguard questionnaire as well as any resulting documents and actions 
required of the SFD during supervision.  
 
The project includes activities that are designed to preserve and protect cultural heritage 
sites.  Consistent with the Operational Policy on Cultural Property, activities included are 
training and capacity building of relevant partners for preserving cultural heritage sites.  
 
Under the current project (SFD III), an updated Environmental Management Plan 
(EMP) has been prepared, appraised and under implementation which includes:  
 
a) rigorous use of safeguards questionnaires early during the preparation of sub-projects;  
 
b)
where necessary, preparation of an environmental impact assessment and other 
safeguard related plans as part of the preparation of sub-projects; and  
 
c) more comprehensive training for SFD staff and clients on safeguards issues.  
 
The SFD also carries out regular environmental audit.  
 
Based on the team’s monitoring and observation since the effectiveness of the SFD III, 
the Bank team is confident that the SFD has the capacity to plan and implement the 
measures described.  The Bank will conduct a safeguards thematic mission during the 
first quarter of FY09 and will ensure that the SFDIII project safeguards requirements are 
satisfied. At such a time, this mission might recommend updating the EMP to reflect 
particular circumstance on the ground.   
 
Page  4
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include local communities, NGOs, local governments, and line 
ministries.  As part of every sub-project appraisal, safeguard policy issues are discussed 
and potential controversial areas are identified, and mitigation arrangements are put 
together in case of any potential negative impacts.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
08/29/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/14/2003 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/16/2003 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Environmental Management Plan revised for the SFD III contains screening 
procedures that could be applied to the proposed additional activities.  The other 
measures indicated in the revised EMP (such as environmental awareness, training and 
education) are pertinent and would still be implemented.  The existing EMP is sufficient 
and further update is not required.   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
N/A 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
N/A 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
N/A 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
N/A 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
N/A 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
N/A 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
N/A 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
N/A 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
N/A 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Anush Bezhanyan 
06/05/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
06/05/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Colin S. Scott 
06/05/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
06/05/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Roberta V. Gatti 
06/05/2008 
Comments:   
