Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/03/2008 
Report No.:  AC3562
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P107636 
Project Name:  RY-GROUNDWATER & SOIL CONSERVATION ADDITIONAL 
FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Satoru Ueda 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (68%);Sub-national government administration 
(20%);Central government administration (12%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Rural policies and institutions (S);Participation 
and civic engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.53 
 Local 
Communities 
3.64
4.17 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Groundwater and Soil Conservation Project (GSCP) is designed to address the 
critical groundwater problem in Yemen. The problem of unsustainable groundwater 
extraction has been caused by the rapid spread of groundwater irrigation, combined with 
dwindling rates of recharge. The root cause is weak management framework ill adapted 
to ensuring sustainable extraction levels, efficient water use, and watersheds protection.  
 
The objective of the GSCP are to conserve water in farming areas, especially 
groundwater, improve recharge and protect watersheds by: (i) improving water use 
efficiency and increasing farmer returns to water, so creating the conditions that would 
allow farmers to reduce pumping of groundwater from aquifers towards sustainable 
levels; (ii) increasing surface and groundwater availability through watershed 
management and groundwater recharge by supporting the rehabilitation of small to 
medium spate irrigation schemes, bank protection works, water harvesting structures, and 
the rehabilitation of terraces and other soil and water conservation investments; and (iii) 
Page  2
supporting a groundwater management framework and institutions that will have the 
incentive and capacity to manage local water resources in a sustainable manner.  
 
The envisaged additional financing of US$15 million is to "scale up" the ongoing 
project. There will be no change in the objectives, components, activities, or geographical 
area of intervention, from those of the original project design.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Groundwater and Soil Conservation Project (GSCP) has been under implementation 
since 2005 and reached about 52% of disbursement. The project consists of three 
components:  
 
•
Component 1 provides advanced irrigation equipment (PVC conveyance pipes and on-
farm localized irrigation system, such as dripper and bubbler).  
 
•
Component 2 provides water harvesting, recharge ponds, wadi banking, soil 
conservation, terrace rehabilitation. Most of these are small structures built by 
community groups with less than $10,000 per unit.  
 
•
Component 3 is institutional capacity building.  
 
The additional financing of US$15 million will "scale up" the ongoing project allowing 
for providing subsidized equipment, financing of small structures, and training/capacity 
building to a larger number of farmers in Yemen. There will be no change in the 
objectives, components, activities, or geographical coverage area (15 governorates), from 
those of the original project design. The only change will be with regards to the targeted 
outputs of the project. For example, the farming area that introduces advanced irrigation 
systems is expected to increase from the current target under the original GSCP of 28,400 
ha to about 46,940 ha with the supplementary financing.  The length of terrace 
rehabilitation as well as the numbers of other small structures are expected to increase 
proportionally.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nationally in 15 governorates through 10 field units 
located in Sana'a, Hodeidah, Dhamar, Taiz, Sabir, Giar, Beihan, Haija, Al-Delah, and 
Seyoun. Yemen is a water-scarce country and groundwater resources are declining 
rapidly. The project will target farmers utilizing groundwater for irrigation in rural 
communities where critical groundwater depletion is occurring and where there is urgent 
national priority to mitigate these adverse development.  
 
The intervened areas are in very arid/semi arid climate conditions and there are no 
perennial rivers. Wadis have flood (spate) flow in a very intensive manner lasting only 
some hours. The number of days for observing flood flow in wadis may be around 10-14 
days per year. None of the structures that are financed under component two are large 
enough to require blue prints design. The project is not expected to impact critical natural 
habitats.   
 
Page  3
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNACS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The GSCP Environmental Management Plan includes all the protective measures 
necessary to fully comply with these two Safeguard Policies. It is noted that current 
Yemeni legislation also requires that these protective measures be taken. The additional 
financing will be implemented with continuation of the same EMP. Additional budget of 
US$ 63,000 has been agreed to cover the cost of the continuation of the EMP.  
 
With regard to Environmental Assessment, the GSCP has adopted an environmental 
review system for selected subprojects during actual implementation. The review system 
includes two kinds of actions: the prevention of general construction impacts through the 
insertion of environmental and social clauses in tender documents, and the prevention of 
site-specific impacts through environmental desk reviews (for most subprojects believed 
to have no or minimal impacts).  
 
With regard to Pest Management, a  Pest Management Specialist has been recruited and 
has reviewed the relevant material with the General Directorate for Plant Protection and 
SBWMP, the pest management practices for different crops and assessed  the pest 
management approaches, quantities of pesticides used, capabilities of the farmers in 
regard to proper handling and use of pesticides, evaluated and suggest measures required 
to reduce specific risks associated with pesticide use and prepared guidelines keeping in 
view the Policy, Regulatory Framework and Institutional  Capacity. The Specialist also 
prepared training courses for the Trainers and organized a training course for Irrigation 
Advisory Service Specialists and Technicians (total 22 participants) from the Field Units 
for 3 days. This training is to be repeated. The Irrigation Advisory Service of GSCP, who 
were trained, have established a mechanism in place to demonstrate Integrated Pest 
Page  4
Management procedures and to develop a farmer education program that stresses good 
and safe practices for storage and application of pesticides.  
 
With regard to Cultural Property, two GSCP project 
components “Irrigation 
modernization and improvement” and “Water harvesting and soil conservation” involve 
movement of earth and surficial environmental changes. All these excavations prima 
facie entail the risk of damaging cultural property but also have the potential for making 
archeological discoveries. Necessary amendments in the tender documents have been 
made to avoid general construction impacts, to eliminate threats to natural habitats and to 
ensure protection measures for chance discovery and reporting to the General Authority 
for Antiquities, Museums, and Manuscripts (GAAMM) for taking appropriate measures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Potential change in pesticide use as described in II A.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower’s implementation of the EMP under the GSCP has been upgraded from 
moderately satisfactory to satisfactory based on the review and discussions of the 
supervision mission in January – February 2008. Since May 2007, the borrower has 
retained an Integrated Pest Management specialist to develop and initiate the 
implementation of an action plan for IPM in the project areas. Some trainings have 
already been implemented. The IPM specialist has also been following up on the other 
safeguards aspects in the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders and beneficiaries, as well as their socio-economic profile, have 
been identified during the project preparation process. These include well owners, 
sharecroppers, land owners, landless laborers, field technicians, local councils, local 
natural leaders, and key players in the line ministries. During the preparation period for 
the GSCP, consultation meetings were carried out through direct field visits and meetings 
with farmer groups and relevant governmental agencies, and the preliminary findings of 
the environmental assessment were discussed. Institutional arrangements for 
establishment of public/community partnerships and guiding principles for public 
awareness and monitoring functions have been prepared in the EMP.  
 
Since the start of the GSCP, a total of 1,295 WUGs have been established, covering the 
entire project area and representing 20,825 participating farmers. Their formation has 
been instrumental in facilitating dialogue, the provision of trainings and implementation 
Page  5
of the awareness campaigns. The project has provided ample training to these WUGs and 
will continue their strengthening through the remaining period.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/07/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/07/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/07/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Page  6
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Satoru Ueda 
04/01/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
04/01/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad 
04/01/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
04/03/2008 
Comments:   
