Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3551 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/06/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P107050 
Project Name: RY-INTEGRATED URBAN DEVELOPMENT 
Task Team Leader: Sameh Naguib Wahba 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: October 28, 2009 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (40%);Flood protection (20%);Solid 
waste management (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (P);Municipal finance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development 
25.00 
 
Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing Country 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
38.00
70.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Integrated Urban Development Project (IUDP) is to: (a) improve the living 
conditions of poor and at-risk populations and reduce environmental degradation in priority 
urban centers, namely San
a’a and Taiz; and (b) introduce a viable institutional model for 
municipal service delivery in selected Governorate capital cities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Upgrading ($20.00 million, in addition to $2.00 million SFD, and $30.00 million 
financing gap)  
 
Yemen is experiencing rapid urbanization.  Urban centers like Sana’a and Taizhave clocked 
average annual growth rates of approximately 8% over the last ten years, fueled by rapid rural-
to-urban migration.  Between 1977 and 2004, Sana’a Municipality’s population grew from a 
mere 162,000 persons to reach 1,747,627 inhabitants.  This amounts to an average growth rate of 
Page  2
9.2% per annum throughout the period, making it one of the fastest growing cities in the world.  
This rapid growth was compounded with the repatriation of Yemeni workers from the Gulf 
countries in the aftermath of the 1991 Gulf War.  
 
In Sana’a city, massive population growth, coupled with the absence of appropriate urban 
planning and regulation instruments, has led to a proliferation of informal settlements at a very 
rapid pace since 1990.  Much construction in Sana’a over the past decade has taken place in 
unplanned areas without building permits and without infrastructure and services.  Several 
squatter settlements are located in flood paths and marginal land, and are mostly occupied by 
poor marginalized communities.  The squatter population has no secure land tenure and lacks 
access to basic infrastructure and municipal services.  Moreover, most of the squatter population 
lives in poor and unhygienic living conditions in wooden and zinc shacks that are prone to fire 
hazards due to their high density (fires in squatter areas in the past five years with losses in lives 
have increased the pressure on government to address this issue).  The improvement of living 
conditions in informal and squatter settlements and the socio-economic integration of the poor in 
the city’s fabric are pressing priorities and explicit aims of local authorities in Sana’a.  
 
In Taiz city, while there is limited squatting, there is significant informal and unplanned 
housing development.  The 2006 Taiz city Master Plan reports that informal or unplanned 
housing amounts to 60% of the total built up area and that 10% of the city’s housing stock is 
illegal, located in marginal land and areas prone to floods and landslides, and mostly held by 
squatters without land ownership.  Informal development typically takes place on legally owned 
land, but in contravention of planning and building regulations and lacking access to basic 
infrastructure and municipal services.  Clusters of extreme poverty are found in fringe areas, 
namely Taizziya and Saber.  Since land and housing are more affordable on the outskirts, these 
areas receive an inflow of rural migrants as well as poorer residents from the inner city districts, 
and are thus growing at a much higher rate than the inner city.  Yet, these areas are mostly not 
connected to water, sanitation and electricity networks, and are deprived of key municipal 
services.  
 
Investments under Component 1 would focus on improving service delivery and living 
conditions in selected informal and squatter settlements in priority urban centers, namely Taiz 
and Sana’a, which have been identified as priority in the citywide urban upgrading strategies 
completed for both cities.  Works would include the design and execution of pedestrian and 
vehicular access, water, sewerage connections, electricity connections, storm water drainage, 
public lighting, and community facilities. Component 1 will also support the costs of community 
outreach and environmental education programs associated with ensuring maintenance of the 
infrastructure (in partnership with the SFD). Finally, Component 1 will finance the resettlement 
of any households or businesses that are required to relocate to facilitate upgrading and ensure a 
basic road network that would enable emergency access. Preparation is also underway of a grant 
application to the Japanese Social Development Fund (JSDF) to finance socio-economic 
development activities to improve the livelihoods of residents in the poor settlements where 
IUDP upgrading and infrastructure investments will take place, including inter alia vocational 
training, micro-credit and community organization activities.  
 
Page  3
Component 2: Solid Waste Management ($8.00 million, in addition to $5.00 million financing 
gap)  
 
Until 1999, responsibility for Solid Waste Management (SWM) in Yemeni cities was 
exclusively within the domain of the central government, leading to poorly organized or even 
non-existent waste collection and disposal systems at the local level.  Cleaning Law No. 40 of 
1999 decentralized SWM and allowed localities to collect revenues to be used to support solid 
waste collection and disposal operations on a cost recovery basis.  Prime Minister Decree No. 20 
of 1999 created Cleaning and Improvement Funds (CIF) at the Governorate level, which are 
replenished with several fees and surcharges for use in cleaning and city improvement purposes. 
The CIF is an important off-budget revenue source for local governments that plays an important 
role in financing capital investments.  The Governor chairs the CIF Board of Directors.  
 
Despite the devolution of SWM responsibilities to the local level and establishment of 
dedicated funding, waste collection and disposal services, generally speaking, suffer from a lack 
of operational guidelines, inadequate operation and maintenance services, poor condition of fleet 
and equipment, a dearth of trained technical and managerial staff, and absent monitoring and 
evaluation. GTZ has been providing technical assistance to the GOY and capacity building to 
selected Governorates and Sana’a Municipality since 1995 through the SWM Decentralization 
Project, anchored at the Ministry of Local Administration (MOLA).  
 
In Taiz city, the situation is particularly alarming as the existing landfill capacity has long been 
exceeded, and the waste collection system barely covers 60% of the population.  The SWM 
system was set up in the 1970’s including a landfill located in Hidran, 8 km west of the city.  In 
operation since 1984, the existing site covers an area of 3.2 ha and receives 250-300 tons per 
day.  The current disposal practices are very poor with major negative impacts on the 
environment on site and surrounding area.  
 
In Sana’a city, the service is somewhat better, but is still in need of much improvement.  15 
cleaning departments work under the auspices of Sana’a Municipality and employ about 3,600 
laborers.  Sana’a is divided into 10 separate waste collection districts, some of which have more 
than one department because of their high population.  All 15 cleaning departments are public, 
non-profit organizations.  The Sana’a landfill is the largest in Yemen.  The site has an area of 
about 7 ha and is 20m deep.  It is partially fenced and situated 15 km from the centre of Sana’a.  
The existing site receives around 1,250 tons of municipal solid waste per day.  Waste 
transportation vehicles are usually randomly inspected at the entrance to the site.  Trenches are 
opened through the rocky ground (to various depths depending on the area) and waste is dumped 
without compaction and is covered daily by a 15-20 cm of soil layer.  The cells are not lined, and 
neither gas and nor leachate collection and proper disposal are provided.  
 
Investments under Component 2 would encompass works, goods and services/technical 
assistance to improve SWM in both Sana'a and Taiz.  Financing will include the development of 
a
new sanitary landfill in Taiz, measures for the closure and environmental remediation of the 
existing site, needs assessment and feasibility study of a new landfill site for Sana’a, upgrading 
of the existing transfer stations and equipment, reinforcement of the existing collection fleet and 
improved overall operation and maintenance practices.  The project will also support, as may be 
needed, Sana’a Municipality to install a landfill gas (LFG) collection and flaring system in the 
Page  4
existing landfill in the aim of generating revenues through Clean Development Mechanism 
(CDM) financing.  The combination of upgrading of informal settlements and improvement to 
the SWM system within the scope of the project is of critical importance to the improvement of 
living conditions for poor people.  In effect, environmental degradation and lack of solid waste 
collection (due to the difficulty of access) were systematically identified as one of the top three 
problems facing residents of informal/squatter areas in Taiz and Sana’a cities.  This Component 
will be closely coordinated with GTZ.  MOLA requested the German Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
to continue funding GTZ’s SWMDP beyond the current closing date of end of 2008 to align with 
IUDP, but funding is still to be confirmed.  
 
Component 3: Flood Protection ($1.00 million, in addition to $25.00 million from AFSED, and 
$3.00 million financing gap)  
 
Sana’a city suffers from severe flash floods and faces significant storm water drainage 
problems due to its geographic location at the heart of the Yemeni highlands at an altitude of 
2,200 meters.  The city sits on a plateau in an inter-mountainous plain that contains many wadis 
(natural storm water channels) originating from surrounding mountains and draining towards 
“Al-Saylah,” the main north-south wadi running through the city.  Due to rapid urban expansion 
in the last two decades, natural wadi courses have been built-up and populated.  Close intervals 
of heavy rainfall in late summer causes substantial storm water flows from the mountains, 
subjecting the city to flash floods and causing significant damage to public and private property, 
endangering human lives and creating major traffic problems in the city.  The flooding also 
endangers the historical patrimony of Old Sana’a, a UNESCO World Heritage Site since 1984.  
 
A
joint USAID and GOY water drainage and flood control project, consisting of converting the 
length of wadi Al-Saylah into an open paved channel, was initiated in 1996 and is estimated to 
be finished in 2009.  The project built a 5-kilometer long open channel flood structure in Al-
Saylah wadi running through the city, including the western portion of the historic center.  One 
of the main problems, however, is that all city storm water drainage systems have been 
developed to drain into the main wadi Al-Saylah causing it to overflow and damage property 
(including in Old Sana’a) and representing a threat to lives when flash floods hitbusy traffic in 
Al-Saylah (it has long become a major arterial road).  The rapid city expansion and expectations 
of continuous population growth of 5-7% a year over then next 15 years is already leading to 
encroachments on surrounding mountains bringing about increased vulnerability to landslides.  
 
The Arab Fund for Social and Economic Development (AFSED) pledged US$25.00 million for 
priority flood protection works in Sana’a city.  The problem, however, is that existing pre-
feasibility and design studies commissioned by the Municipality, were prepared without 
consideration of an overall storm water management plan for the city that would examine storm 
water drainage, hydraulic and hydrologic issues and propose comprehensive structural and non-
structural recommendations for flood risk mitigation and water drainage, including issues of 
aquifer recharge and land use planning and development regulations.  As things stand, the new 
proposed structures would result in channeling more water into wadi Al-Saylah, which already 
reaches capacity and overflows at times.  At the request of the Ministry of Planning and Sana’a 
Municipality, a grant application was submitted tothe Global Facility for Disaster Risk 
Reduction (GFDRR) to prepare an overall Integrated Storm Water Drainage Management 
Page  5
(ISWDM) plan for Sana’a and identify priority interventions for implementation with AFSED 
funding and under IUDP.  
 
Investments under Component 3 would complement the flood protection structures to be 
financed by AFSED.  Investments would include the installation of an early flood warning 
system, implementation of structural and institutional interventions to facilitate the sealing of Al-
Saylah and evacuation of people and vehicles in the event of a flood, testing of pilot 
interventions in selected at-risk areas to reduce water runoff (e.g. porous surfaces), and/or 
construction of reservoir(s) for storm water reclamation or aquifer recharge.  This component 
will also develop priority instruments for flood damage mitigation (e.g. land development and 
building regulations for at-risk areas), mainstream risk management responsibilities in the 
municipal structure and build capacity in flood risk mitigation and preparedness.  
Complementary AFSED and IDA investments would, therefore, have the benefit of protecting 
residents from flood risk, increasing the source of water supply, and strengthening municipal 
capacity.  
 
Component 4: Local Government Institutional Development, Capacity Building and 
Implementation Support ($6.00 million)  
 
The Local Authorities Law of 2000 devolved greater authorities to local administrations; it 
provided local councils with direct responsibility for planning, development, finance, service 
delivery and social affairs.  Local councils are by law assigned responsibilities for budget 
preparation and accounting, preparation of their own physical and economic plans, raising local 
revenues, and executing local public works.  Yet, implementation of the Law has been slow.  
Some of the challenges faced by local authorities include:  
 
•
Fragmented structure of local administration. Even though the deconcentrated branches 
of line ministries were by Law transformed into organs of local governments, in reality this shift 
has not taken place and local administrations remain fragmented.  The local offices of line 
ministries and national agencies remain de facto affiliated to central government and carry out 
centrally planned initiatives.  This has resulted in splintered budgetary processes and conflicts in 
infrastructure service delivery arrangements.  
 
•
Weak institutional capacity at the local level. The capacity of central government 
deconcentrated staff is overall weak and inadequate for a significant role expansion at the local 
level, at least in the short term.  It will take some time before local administrations are able to 
carry out all of their mandated municipal functions.  
 
•
Inadequate contribution of local revenues. Public finance in Yemen has historically been 
within the purview of the central government.  Prior to 2000, Governorates and Districts were 
simply administrative units without an own revenue base.  While the Law provides for retaining 
some local revenues, many aspects of revenue generation remain undeveloped including a 
fragmented structure of local tax administration, a limited tax base, and inefficient collection.  
Putting in place a sustainable and adequate revenue base to support needed improvements in 
local government service delivery will be a major challenge in the years to come.  
 
•
Poor levels of infrastructure provision and maintenance. Current levels of local 
infrastructure provision and maintenance reflect a persistent state of low revenues and low 
expenditures.  The provision of urban services in cities cannot keep pace with population and 
spatial growth.  Budget allocations to Governorates are inadequate and confined to covering 
local recurrent expenditures, meaning that execution of programs and investments required are 
Page  6
substantially behind the needs.  New investments are rarely accompanied by an increase in 
maintenance budgets.  
 
Against a background of reinvigorated push for decentralization (including the revision of the 
Law to further empower local councils and the resources at their disposal, and the election of 
Governors), the cities identified for investment under Component 4 are Sana’a and Taiz.  By 
Law, Sana’a Municipality has a uniquelegal status that differentiates it from other urban areas in 
Yemen.  Yet, it lacks the implementing law and organizational structure necessary for it to 
function as the consolidated municipal government.  The strengthening of Taiz local government 
was initiated under TMDFPP, along with construction of local council buildings in several 
districts to bring under one roof service departments that were previously fragmented.  Building 
on the achievements of TMDFFP, the successful consolidation of administration under the Taiz 
Governorate capital will serve as a model for other Yemeni Governorates.  
 
Investments under Component 4 would focus on enabling the Government of Yemen to 
develop its national integrated urban development program, including identification of future 
investments to alleviate urban poverty. It would also support the development of a viable 
institutional model for municipal consolidation and service delivery in Sana’a and Taiz.  Finally, 
this Component will support the Ministry of Local Administration’s work on strategy 
development and building the capacity of local government as well as Project Management costs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed project would be implemented in the cities of Sana’a and Taiz.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
IUDP is a complex project involving multiple cities and investment sectors, as well as potential 
resettlement.  Project implementation would be entrusted to the existing and well-functioning 
Project Management Unit (PMU) for the Taiz Municipal Development and Flood Protection 
Project (TMDFPP), which works in close cooperation with the local governments and with 
technical supervision from the Ministry of Public Works and Highways (urban upgrading and 
flood structures) and the Ministry of Local Administration (for solid waste management and 
municipal development).  The PMU has over twelve years of project implementation experience 
in IDA-financed projects including addressing environmental and social issues associated with 
urban upgrading and resettlement under a Category A project.  It was initially established to 
carry-out the first Taiz Flood Disaster Prevention and Municipal Development Project (SIL 
1991-1998).  The PMU, headed by a former Department Head of the Taiz office of the 
MOPWH, is comprised of core staff members responsible for financial management, 
procurement, engineering, monitoring and evaluation, environment and social issues, and project 
management support, and serves as a liaison to the government. The PMU also employs several 
engineers and technical assistants who support the implementation of civil works.  
 
The PIU has two safeguard officers responsible for managing the social/resettlement and 
environmental issues under the TMDFPP.  The identification of a new environmental officer is 
currently underway for the additional financing for TMDFPP, as the current officer recently 
moved to a procurement function.  A consulting firm is also in the process of being recruited for 
conduction a feasibility study for the proposed sanitary landfill site in Taiz, and an independent 
Page  7
consulting firm is also being recruited to undertake an independent Integrated Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment (IESIA) of the proposed landfill site and SWM system (both financed 
under the TMDFPP additional financing).  In addition, detailed social studies in Taiz and Sana’a 
are currently underway (financed under theTMDFPP and the Cities Alliance grant to the Sana’a 
City Development Strategy) toserve as a basis for identifying the specific investments in urban 
upgrading and associated social issues targeting the poor.  In parallel, preparation is underway of 
a
grant application to the JSDF to finance socio-economic development activities targeted at the 
poor settlements where IUDP upgrading and infrastructure investments will take place.  
Procurement of consultancy services for the preparation of an IESIA for the overall project, 
excluding the Taiz landfill site, is to be launched shortly and the assignment would commence 
upon the approval of the PHRD grant for IUDP preparation.  The assignment would include a 
social impact assessment to determine inter alia whether the project includes activities that would 
displace residents or negatively affect their economic activities.  A Resettlement Action Plan 
(RAP) or an Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (ARP) would be prepared as part of project 
preparation for investments which have been identified and designed in detail, as well as a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) for investments not identified/designed in detail by 
appraisal.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa (MNSSD) 
Ms Laila Al-Hamad (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
consulting firm is in the process of being recruited to conduct a feasibility study for the 
proposed sanitary landfill site and solid waste management system in Taiz, and an independent 
consulting firm is also being recruited to undertake an independent Integrated Environmental and 
Social Impact Assessment (IESIA) of the proposed landfill site and SWM system (both will be 
financed under the TMDFPP additional financing). An Integrated Environmental and Social 
Impact Assessment (IESIA) for other IUDP investments will be carried out as part of project 
preparation. Terms of reference have been prepared and the procurement process is in the 
process of initiated (to be financed under the PHRD grant for project preparation).   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
A
change find procedure will be included.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Procurement of consultancy services for the preparation of an IESIA for the overall project, 
excluding the Taiz SWM system (for which the feasibility study and IESIA are prepared 
separately), is to be launched shortly and the assignment would commence upon approval of the 
PHRD grant for IUDP preparation. The assignment would include a social impact assessment to 
Page  8
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
determine inter alia whether the project includes activities that would displace residents or 
negatively affect their economic activities.  A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or an 
Abbreviated Resettlement Plan (ARP) would be prepared as part of project preparation for 
investments which have been identified and designed in detail, as well as a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RFP) for investments not identified/designed in detail by appraisal. In addition, 
detailed social studies in Taiz and Sana’a have been prepared for urban upgrading and the 
preparation of a JSDF grant for socio-economic activities to accompany urban upgrading is 
currently underway.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/28/2009 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The IESIA for the Taiz landfill site and SWM would be launched in July 2008 and would be 
expected to be completed in November 2008. The IESIA for the remainder of the project 
components would be launched in September/October 2008 and a draft completed in May 
2009 for disclosure in Infoshop (the latest date for disclosure is June 28, 2009, in line with 
the Pelosi Amendment).   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Sameh Naguib Wahba 
06/03/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  9
