Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/20/2008 
Report No.:  AC3492
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P108649 
Project Name:  RY-PUBLIC WORKS III ADDITIONAL FINANCING 
Task Team Leader:  Somin Mukherji 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: April 17, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General education sector (30%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (30%);General transportation sector (20%);Health (10%);Other social services 
(10%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Social safety nets (P);Participation and 
civic engagement (S);Other financial and private sector development (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
29.84 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
4.34 
 Local 
Communities 
2.05
6.39 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objectives and description remain the same as for the original 
project (PWP-3).  It will finance the implementation of about 282 sub-projects (targeted 
mainly at the rural population) for the rehabilitation and/or extension of infrastructure 
works throughout the 20 governorates of Yemen.  The project will continue to provide 
the needed infrastructure to improve services and environmental conditions, especially 
those affecting women and children, and create short-term employment.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project development objectives and description remain the same as for the original 
project (PWP-3).  The additional financing will help finance the costs associated with 
scaling up the output targets of most of the sub-projects to their original levels as detailed 
in the Project Appraisal Document (Report No. 27266 dated February 2, 2004).  
Specifically, it will finance the implementation of about 282 sub-projects (targeted 
mainly at the rural population) for the rehabilitation and/or extension of infrastructure 
Page  2
works throughout the 20 governorates of Yemen.  The project will continue to provide 
the needed infrastructure to improve services and environmental conditions, especially 
those affecting women and children, and create short-term employment. The project 
components would be similar to those of the PWP-3 as follows:  
 
Component One: Community Infrastructure Projects (US$26.69 million) - to support 
small-scale civil works in areas with above-average unemployment rates for construction, 
rehabilitation, and/or extension of infrastructure works throughout the 20 governorates of 
Yemen. Subprojects will be selected from proposals that have been or will be submitted 
by communities and local governments with requests for financing. The subprojects will 
be evaluated and prioritized based on selection criteria, and consolidated in quarterly 
investment programs. The subprojects will collectively have national coverage, with 
emphasis on poverty areas. They will also have high labor content and include 
community participation. They will cover water supply and sanitation schemes, water 
harvesting schemes, flood protection, vocational training centers, schools and health 
centers. The subprojects will be small in size, averaging about US$95,000 and will be 
implemented over a period of 6-12 months.  
 
Component Two: Technical Assistance/Consultant Services (US$1.86 million) - to 
support sub-project preparation, implementation and capacity building of consultants and 
contractors.  
 
Component Three: Project Management (US$1.29 million) - to support and further 
strengthen the Project Management Unit with staff training.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project component dealing with community infrastructure subprojects will be scattered 
throughout the country ranging from extreme remote areas to remote rural, semi urban 
and urban areas. Selection of subprojects will be based on indicators such as high 
poverty, high population density, and no access to services. Subproject completion is 
expected to trigger positive environmental impacts, access to safe water supply and 
sanitation, health services, paved roads, etc. Sites selected are not expected to be close to 
any protected cultural resources, archaeological or historical sites. The project will be 
prepared with high participation by the local communities and any socially contentious 
issues will be avoided through consensus of the communities on subproject and site 
location, before implementation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSSD) 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ENV) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional financing operation was reviewed with regards to safeguards implications 
as noted in the Project Paper dated February 5, 2008. The parent PWP-3 project does not 
have any significant outstanding safeguards issues. There are no proposed new categories 
of activities and the environmental categorization remains category B. No other new 
safeguard policies are triggered by the project as a result of additional financing.  
 
The safeguard policy that is triggered by the project is OP4.01 on Environmental 
Assessment. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) including Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) and monitoring plan was prepared by the Borrower and 
disclosed both in-country and at InfoShop for the parent Public Works Project III (PWP-
3). As the project description, development objectives and components remain the same 
as PWP-3, the EIA/EMP that was prepared for PWP-3 will also apply to the proposed 
scale-up operation. The subprojects that will be implemented are expected to have 
generally positive health and environmental impacts.  Due to the small-scale nature of 
interventions, no significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. Negative impacts if 
any would be minor when compared to the positive impacts and could be mitigated by 
implementing the mitigating measures recommended in the EMP.  
 
A
Socio-economic Impact Assessment (SIA) was completed during the preparation of 
the PWP-3; a further SIA was also conducted prior to the Mid Term review.  No social 
safeguards have been triggered by the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
Page  4
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
As the subprojects can be implemented in any part of the country, the EIA therefore 
addresses general environmental impacts by each category of subprojects, including the 
perceived risk of each impact, and suggested mitigation measures. Due to the nature of 
the project that maintains the individuality of subprojects implemented in different 
environmental conditions, impacts for each subproject will be assessed separately and 
mitigation measures will be suggested accordingly by considering local environmental 
conditions and resources. The project will therefore carry out a screening process to 
define the environmentally sensitive subprojects and produce necessary EMPs for those 
subprojects. This will be done through contracting a short-term local environmental 
specialist or a local consulting firm to carry out subproject specific environmental 
analyses and produce limited EIA/EMP as required and mentioned in the operations 
manual.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower has prepared an EIA/EMP for the parent PWP-3 project that will also be 
applied to this scale-up operation, to address safeguard policy issues. The report has 
identified training requirements for various stakeholders according to the different 
sectors.  
 
Borrower has proven high capacity to implement safeguard policies. The Project will 
utilize the successful institutional arrangements that are in place for the ongoing PWP-3 
project; including the well established Project Management Unit (PMU) that has gained 
significant experience in implementing similar subprojects. The PMU implements a 
rigorous environmental and social screening process, whereby the design of every 
subproject is screened by a dedicated team of environmental and social specialists. 
Furthermore, environmental aspects are incorporated in each contract for contractors and 
supervising consultants, in Arabic. Specific issues, as they arise, are adequately addressed 
by the environmental and the social staff in the PMU and in full collaboration with IDA.  
The implementation of EMP will continue to be monitored through regular supervision 
by staff from HQ and country office staff.  
 
Noteworthy is during implementation of PWP-3, the PMU took up the challenge of 
developing a unique reforestation program in subproject areas. Given the acute 
deforestation that the country is currently facing, this initiative ensures that in every 
contract finalized, there is a provision to plant trees, both to replace the ones lost during 
construction and to increase the green coverage of the country. The PMU includes 
planting of these saplings within the works contracts and carries out necessary awareness 
programs amongst the community members. By end 2007 under the Public Works 
Program, the PMU had planted close to 72,000 saplings all over the country of which 
more than 25,000 have been planted in sub-project sites financed under the PWP-3. The 
reforestation program will continue under the proposed operation.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include target communities in rural and urban areas with high 
poverty; local councils; NGOs: local government and line ministries.  
 
Similar to the parent PWP-3 project, the proposed project will be prepared and 
implemented in a highly participatory manner. Consultation with stakeholders and 
consensus building will be continually achieved through a Demand Driven Approach 
during the identification stage of each subproject. Consultations and stakeholder 
participation is built into the project design due to its participatory, demand driven 
approach. In addition, environmental awareness and relevant training programs will be 
continue to be conducted with various stakeholders at different times during preparation 
and implementation (as is being done in PWP-3 project).  
 
The EIA/EMP has been re-disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/12/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/12/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
EIA/EMP was disclosed for the parent PWP-3 project. The same report will apply to the 
proposed operation and will be implemented using existing arrangements. However, the 
reports have been re-disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop for transparency 
purposes. Additionally, the Arabic version of the executive summary has also been re-
disclosed in-country.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Somin Mukherji 
03/18/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Dahlia Lotayef 
03/19/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gregorio Bettiza 
03/19/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
03/19/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
03/19/2008 
Comments:   
