Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/06/2007 
Report No.:  AC3324
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P109219 
Project Name:  Taiz Municipal Development and Flood Protection Project 
Task Team Leader:  Stephen George Karam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 14, 
2007 
Estimated Board Date: January 29, 2008 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (70%);Sub-national government administration (30%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.05
2.05 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The original Project has three development objectives: (i) Taiz local government 
develops its capacity to carry out a major part of their responsibilities under the country's 
new Local Authorities Law; (ii) to protect city residents, businesses and infrastructure 
from seasonal destructive flash flooding; and (iii) initiate support for Yemen's 
decentralization program.  Under the additional financing, all three objectives would 
remain valid and thus have not been modified.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed additional financing retains essentially the same project structure of the 
original project.  Of the original three components, two will be utilized, as follows: (i) 
Flood damage protection infrastructure and related public sector infrastructure; (ii) 
Resettlement (no longer necessary as there will be no resettlement under the additional 
financing) would not be financed under the additional financing; and (iii) Local Council 
capacity building program.  A forth component is added to cover the budget for project 
management by the Project Management Unit (PMU).  Although Component 2 will no 
longer be financed under the project, as there would be no resettlement, IDA is working 
Page  2
with Government and City counterparts to define a program of continued support to the 
Resettlement Village and to several NGOs working with the residents of Birrara to ensure 
sustained impact and integration of the resettled community.  A brief description of each 
component is given below:  
 
Component 1- Flood Damage Protection Infrastructure (US$18.30 Million Equivalent).  
 
Component 1 entails the construction of about: (i) 4.4 kilometers length of flood damage 
protection channels to protect populated areas,  (ii) 20.45 kilometers length of street 
paving in tributary areas to the flood damage protection structures to improve rainfall 
surface drainage and prevent soil erosion to minimize potential damages and the cost of 
maintenance of flood structures while improving pedestrian and vehicular access; (iii) 
1.04 kilometers length of retaining walls to protect built-up areas and nearby flood 
damage protection structures from potential risk of landslides; (iv) 1.38 kilometers length 
of footpaths in steep walkways to control erosion while providing safe pedestrian access; 
and (v) 13.91 kilometers length of sewage collection pipes, and about 1,400 house 
connections to reduce water pollution caused by sewage discharges onto the flood 
channels.  This component would be executed through ten contractual packages.  The 
size of each contract has been determined by grouping the works within the same 
geographic area, or by the type of work to be carried out, the duration of each contract 
not to exceed eighteen months, and by limiting the cost of each contract to sizes suitable 
for competition among medium and larger size contractors.  
 
Component 2- Resettlement.  (Not financed under the Additional Financing)  
 
This component would no longer be financed under the additional financing, as no 
resettlement would be required under the project. The proposed set of civil works projects 
noted in Component 1 above are identified and have been reviewed by an independent 
social specialist and determined not to require any resettlement.  However, careful 
monitoring during the implementation phase will be carried out by a full-time social 
officer to ensure compliance with OP 4.12 concerning involuntary resettlement.  Should 
any unforeseen circumstances arise that might trigger this policy, such as temporary 
resettlement during the construction phase, an abbreviated resettlement action plan (RAP) 
would be prepared based on guidance from the Team’s social safeguards specialist. 
Furthermore, the work of the task team will be complemented by a parallel assignment 
carried out by the Bank’s social team in which specially targeted technical assistance and 
capacity building would be provided to the Resettlement Village developed under the 
original project and to the NGOs providing services to residents in the village.  This 
assistance is proposed to be supported by a JSDF (Japan Social Development Fund) grant 
and would be intended to ensure sustainability of the village and integration of the 
residents into local society, provide access to employment opportunities, and help to 
engender broader social acceptance.  
 
Component 3- Capacity Building for Local Councils (US$3.37 Million Equivalent).  
 
Component 3 consists of scaling-up the capacity building program for local councils and 
administrations in support of the government’s decentralization agenda through assisting 
the city of Taiz in fulfilling its responsibilities under the Local Administration Law of 
Page  3
2000. This component also includes construction of two Local Council buildings in 
Taizieh and Salw Districts (both within Taiz Governorate) and equipping such buildings 
with furniture and office equipment necessary for Local Councils to fulfill their mandate 
under the Law.. This component would consist of the following programs:  
 
1. 
Traffic system management study (US$0.30 Million equivalent). A consultant 
would study and recommend options for addressing traffic flows in the expanded road 
network alongside the flood damage prevention channels aiming at reducing congestion 
and identifying strategic sites suitable for parking areas in the vicinity of commercial 
areas and markets, which would be designed to enhance vehicular and pedestrian safety 
and access within the city;  
 
2.
Street Addressing and Parcel Numbering (US$0.44 Million equivalent). This 
program would complement the new Taiz GIS system developed under the masterplan to 
enhance local tax collection and improve delivery of public services. The assignment 
would be undertaken jointly by the Taiz public works and finance departments, under the 
guidance and direction of the Taiz Local Council. This activity would consist of: (i) a 
study carried out in consultation with the Local Council and an already-established Street 
Addressing City Committee, including survey work, system design, and implementation 
plan.  In addition, bidding documents would be prepared for the supply and installation of 
signs and postings of street names and parcel numbers (US$0.12 Million equivalent); and 
(ii) the supply and installation of street names and parcel numbers (US$0.315 Million 
equivalent).  
 
3.
Strategy for strengthening civil defense response capacity (US$0.20 Million 
equivalent). This activity entails developing a civil defense strategy and provision of 
basic equipment for initial implementation of a program for future expansion and 
coordination among all concerned stakeholders.  The support would be aimed at 
improving the response time and capacity of service providers to flood-affected victims 
in all parts of the city.  
 
4.
Master Plan detailed designs (US$0.30 Million equivalent). This activity would 
develop additional detailed maps of Taiz (five in total) to expand the already developed 
system under the original project, including technical assistance and capacity building of 
technical staff to enhance detailed planning efforts at the city level.  
 
5.
Municipal Service Delivery Study (US$0.23 Million equivalent). This activity 
would consist of a set of assignments in support of the city’s efforts to consolidate its 
services and administrative structures into a municipal management framework. The 
study would look into various options such as establishing a position of city manager, 
local tax administration study for consolidating all municipal revenues and expenditures 
into a single budgetary framework and developing a new organization chart with 
functional departments and corresponding operations manuals. This activity would also 
support the review of the Government’s proposed amendments to the Local 
Administration Law.  
 
6.
Strengthening Land Management (US$0.50 Million equivalent).   This activity 
would assist the Government in formulating a viable national and local level framework 
for public land management and land registration following establishment of the General 
Authority for Land, Survey and Urban Planning (GALSUP).  
Page  4
7. 
Studies and Design for Sanitary Solid Waste Disposal (US$0.27 Million 
equivalent). This activity includes undertaking: (i) a study to implement the solid waste 
management strategy carried out under phase 2 project (US$0.02 Million equivalent); (ii) 
design of a sanitary landfill and drafting of bidding documents of a selected site for 
construction under a separate program (US$0.15 Million equivalent); and (iii) 
undertaking an Independent Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (IESIA) for 
the proposed solid waste management project to be executed under a separate program 
(US$0.10 Million equivalent).  
 
8.
Construction and Equipping Local Government Administration Buildings 
(US$1.13 Million equivalent). This activity would construct and equip two Local Council 
(LC) buildings and equip the local office of GALSUP.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Taiz is the second largest urban settlement in Yemen, located in the interior highlands at 
altitudes ranging between 1,100m and 1,600m above sea level, at the foothills of Sabir 
Mountain (altitude 3,000m).  The city is the administrative capital of Taiz Governorate, 
the most populated of Yemen’s 20 governorates with close to 16% of the total 
population.  Taiz city’s population is estimated today to be around 540,000 inhabitants, 
out of a total population in the Governorate of 3 million. Due to its location at the base of 
Mt. Sabir, Taiz City is subject to severe seasonal flash flooding that annually claims at 
least one life, injures scores of city residents, and inflicts significant damage and financial 
losses on the residences and businesses of the city.  In response to this daunting 
challenge, the World Bank-financed Taiz Municipal Development and Flood Protection 
Project was designed with the main aim of erecting flood protection structures to protect 
the City’s residents and businesses by channeling the flood waters through open and 
closed flood structures to a catch basin south of the city.  
 
The Project investments under the additional financing would take place entirely within 
Taiz Governorate.  Other than the local Council building to be constructed in Salw, all 
other civil works will be confined to the City of Taiz.  The vast majority of the additional 
financing (around 83%) would be devoted to small-scale works to construct flood 
protection channels, inner-city roads, pedestrian footpaths, stormwater drainage, and 
wastewater collection networks.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSSD) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The original 
project had an Environmental Category “A” classification with the most 
significant issue identified in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) as the resettlement 
of 170 families from areas where construction works were planned to take place.  Under 
the additional financing, no involuntary resettlement is envisaged or would be 
undertaken.  As such, the additional financing integrated social and environmental 
classification is proposed to be downgraded to Category B according to the World Bank’s 
Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01).  
 
The proposal to downgrade the Additional Financing environmental classification is 
also based on the following considerations, which include measures undertaken under the 
original project to address specific environmental risks identified at project appraisal in 
2001 (page 14, PAD) as follows:  
 
o
Spillway capacity on the agricultural dam receiving flood flows:  Under the 
original project, the spillway dam has been completely upgraded to a capacity that 
exceeds anticipated flood waters resulting from a 30 year rainfall event;  
 
o
Introduction of stones, debris, and solid waste into the flood structures:  The flood 
structure contracts financed under the original project included installation of several 
boulder traps and flood structure screens and grates that prevent the build up of stones 
and debris within the flood structures; over $250,000 of flood structure equipment has 
been procured under the original project for the purposes of cleaning and maintaining the 
structures; a solid waste management strategy has been prepared under the original 
project and has defined flood structure maintenance and cleaning plans which are now in 
place and under implementation; the Governor has issued a formal decree assigning both 
the equipment and flood structure maintenance and cleaning to the Taiz City Cleaning 
and Improvement Fund.  
 
o
Institutional capacity to maintain the flood structures:  Specific training, 
maintenance programs and performance standards have been designed for flood structure 
maintenance and cleaning by a Municipal Management Specialist for the Cleaning and 
Page  6
Improvement Fund.  Public awareness training has been carried out and this program of 
support would be extended under the proposed additional financing.  
 
o
Indirect impacts/presence of Malaria related to another IDA Project:  The flood 
structures installed under the original project provide graded, smooth surface conduits for 
rainfall and flood waters to pass easily and quickly through the core areas of the city out 
to the retention basin north of the city.  The incidence of malaria in the city was reported 
by the Social Scientist to have declined significantly over the past several years.  This is 
due in part to the flood structures replacing the natural flood paths (wadis) where malaria-
infested mosquitos were reproducing in small pools of residual flood waters (less than 15 
cm.)  
 
o
Means of escape from the flood structures:  Each of the existing flood structures 
have escape ladders installed to ease exit from the structures and the same design feature 
is included in the proposed flood structure extensions.  
 
As an Environmental Category “B” Project, a Partial Environmental Assessment 
isrequired. An environmental impact assessment report (EIA) was prepared, following 
OP 4.01 guidelines. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is included with the 
EIA, and it addresses potential environmental and social impacts, the necessary 
mitigation measures and monitoring plan, and the capacity building requirements for the 
EMP implementation.  
 
An additional issue that was not explicitly addressed in the original project 
environmental assessment is the matter of illegal piping of domestic wastewater from 
households surrounding the wadis/flood structures into the structures.  Provision has been 
made under the original and the proposed additional financing to correct this problem by 
installing wastewater collection pipes along the flood structures to channel the effluent to 
the Al-Burayhi treatment ponds downstream.The Al-Burayhi Wastewater Treatment 
Plant is currently undergoing cleaning and capacity upgrading carried out under the 
Bank-financed Urban Water and Sanitation Project; this work is expected to be 
completed by February 2008.  An estimated 1,400 household connections would be made 
under the proposed additional financing to prevent dumping of wastewater into the 
structures.  The EIA carries out a review of the wastewater treatment facility.  The 
facility has a design capacity of 4,000 m3/day (total detention time of 69,200 mw 
storage/4000 m3/day = 17 days).  Actual sewage volume is less than 4,000 m3/day but no 
measurements are available.  Of the less than 2,000 wastewater connections proposed 
under the additional financing a total volume of 100-200 m3/day is anticipated.  This 
would represent an anticipated 2.5-5% of the total wastewater treatment plant design 
capacity.  
 
Some farmers have been observed drawing some of the untreated wastewater from the 
collection system downstream for use in agriculture.  Although not directly related to the 
project, the downstream risk of some farmers potentially misusing untreated wastewater 
passing through the network installed under the project would be addressed by organizing 
on a periodic basis for the duration of the project public awareness sessions concerning 
the inherent health risks in using this water prior to appropriate treatment.  This 
assistance is specified in the project EMP and would be the responsibility of the 
Page  7
consultant providing capacity building support on solid waste management and 
environmental health awareness.  
 
Operational Policy on Cultural Property (OP 4.11) may be triggered during 
construction, if chance finds of archeological or cultural significance is encountered. This 
issue is not expected to be significant, however, as the construction of the drainage 
channels, boulder traps, and sewers is done in wadis, whereas the development of Taiz 
city is predominantly at high grounds and on hill tops. Nonetheless, OP 4.11 should be 
evaluated during construction. The construction contracts should include a Chance Find 
procedure according to OPN 11.03.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).  A detailed social assessment (SA) was carried out 
by an independent social scientist during the preparation stage of the project and 
confirmed that no resettlement would take place and that no land acquisition would 
therefore be required for implementation of this operation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Positive environmental and social impacts are expected to result from the reduction of 
negative consequences of floods on health, environment, and quality of life. The overall 
quality of life is also expected to be improved trough the provision of wastewater 
connections in un-served areas. These impacts were determined to far outweigh any 
potentially negative environmental impacts.  
 
Most of the project impacts are expected to result from the construction phase. 
Examples include disruption of traffic, air quality and noise impacts from construction 
activities, and possible safety concerns during construction. These impacts are expected 
to be localized, short lived, and reversible.  Operational phase impacts, related to the 
issues of sewerage collection impact on existing treatment plants, reuse of wastewater, 
and solid waste disposal in the channels are dealt with through other on-going investment 
projects (World Bank-financed Urban Water and Sanitation Project), proposed studies 
and/or training/awareness programs as identified in the EMP.  
 
Furthermore, mitigation measures for these impacts will be included in the tender 
document and contract with the selected contractors. Violation or deviation from these 
measures would be handled accordingly, and specific measures to respond will be include 
in the special conditions of the contracts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The project will utilize widely accepted norms and equipment for construction. No 
alternative construction methods are expected to reduce the impacts. The design will 
consider alternative building materials and will select the optimal one based on multi 
criteria analysis of technical and economic feasibility, and environmental aspects.   
 
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will utilize widely accepted norms and equipment for construction. No 
alternative construction methods are expected to reduce the impacts. The design will 
consider alternative building materials and will select the optimal one based on multi 
criteria analysis of technical and economic feasibility, and environmental aspects.  
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:  
 
The agency responsible for environmental matters in Yemen is the Environmental 
Protection Authority (EPA). EPA has a limited capacity in following up environmental 
projects. However, this is a non-issue as the environmental mitigation and monitoring 
plans will be carried out by the Project Management Unit, which includes a full-time 
Environmental Officer). The EO will implement the EMP and the environmental aspects 
included in the project’s Operations Manual. The EO was in charge of supervising the 
work for Phases I and II of the project. The EO will continue to act in the same capacity 
for the additional financing works.  
 
In addition, the project will be hiring a Social Officer to monitor activities during the 
construction phase and to ensure that no resettlement issues are triggered.  With regard to 
broader social development issues, a very thorough social assessment (SA) has been 
carried out and its findings have been incorporated into overall project design.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Public consultations were carried out during the environmental assessment of Phases I 
and II. Subsequently, public consultation workshops were held in March 2001; and May, 
June, and September 2005, and included all relevant stakeholders, such as: (a) residents 
living in the districts where the project would be implemented, (b) community leaders, 
(c) local council members, (d) NGOs, (e) District Police, and (f) National Water and 
Sanitation Authority.  
 
A
very thorough Social Assessment (SA), including public consultations of the affected 
population, was also carried out in September 2007 concerning the impacts of the original 
project and with the aim of incorporating lessons learned into the activities supported 
under the Additional Financing.  The SA was carried out by an independent, 
internationally-qualified reviewer, and involved numerous consultations with affected 
communities and other city and project stakeholders.The SA determined that none of the 
proposed work sites would require any resettlement.  The SA investigated expected 
socio-economic impacts of the TMFPP Additional Financing (AF) as well as social risk 
and safety issues through field visits, the analysis of project documents and data collected 
by 30 surveyors in interviews and focus group discussions with altogether 314 
beneficiaries in 16 areas where AF investments will be implemented. Project measures 
under the AF are largely the same and complementary to those implemented under Phase 
I
and II of the TMFPP.  
Page  9
Benefits and risks identified through impact analysis of previous project investments are 
thus projected to be similar to those of the AF. The SA revealed that previous project 
measures yielded significant benefits for public health through the protection of lives and 
the reduction of water-borne and pollution related diseases. Project measures had also 
had clear poverty alleviation effects through stimulation of economic development and 
job creation as a result of improved access, transportation and protection of property in 
addition to saving expenditures for replacement or repair of damaged property after 
ravaging floods. The project greatly facilitated the introduction of infrastructure and 
garbage collection through improved access and protection from flood damage. 
Protective measures and improvements of access and transportation have also increased 
children’s attendance in school and have largely eliminated the social isolation of 
residents in newly-established flood structure areas.  
 
The social assessment did, however, highlight additional safety issues to be taken into 
account in sub-project design in order to ensure preventative measures are in place, 
including expansion in the provision of safety railings to prevent any inadvertent entry 
into the flood structures by children and/or other city residents.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/06/2007 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/07/2007 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/06/2007 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  10
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
N/A 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen George Karam 
11/30/2007 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed 
11/30/2007 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Knut Opsal 
11/30/2007 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jaafar Sadok Friaa 
12/04/2007 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/04/2007 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
11/30/2007 
Comments:   
