Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/01/2008 
Report No.:  AC3826
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P107037 
Project Name:  Yemen-Water Sector Support 
Task Team Leader:  Maher F. Abu-Taleb 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 26, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: February 17, 2009 
Managing Unit:  MNSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (40%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (30%);Water supply (30%) 
Theme:  Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
141.10 
 
UK: British Department for International Development (DFID)  30.90 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW) 
60.70 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 58.30
291.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Water Sector Support Program (WSSP) is designed as a contribution to the National 
Water Sector Strategy and Investment Program (NWSSIP) adopted by the Government of 
Yemen (GOY).  The Program Development Objective (PDO) is to support 
implementation of the NWSSIP and thereby achieve the NWSSIP goal of improving the 
Yemeni population’s sustainable and economically efficient use of the nation’s scarce 
water resources. This overall objective will be achieved through five intermediate 
objectives: (a) strengthen institutions for sustainable water resources management; (b) 
improve community-based water resource management; (c) increase access to water 
supply and sanitation services; (d) increase returns to water use in agriculture; and (e) 
stabilize and then reduce groundwater abstraction for agricultural use in critical water 
basins.  
 
Page  2
Emphasis is put, not only on the safety of water supply services, but also on 
sustainability, affordability and equitable access. This will be achieved through a Sector-
Wide Approach (SWAp) aligned behind NWSSIP.   
 
3. Project Description 
WSSP has been designed to provide financing on a SWAp basis over a five year period 
(2009-2014) to support implementation of NWSSIP.  The total WSSP contribution over 
this period is expected to be about US$381 million, of which the IDA contribution would 
represent about 24%.  Other donors, the government, beneficiaries and the private sector 
will finance the balance of the proposed WSSP program (76%).  WSSP financing will be 
allocated to the NWSSIP investment program on a demand-driven basis according to 
approved Annual Operating Plans. Based on NWSSIP and preliminary indications, a 
tentative allocation of the WSSP resources to the various NWSSIP investment activities 
has been made under five components as shown below:  
 
Component 1: Water Resources Management (US$38 million): WSSP would contribute 
US$38.0 million (IDA share US$4.0 million) through pooled financing and coordinated 
in-kind support of the NWSSIP integrated water resources management (IWRM) 
program 2009-2014, to be implemented by National Water Resources Authority 
(NWRA).  The component would build on the NWRA decentralization and institutional 
support provided since 1996 through Bank, Netherlands, Germany, and UNDP-funded 
projects.  As funds would be allocated in line with agreed annual plans, a detailed Annual 
Operating Plan for the first year of WSSP will be in place before effectiveness.  
 
Component 2: Urban Water Supply and Sanitation (US$86.5 million): WSSP would 
contribute US$86.5 million (IDA share US$18.1 million) of pooled financing to Ministry 
of Water and Environment (MWE), Local Corporations (LCs) and Autonomous Utilities 
(AUs), and to private providers, including NGOs to implement the NWSSIP urban water 
and sanitation program 2009-2014. In addition to financing physical investment in system 
rehabilitation and expansion, the component is designed to support the development of 
efficient and autonomous utilities by helping to build the technical, administrative and 
financial capacity of the LCs and AUs, together with the enabling and regulatory 
framework.  The component would build on and complete the urban sector reform 
program that has been underway since 1997, which has been supported by Germany and 
IDA.  The beneficiaries would be the residents of cities who would benefit from: (a) 
improved quality and reliability of service and (b) increase in affordable and sustainable 
water supply and sanitation coverage.  
 
Component 3: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (US$173.9 million): WSSP would 
contribute US$173.9 million (IDA share US$15.4 million) of pooled funding to financing 
of the NWSSIP rural water and sanitation program 2009-2014, to be implemented by the 
General Authority for Rural Water Supply Projects (GARWSP). In line with the 
NWSSIP objectives, the component would increase access to sustainable and affordable 
rural water and sanitation services by ensuring that agencies operating in the sub-sector 
deliver efficient, least cost projects on a demand-driven basis.  Although WSSP financing 
would be provided only to GARWSP, strengthened cooperation between GARWSP and 
Page  3
other key partners such as the Social Fund for Development (SFD) and the Public World 
Project (PWP) would be supported within the NWSSIP framework.  
 
Component 4: Irrigation (US$74.9 million): WSSP would contribute US$74.9 million 
(IDA share US$51 million) through pooled financing of the NWSSIP irrigation program 
2009-2014, to be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MAI) 
through the National Irrigation Program (NIP) and associated agencies and programs. In 
line with NWSSIP objectives, this component would improve (or at least sustain) 
farmers’ livelihoods while ensuring resource sustainability both in quantity and quality 
by supporting NWSSIP policies and programs for: (a) modern (conveyance and 
localized) water-saving irrigation technologies and farming practices; (b) multi-purpose 
(diversion) works for harvesting spate water (for irrigation, rural water supply, flood 
protection, and for recharging groundwater and “conjunctive use”) (b) institutional 
development and empowerment of water-userorganizations to manage their own resource 
locally within basin and local/district level plans; and (c) establishment of the NIP and 
expansion of the Irrigation Advisory Service (IAS).  The NWSSIP approach builds on the 
experiences gained from IDA-supported projects which introduced the concepts of 
participatory irrigation management (PIM), “more crop per drop” (i.e., agronomic 
advisory) or “lessdrop per crop” (i.e., irrigation advisory), and conjunctive use of surface 
andgroundwater.  In order to maximize the impact on the water balance and on 
livelihoods, investments (particularly for areas irrigated on groundwater) would be 
targeted to geographical priority areas, giving priority to: (i) areas where agricultural use 
competes with water supply wells, (ii) areas where losses from open channels plus from 
irrigated fields are less likely to be recaptured (per the recommendations of the NWRA-
sponsored Groundwater Incentives Study); (iii) areas of pronounced poverty; and (iv) 
areas where WUAs have already been formed and empowered.  
 
Component 5: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development (US$7.7 million): 
WSSP would contribute US$ 7.7 million (IDA share US$ 1.5 million) to the pooled 
financing of the NWSSIP institutional strengthening and capacity development program 
2009-2014, to be implemented by all participating water sector agencies and programs.  
The component will address the need for improved institutional capacity of implementing 
agencies to develop policy, plans and budgets, and to regulate the water sector, as well as 
the need for improved institutional capacity for planning and implementation at basin, 
governorate and district levels. WSSP support would be structured to be as flexible as 
possible through a set of seven “windows” or facilities: (i) support to program 
management; (ii) a capacity development facility; (iii) a facility to support subsector 
planning and evaluation; (iv) a project preparation and evaluation facility; (vi) support to 
the Anti-Corruption Action Plan (ACAP); (vii) support to communication programs; and 
(viii) a human resources development/training facility.  
 
Monitoring and evaluation arrangements for WSSP will form a sub-set of the 
arrangements for NWSSIP as a whole.  For NWSSIP and WSSP M&E, the Ministry of 
Water and Environment (MWE) has established an M&E Unit reporting directly to the 
Deputy Minister (Water). Data collection is based on a participatory approach, where 
subsector groups and representatives are responsible for M&E functions for their 
Page  4
respective subsector. Staff at each level are responsible for M&E.  WSSP’s institutional 
strengthening and capacity building component will provide needed training and 
technical support.  The findings of the M&E system for both NWSSIP and WSSP will be 
distributed and used through: (i) regular (quarterly) reports; (ii) participatory M&E 
workshops (at least annually, in connection with the Joint Annual Review (JAR) 
preparation) to evaluate results with all stakeholder groups; (iii) an annual status report 
covering all aspects of the sector (the “JAR Report”); and (iv) the JAR conducted at 
national level among government, civil society, external partners, and other stakeholders.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
By world standards, Yemen is a country poorly endowed with water resources.  The 
climate is largely semi-arid or arid.  Rainfall is abundant only in the southern uplands.  
Yemen has one of the lowest rates of per capita freshwater availability (135 m3/cap/year) 
in the world, compared to a regional average of 1,250 m3/cap/year.  There are no 
perennial rivers: water comes from rainfall, springs, seasonal spate flows, runoff and 
groundwater.  Water shortages are now an increasing constraint to development and 
poverty reduction.  Urban growth and industrial development are held back, and access of 
the population to water and sanitation services is constrained, with negative and 
impoverishing effects on public health, children's education and general well being.  
 
There are essentially two major challenges:  First, groundwater is running out, and the 
large part of the rural economy dependent on the groundwater resource is consequently 
under threat.  In the last decades, a massive and persistent problem of unsustainable 
groundwater extraction in both highland and coastal areas has arisen.  The result is a 
critical situation that threatens the rural economy and water supply to settlements.  But 
unconsidered action could have severe negative consequences for the rural economy 
today.  Groundwater policy has to look not only at sustainability but also at incomes.  
Second, Yemeni settlements are quite poorly provided with safe water and sanitation 
services.  In urban areas, only about 56% of the population has access to network water 
supply, and only 31% to sewerage.  In rural areas, about 45% of the population has 
access to safe water, and only 21% to adequate sanitation.  In addition, towns, 
particularly the largest cities such as Sana'a and Ta'iz, are very short of water and are 
faced with very high-cost new supply options.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Mr. David Colbert, FAO/CP staff member, is the the Environment Specialist for this 
project.  
 
Although the ov
erall environmental and social impacts of the WSSP’s interventions are 
expected to be positive (e.g., strengthened water resources management, use of improved 
irrigation techniques, enhanced groundwater conservation, and improved urban and rural 
water supply and sanitation systems), because of the sector-wide approach taken by the 
WSSP and the critical nature of water resources management in Yemen, the WSSP has 
been classified Environmental Category A.  
 
The WSSP triggers the following World Bank safeguard policies: (a) Environmental 
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), because WSSP interventions will involve infrastructure 
investments in urban and rural water supply and sanitation and irrigation improvement 
activities in the agriculture sector; (b) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), because 
WSSP interventions may result in limited resettlement of local populations and/or 
acquisition of land; and (c) Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09), because WSSP interventions 
will involve irrigation improvement activities that may affect the use of agricultural 
chemical inputs in the agriculture sector.  
 
No large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated as a result of the 
WSSP.  On the contrary, the sector-wide approach taken by the WSSP presents the GOY 
with a singular opportunity to address management of Yemen’s critical water resources in 
a
holistic manner and thus realize significant environmental and social benefits for the 
country.  In order to address any potential adverse environmental or social impacts, 
however, the GOY performed a Sector-wide Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SwESA) of the WSSP and is committed to implementing the various preventive actions 
and mitigation measures recommended by the SwESA.   
 
Page  6
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The principal potential indirect and/or long-term impact of concern is that the WSSP 
interventions will not sufficiently reduce the unsustainable abstraction of scarce 
groundwater resources in the particularly vulnerable wadis/basins and, in fact, may 
inadvertently increase pressures on these groundwater resources.  To address this 
concern, the WSSP’s water management component is designed both to improve 
planning, conservation, and sustainable allocation of water and to address water-related 
environmental issues and climate change impacts on water resources policy decisions.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The SwESA compares the WSSP with and “without WSSP” alternative on the basis ofa 
number of relevant criteria (e.g., water policies, abstraction of groundwater, water 
conservation, water quality, poverty reduction, and gender concerns) and concludes that 
the WSSP offers the better alternative because of the benefits to water resources 
management derived from the sector-wide approach. The SwESA also identifies a 
number of policies, preventive actions and mitigation measures to enhance the 
environmental benefits and to avoid or minimize any potential adverse environmental 
impacts of the WSSP.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As noted above, during preparation of the WSSP, the GOY conducted a SwESA in 
compliance with GOY environmental requirements and the Bank’s environmental 
assessment safeguard policy.  Furthermore, the GOY committed to implementing the 
various policies, preventive actions and mitigation measures recommended by the 
SwESA to address the safeguard issues raised by the WSSP.  The SwESA includes an 
environmental and social management framework (ESMF), which will: (i) identify 
potential environmental and social impacts of WSSP interventions, (ii) assess the 
environmental and social impacts, and (iii) mitigate them appropriately.  
 
In addition to the SwESA, the GOY prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), 
which is the appropriate instrument for the WSSP to ensure compliance with the Bank’s 
resettlement safeguard policy. An RPF is prepared when the extent and location of 
resettlement cannot be known at appraisal.  This typically applies to projects with 
multiple components such as the WSSP.  The policy framework establishes resettlement 
objectives and principles, organizational arrangements, and funding mechanisms for any 
resettlement operation that may be necessary during the implementation of the various 
components. When, during implementation, the extent of resettlement in any subproject 
becomes known, a site-specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) - or abbreviated RAP, 
depending upon the scale and severity of impacts – is prepared prior to approval for 
funding.  
 
The Yemeni Environment Protection Authority (EPA) is the key GOY oversight 
institution for addressing environmental safeguards issues.  The institutional capacity 
Page  7
within the EPA for managing and reviewing environmental impact assessment (EIA) is 
steadily growing and has been enhanced through recent experience with several donor 
projects, including the Bank’s Sana’a Basin Water Management Project.The SwESA 
includes recommendations for further strengthening EIA capacity within the EPA, which 
should provide the borrower with sufficient capacity to plan and implement the measures 
contained in the SwESA.  Regular review of EPA performance of these EIA functions 
should be part of the routine supervision of the WSSP performed by the Bank and its 
development partners.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Summarize consultations based upon information presented in the SwESA.  
 
Public consultation is an important tool of information, dissemination and awareness 
creation during the planning stage of the project.  It provides valuable inputs towards 
successful implementation of the project in addition to ensuring broader participation and 
involvement.  The purpose of public consultation meetings was to promote public 
awareness and understanding of the proposed WSSP interventions at subsector level.  
The main objectives were to disseminate information about the program to the 
stakeholders and provide opportunities for participation in the design, review and 
implementation of the program through:  
 
-
Timely disclosure of comprehensive information about the program and its benefits.;  
 
-
Providing opportunities to disclose information and maintaining communications in a 
manner that is culturally appropriate and practical;  
 
-
Determining stakeholder issues and ensuring that these are taken into account in 
project design, and  
 
-
Building trust by documenting consultations and discussions, and by being 
accountable and transparent in the process.  
 
Furthermore, the public consultation process helped in eliminating any apprehension 
regarding the program and gives insight to the problems faced by the public.  The 
consultation process aligns program polices and strategies with the interests and concerns 
of stakeholders. The process included the following steps:  
 
-
Identifying stakeholders who may have a specific interest or concern in a program;  
 
-
Consulting those stakeholders to understand respective interests, concerns and 
expectations;  
 
-
Developing strategies and approaches to address stakeholder interests and concerns;  
 
-
Delivering plans to stakeholders for review and possible further revision by 
stakeholders; and  
 
-
Following up with ongoing communication with stakeholders on progress on specific 
initiatives.  
 
In the WSSP context, consultations have taken place at different levels:  
 
Page  8
1. Public Consultation Meetings. The first public consultation meeting was held on 26th 
May 2008 and 58 stakeholders working in different field of water sector were invited. 
Participants expressed their views on a variety of issues, and the media was also invited 
to spread the message and purpose of the WSSP and SwESA Study.  The second 
consultation meeting was held on 3rd August 2008 and was attended by 80 stakeholders. 
Among other issues, the lessons learnt from the focus group discussions in the field were 
discussed and the different views have been documented.  
 
2. Focus Group Discussions (FGD). Nine FGDs, including three with women, were 
conducted over several weeks among the selected primary stakeholders, e.g. women, 
poor farmers, land owners, village leaders, and WUAs/WUGs, to elicit their attitudes 
towards the project, problems and potential solutions as perceived at the local level.  The 
FGDs were carried out in a number of governorates, including Sana’a, Ibb, Taiz, Lahej, 
Aden and Hadramout.  
 
3. Qualitative Interviews with Key Informants. As a part of the study, specific 
information was obtained from ‘Key Informants’. Key informant interviews were 
conducted with different project proponents and concerned government officials working 
in the water sector projects.  This was done through face-to-face qualitative interviews, 
and provided an up-to-date overview of the existing situation in the different water 
projects on which the WSSP will be based.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/15/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
10/15/2008  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/11/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/15/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/09/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/11/2008 
 
Page  9
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/15/2008 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
In-country disclosure completed.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or 
SM?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?  If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Maher F. Abu-Taleb 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Knut Opsal 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Comments:  Mr. David Colbert, FAO/CP staff member, is the Environment Specialist for this 
project. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
 
Comments:   
