Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3244 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/20/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID: P107037 
Project Name: Yemen-Water Sector Support 
Task Team Leader: Maher F. Abu-Taleb 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 22, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: December 18, 2008 
Managing Unit: MNSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (40%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (30%);Water supply (30%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
90.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
200.00 
 
GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW)
 163.00 
 
NETHERLANDS: Min. of Foreign Affairs / Min. of Dev. Coop. 38.00
401.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The program development objective (PDO) is to improve access to water supply and sanitation 
services, increase returns to water use in agriculture, and strengthen sector institutions for 
sustainable water resources management and environmental protection.  This will be achieved 
through a sector-wide approach aligned behind NWSSIP.  
 
Overall program success will be measured by four indicators: (i) increase in coverage of urban 
water supply and sanitation; (ii) increase of access to sustainable rural water supply and 
sanitation; (iii) coverage of farms with water saving techniques; and (iv) improved institutional 
capacity to develop and coordinate integrated water resources management through the increased 
number of NWRA branches decentralized and fully operational and implementing an approved 
plan for integrated basin water management by 2015.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The program is designed to support the NWSSIP investment program laid out by GoY which 
targets an investment envelope of approximately US$1 billion over the next five years of 
NWSSIP implementation.  The tentative program may support a small policy component to 
finance the reforms recommended in the PSIA (namely, improving NWSSIP implementation, 
improving impacts of the reforms, and considering the political economy and overcoming 
institutional constraints).  The bulk of the program will aim to achieve the Program objectives 
through the four components detailed below.  In its entirety, the program is estimated to cost in 
the range of US$300 million (US$60million/year) to be financed by IDA (US$90 million) and 
parallel/joint co-financing from Germany (US$163 million), DFID (US$35 million), and the 
Netherlands government (US$38 million).  The Table below identifies potential contributions in 
US$ millions 
–
still to be confirmed based on updated investment plan and other donor 
commitments.  
 
The proposed program will have five components (IDA financing in brackets).  
 
Component 1: Urban Water and Sanitation (US$30 million - TBD).  This component aims to 
increase coverage along with sustainable water supply and sanitation services, with due priority 
to the poor.  The component will provide support to urban LCs in cities and towns based on 
criteria to be agreed with GoY and development partners (namely Germany). Capacity building 
will be an important element of the support.  
 
Component 2: Rural Water Supply and Sanitation (US$15 million - TBD). This component will 
achieve rapid expansion of water and sanitation services in rural communities aimed to help 
enhance the pro-poor focus and meet the MDGs in the Rural subsector.  The component will 
provide support to GARWSP and local governorate branches to design and implement rural 
water supply and sanitation schemes based on DRA throughout Yemen. Capacity building will 
be a mainstay of the support.  
 
Component 3: Irrigation Improvements (US$40 million - TBD).  To improve farmers’ 
livelihood and ensure resource sustainability both in quantity and quality through the provision 
of modern on-farm irrigation technologies throughout Yemen, and through building on the 
experiences gained from the IDA- supported projects which introduced the concepts of 
“Participatory Irrigation Management” and “More Crop Per Drop” (e.g., focus on successful 
Sana’a Basin, Groundwater and Soil Conservation, and Irrigation Improvement Project 
interventions.   The component will support GDI directly in designing and implementing a 
program of improvements including: transmission lines, on-farm modern irrigation technologies, 
irrigation user associations (at the canal level) and irrigation councils (at the wadi/basin level), 
and on-farm agronomic and water-saving practices leading to “more value per water drop”.   
Capacity building will be a main element of the component including development and 
implementation of an irrigation strategy,  
 
Component 4: Water Resources Management (US$5 million TBD).  This component will 
improve planning, conservation, and sustainable allocation of water and address water-related 
environmental issues and climate change impacts on water resources policy decisions. The 
component will provide (i) support to MWE in the planning and monitoring functions; and (ii) 
Page  3
support to NWRA in basin planning activities (design and implementation) for up to five critical 
basins.  
 
Component 5: Capacity Building. This cross-cutting component will address the need for 
improved institutional capacity of central institutions to develop policy, plans, budgets, and 
regulate the water sector.  The component will provide financing from the 4 components above 
for short and medium length training programs primarily for MWE and MAI and for the central 
authorities of GDI, NWRA, GARWSP, and LCs and be designed to link with continuing civil 
service reforms.  
 
Project Implementation.  The program will build on a number of reform efforts currently 
underway, including an IDA Budget Support operation for economic reforms and the 
Netherlands earmarked budget support to NWRA and GARWSP.  Implementation will be based 
on existing institutions and procedures, suitably strengthened. Implementation of all components 
will be done by line agencies with capacity building support within each entity as well as a 
Transaction Unit set up within MWE/MAI to handle FM and procurement issues when needed.  
Donors and government would transfer funds through the MoF holding accounts to the 
implementing agencies, which would execute according to the agreed plan and budget, and in 
line with the agreed fiduciary requirements.  
 
Based on current lessons from projects, tentative institutional arrangements have been identified 
to include an Inter-Ministerial Steering Committee (IMSC) headed by H.E. the Deputy Prime 
Minister with membership of H.E. the Minister of MWE, H.E. the Minister of MAI, H.E. the 
Minister of MOF and the four deputies of the respective ministries, supported by a Program 
Management Committee (PMC) - -
 devolved from the programï¿½s preparation committee - - 
with Deputy Ministers fromMOPIC, MAI, MWE and MOF as members.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Countrywide with target basins of Sanaa, Taiz, Ibb, Sadah, Hadramout; Radaa; Amran; Abyan; 
and Tihama; and all 14 Governorates.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Both the Yemeni Environmental Protection Law (No. 26 of 1995) and OP 4.01 on 
Environmental Assessment require preparation of an environmental impact assessment (EIA).  
 
With technical guidance from the World Bank, the GoY will undertake preparation of a 
combined sector-wide environmental and social impact assessment (SESA) for the Water Sector 
Support Program (WSSP), which will include preparation of an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that addresses the Banks environmental and social safeguard 
policies and ensures that program interventions will be implemented in an environmentally and 
socially sustainable manner. Given that the types and locations of Water Sector Support Program 
investments are not yet known at this time, the ESMF will contain a participatory environmental 
and social screening process that will enable program stakeholders/beneficiaries to identify 
potential environmental and social impacts and to specify appropriate preventive actions or 
mitigation measures to address them.  
 
Page  4
The Environment Protection Agency (EPA) is the key GOY oversight institution for addressing 
environmental/safeguards issues. The institutional capacity within the EPA for managing and 
reviewing environmental impact assessment (EIA) is growing and has been enhanced through 
experience with several donor projects including Sanaa Basin Water Management Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSSD) 
Mr David M. Colbert (LCSSD) 
Ms Sabine W. Beddies (SDV) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
During WSSP preparation, a combined sector-wide environmental and social assessment 
(SwESA) will be performed and an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) 
will be prepared for the program. The SwESA will identify the significant environmental and 
social impacts (and the corresponding preventive actions and mitigation measures), while the 
ESMF will ensure (i) regular screening of specific program interventions, (ii) identification of 
appropriate preventive actions and mitigation measures in each case, and (iii) routine monitoring 
and evaluation of program environmental and social impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The WSSP will continue many of the irrigation improvement activities started by the 
Sanaï¿½a Basin Water Management Project, which triggered the Pest Management safeguard 
policy. For this reason, the SwESA will have to determine if the irrigation improvement 
activities to be undertaken by the WSSP trigger this safeguard policy as well.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 
X
WSSP will assess during preparation how physical cultural resources will be impacted.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed in parallel with the SwESA to 
address relevant social safeguards as specified in OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/24/2008 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The SwESA assignment is planned to be launched in January/February 2008.  The 
procurement process for this assignment will be fully financed by GoY.  A draft SwESA 
report, including the ESMF, would be prepared and disclosed in the Infoshop by August 4, 
2008, with the final report to be completed in line with reviewer and stakeholder comments 
and the outcomes of Project Appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Maher F. Abu-Taleb 
02/14/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
