Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3536 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/05/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P110458 
Project Name: Water Sector Performance Improvement Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: N. Jane Walker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 18, 2008 
Estimated Board Date: August 28, 2008 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Water supply (75%);Sewerage (25%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the original Water Sector Performance Improvement Project (WSPIP) as stated 
in the Financing Agreement (DFA) is to support the Recipient's efforts towards the:  
 
(i) improvement of access to, and sustainability of, the water supply and sanitation for services 
in Lusaka; and (ii) development of a comprehensive institutional structure supporting a 
coordinated approach to water supply and sanitation investments. The first objective is the 
responsibility of LWSC and the majority of project resources (95%) are devoted to this 
objective. The second objective is the responsible of the Ministry of Local Government and 
Housing (MLGH) and about 5% of the project supports the achievement of this objective.  
 
The objective of this Additional Financing part of the WSPIP is to support the Recipient's 
efforts towards the: (i) improvement of access to, and sustainability of, the water supply and 
sanitation for services in Kafue, Chongwe, Luangwa and Lusaka districts, and (ii) development 
of a comprehensive institutional structure supporting a coordinated approach to water supply and 
sanitation investments (same as the original WSPIP's objective).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The Additional Financing will mirror the current support to LWSC however this will be focused 
on the new three districts (Kafue, Chongwe, and Luangwa districts)  as follows:  
 
•
meet the immediate and short term funding gap for urgent rehabilitation of water supply and 
sewerage works in the 3 districts, leading to improvements in access to water and sanitation 
services for at least 150,000 people; support the implementation of institutional reforms; and 
support improved management and operational efficiency of  an expanded LWSC.  
 
The additional financing will support 3 sub-components under Component A - Support to 
LWSC (Part 1 in the Financing Agreement): These include:  
 
(a)  Sub- Component 1: Supporting restructuring of the regional Lusaka Water and Sewerage 
Company to incorporate the 3 district to a cost effective and sustainable way.   This component 
will support the LWSC to formalize arrangements for the operation of the regional utility. Key 
activities will include, harmonization of the Human Resource Strategy; harmonization of the 
financial systems; training & capacity building, community outreach programs including hygiene 
promotion, and administrative support and set up of offices etc - US$1.5m  
 
(b)  Sub - Component 2:  Urgent works: This component will support improvement in and 
rehabilitation of water and sewer/sanitation facilities (including on-site sanitation) and the 
rehabilitation and expansion of the distribution system in all the 3 districts It is expected that 
rehabilitation of the production facilities  will improve the works to their original design 
standards. - US$7.50m   
 
(c)  Sub Component 3: Operational Cost Support: This component will support LWSC to meet 
the gap in operational costs for the 3 districts on a declining basis and will including costs of 
chemicals for water purification, vehicles, License fees and electricity. - US$1.0m   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will support piped water supply and sanitation works in Kafue, Chongwe, Luangwa 
and Lusaka districts of Zambia.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) were prepared and are currently being implemented for the original project. 
The ESMF for the project includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMP is 
designed with specific attention to anticipated impacts from the rehabilitation works. The RPF 
already in place for the project sets out the compensation policies in case any physical relocation 
is caused by the project (any loss of land or loss or damage to other assets or livelihoods) and 
will be updated as necessary.  The Borrower will update the existing ESMF, EMP and RPF, as 
necessary,  to include the new areas to be supported by the Additional Financing operation. This 
update will include confirming that there are no new locations for physical works that include 
protected areas.  Community consultations will be included in the new project areas. The update 
will confirm that the institutional mechanisms are in place with respect to the RPF and that the 
EMP will include requirements for contractors.  
 
Page  3
Currently, LWSC is employing an environmental specialist (consultant) to supervise and ensure 
compliance with environmental standards and safeguards of the original project. The same 
environmental specialist will also oversee the safeguards compliance for the Additional 
Financing part of the Project. If specialist expertise in needed in this area, additional consultants 
will be employed. Funds have been provided for this under the Additional Financing credit.  
 
At present, because of the delay in the implementation of the original WSPIP there have been 
no requirements for RAPS to date. The project only involves rehabilitation and no new areas are 
expected to be developed.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The works under the additional financing are similar in nature, ie rehabilitation of water and 
waste water facilities in urban areas, to the parent project.  There is an ESMF for the parent 
project. Consultants are amending the ESMF to take account of the additional urban areas and 
these communities will be subject to the same consultation process.  The water facilities will 
only be rehabilitated to their original design parameters and therefore will not use any more 
water than allocated for their original construction.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The works under the additional financing are similar in nature, ie rehabilitation of water and 
waste water facilities in urban areas, to the parent project. There is a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) for the parent project. Consultants are amending the RPF to take account of 
the additional urban areas and communities that will be covered under the Addtional Financing. 
If any addtional land is required or assets impacted,  a RAP will be prepared that will include a 
compensation plan as required.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
Page  4
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  04/30/2008 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) that are already in place for the original project will be utilized for this 
Additional Financing part of the Project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms N. Jane Walker 
05/01/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
05/01/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
05/01/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
