Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/13/2009 
Report No.:  AC4148
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P106596 
Project Name:  ROAD REHABILITATION AND MAINTENANCE PROJECT PHASE 
II 
Task Team Leader:  Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: October 1, 2009 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (40%);Decentralization (40%);Biodiversity 
(20%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching goal of Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project (RRMP) is to 
stimulate economic growth and contribute to poverty reduction through appropriate 
investment in road infrastructure, adequate policy and institutional reforms, and enhanced 
road sector management. The specific objectives of Phase II are as follows:  
 
a) 
To preserve road assets;  
 
b)
To strengthen the technical and managerial capacity of existing road authorities;  
 
c) 
To improve road safety; and  
 
d)
To provide an enabling environment for improved rural transport services.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1 (US$62.43 million) - Civil works for road improvement: The civil work 
component will focus on: (i) the rehabilitation of the paved road between Lusaka and 
Chirundu 51 km (section km 4 to 55); (ii) the construction of the Mufuchani Bridge on 
the Copperbelt; (iii) the construction of weighbridges in Eastern and Copperbelt 
Provinces; and (iv) the building of a Construction Material Testing Center (CMC).  
Page  2
Component 2 (US$6.20 million) - Engineering and technical services: Technical 
assistance for carrying out feasibility studies, engineering design, and supervision 
services for the rehabilitation and construction works under Component 1 as well as the 
supervision of the construction of the road safety school park in Lusaka and the works in 
five districts and design and supervision of the vehicle inspection center in Lusaka.  
 
Component 3 (US$1.66 million) - Institutional development and capacity building: 
Technical assistance and training in the areas of institutional development aimed at 
implementing the Government of the Republic of Zambia's (GRZ's) transport policy as 
well as the recommendations from ongoing institutional review study of the three road 
agencies. In addition, this Component will support continued financing of the HIV/AIDS 
prevention program, initial implementation of the National Council for Construction 
(NCC) strategic plan and equipping of National Road Fund Agency (NRFA) new 
headquarter.  
 
Component 4 (US$2.90 million) - Road safety: This will continue to support the 
activities initiated under Phase I, namely: (i) setting up of a road accident data base; (ii) 
construction of motor vehicle inspection center in Lusaka; (iii) organization of road 
transport enforcement and regulation campaigns, (iv) creation and equipment of a road 
regulations enforcement unit within Road Transport and Safety Agency (RTSA), (v) 
acquisition of road signage and installation of two road traffic light systems., and (vi) 
construction of a road safety school park in Lusaka.  
 
Component 5 (US$1.81 million) - Mobility improvement: This component is aimed at 
providing continued support for improving mobility on existing community roads for the 
poor in order to promote their economic and social development. It will include minor 
community transport infrastructure rehabilitation in the five districts already covered 
under Phase I (Chibombo, Kalabo, Mpongwe, Sinazongwe and Zambezi) and the 
acquisition of vehicles for the RAMP program.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The program covers the entire country and the project specifically will be affecting the 
areas between Lusaka and Chirundu and Kitwe where the Mufuchani Bridge will be built.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Lusaka-Chirundu road is a paved road which will benefit from rehabilitation works 
that will not involve any widening or changes from the existing road alignment. It was 
already the subject of a full blown Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) 
in 2002 in preparation of rehabilitation works carried out between 2006 and 2008 under 
Phase I of this project. Accordingly, additional works on this road only require an 
Environmental Project Brief (EPB). The EPB indicated that the Chirundu National 
Petrified Forest Monument is the vicinity of the road project corridor. Site visit by the 
Bank's environmental safeguards specialist confirmed that, the Petrified Forest 
Monument is located beyond the right of way of the road.  
 
The Mufuchani bridge will be built in Kitwe and require the resettlement of 333 persons 
living in the bridge footpath into new dwellings. In order to address the adverse impacts 
related to it, ESIA and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) have been prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect impacts are related to the use of the road infrastructure, and may potentially 
include:  a) induced traffic; b) compromised air quality;  c) increased CO2 emissions, this 
is a matter for any road use, the World Bank is undertaking various initiatives to address 
the  issue of CO2 emissions at global level; c) increased land use; d) increased road 
accidents, road safety measures will be put in place, particularly in agglomerations; e) 
increased urbanization, this is a universal impacts that is experienced by most road 
construction projects in the world, it is a well known fact that roads induce 
agglomerations , whether in Zambia or elsewhere, today or tomorrow.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Capacity for environmental management and monitoring has been established in the 
Roads Department under existing road program through the creation of an environmental 
management unit (EMU) that will manage the implementation of the environmental 
management plan (EMP) and the RAP designed for the Mufuchani Bridge.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The major stakeholders are the local communities and other road users who will benefit 
from the upgraded roads and new bridge. Other stakeholders include: (i) the Ministry of 
Roads, (ii) the National Roads Fund Agency (NRFA), (iii) the Road Sector Investment 
Programme (ROADSIP), (iv) the Roads Department, and (v) the private sector, 
particularly the mining sector. The Mufuchani Bridge RAP was disclosed on April 3, 
2009 while the Resettlement Site EIS was disclosed on May 20, 3009. The Mufuchani 
Bridge EPB was also disclosed May 20, 2009. The EIS for Chiawa Bridge Construction 
Site was disclosed on May 20, 2009. The EPB for the Lusaka-Chirundu was reviewed by 
Environmental Council of Zambia (EPB do not require in country disclosure per the 
Zambian law) but was disclosed in-country on May 12, 2009. All the above documents 
were disclosed at the Bank's Infoshop on May 29, 2009.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/20/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/29/2009 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/20/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/03/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/29/2009 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  5
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
07/13/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba 
07/13/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Antoine V. Lema 
07/13/2009 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Alain L. Labeau 
07/13/2009 
Comments:   
