Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC3764 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/07/2008 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zambia 
Project ID: P106596 
Project Name: ROAD REHABILITATION AND MAINTENANCE PROJECT PHASE 
II 
Task Team Leader: Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 
2009 
Estimated Board Date: April 16, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (P);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overarching goal of RRMP is to stimulate economic growth and contribute to poverty 
reduction through appropriate investment in road infrastructure, adequate policy and institutional 
reforms, and enhanced road sector management.  The specific objectives of Phase 2 are as 
follows:  
 
•
To bring core road network (40,113) into a maintainable condition;  
 
•
To strengthen the technical and managerial capacity of existing road authorities;  
 
•
To create employment opportunities in the road sector and alleviate poverty through creation 
of new jobs in road maintenance;  
 
•
To improve road safety;  
 
•
To improve road sector environmental management;  
 
•
To provide an enabling environment for improved rural transport services; and  
 
•
To develop and implement a framework for the management of community roads and 
promotion of community participation in road management.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Phase 2 this program includes the following components:  
 
•
Component 1 (US$35.0 million) - Civil works for road improvement: The civil work 
component will focus on: a) the rehabilitation of the paved road between Lusaka and Chirundu; 
b) the construction of Mufachani bridge; and c) the upgrading of a section of the Chipata to 
Mfuwe road.  
 
•
Component 2 (US$4.0 million) - Engineering and technical services: Technicalassistance for 
carrying out feasibility studies, engineering design, and supervision services for the rehabilitation 
and upgrading works under Component 1.  
 
•
Component 3 (US$3.0 million) - Institutional development and capacity building: Technical 
assistance and training in the areas of institutional development aimed at implementing GOZ's 
transport policy as well as the recommendations from ongoing institutional review study of the 
three road agencies. In addition this Component will support continued financing of the 
HIV/AIDS prevention program.  
 
•
Component 4 (US$7.0 million) - Road Safety: This will continue to support the activities 
initiated under Phase 1, namely: a) setting up of a road accident data base; b) establishment of 
vehicle inspection centers, and c) organization of road transport enforcement and regulation 
campaign.  
 
•
Component 5 (US$1.0 million) - Mobility improvement: This component is aimedat 
providing continued support for improving mobility on existing community roads for the poor in 
order to promote their economic and social development. It will include minor community 
transport infrastructure and intermediate means of transport using bicycles or animal driven 
means.  
 
Estimated cost: The estimated cost for all the above components including contingencies shown 
as unallocated is US$50 million over an implementation period of three years (7/1/2009 to 
6/30/2012). At this stage no donors co-financing is envisaged, although parallel financing from 
other donors similar to that underway as part of Phase 1 will occur.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The program and project covers the entire country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The current APL institutional set-up gives NRFA the overall fiduciary and coordinating role for 
the Program. This will be continued under Phase 2 to ensure that the recommendations of the 
Environmental Assessment are implemented and ensure that environmental and social 
assessment processes are followed according to national laws and regulations as well as Bank's 
safeguard policies. In order to strengthen RRMP's legal framework, NRFA will sign a Project 
Agreement with the Bank for Phase 2 as well as sign a subsidiary agreement with the 
Government.   
 
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTTR) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Chirundu/Lusaka road is already a paved road which will benefit from rehabilitation 
works that will not include any widening or changes of the existing alignment. Since a part of 
this road has already been rehabilitated under Phase 1, an EIA for this road dating back from 
2004 already exists and will be updated as part of RRMP Phase 2.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The Chipata/Mfuwe road consists of works to upgrade a section of an existing gravel road 
from the Malawi border to a game park to a paved standard. Since it is unclear at this stage 
which 10 km section of this 108 km road will be upgraded and to which technical standards (i.e., 
single or dual carriageway), the Team has left as To be Determined (TBD) for OP/BP 4.04 until 
such time when the full environmental and social assessment for this road becomes available 
(i.e., by December 2008).   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The Chipata/Mfuwe road consists of works to upgrade a section of an existing gravel road 
from the Malawi border to a game park to a paved standard. Since it is unclear at this stage 
which 10 km section of this 108 km road will be upgraded and to which technical standards (i.e., 
single or dual carriageway), the Team has left as To be Determined (TBD) for OP/BP 4.12 until 
such time when the full environmental and social assessment for this road becomes available 
(i.e., by December 2008).   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/04/2008 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguards documents will be prepared and shared with ASPEN for comments prior to 
disclosure in country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.  
 
The AFTTR Sector Management Unit has agreed to accept the transfer of the safeguards 
responsibilities for this project.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Pierre A. Pozzo di Borgo 
10/07/2008 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
10/07/2008 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
10/07/2008 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
