Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/08/2009 
Report No.:  49407
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P096131 
Project Name:  Zambia Malaria Booster Project 
Task Team Leader:  Monique Vledder 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 9, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTHE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (38%);Health (29%);Central 
government administration (18%);Other social services (15%) 
Theme:  Malaria (33%);Health system performance (17%);Other human development 
(17%);Participation and civic engagement (17%);Administrative and civil service reform 
(16%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Results-Based 
Financing 
11.00 
 
Russian Trust Fund 
6.85 
 Financing 
Gap 
-17.85
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The revised project development objective is to increase coverage  of interventions for 
malaria prevention and treatment and other key maternal and child health interventions. 
The target population is the population of Zambians living in all the 72 malarious districts 
of the country.  However, the priority groups will be children under the age of five years, 
pregnant women and all those infected with malaria.  
 
The specific objectives and targets of the project are to: (i) to increase the percentage of 
children under 5 years of age who sleep under a treated bed net from 38 percent to 60 
percent by 2012,  (ii) to increase the percentage of pregnant women who receive a 
complete course of intermittent presumptive treatment for malaria from 64% to 80% by 
2012 and (iii) to increase the percentage of women delivering in facilities by skilled birth 
Page  2
attendant from 34% to 50% by 2012. These indicators and targets are derived from the 
monitoring and evaluation framework for national programs.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project's contribution will be organized in three components, which comprise 
elements derived from the malaria strategic plan and the national health strategic plan.  
 
Component 1 (a): Strengthening the health system to improve service delivery:  This 
component will deal primarily with health system strengthening activities through the 
district basket pooled funding arrangement whereby all 72 district health management 
teams will receive incremental fund allocation to improve service delivery in the areas of 
maternal health, child health and malaria. Furthermore, one district per province (9 in 
total) will receive the results-based financing scheme. The component will deal with the 
supply-side constraints for expanding coverage of key interventions, such as Insecticide 
Treated Nets (ITN), Rapid Diagnostic Tests (RDTs) and other laboratory equipment, 
reproductive health commodities and contribute to alleviating the dire human resource 
situation in the health sector through support for non-monetary and monetary 
compensation to retain and increase productivity of critical staff.  The implementation of 
this component will be primarily through the district basket mechanism, whereby funds 
will be pooled with other partners to finance incremental operating costs for the districts.  
Large ticket items such as ITNs, emergency obstetric and neonatal care equipment and 
laboratory supplies will be centrally procured and distributed to the DHMTs as 
contributions to the basket in kind.  
 
Component 1 (b):  Improved environmental health management:  This sub-component 
of the project will finance activities aimed at improving the management of health care 
waste associated with malaria control and maternal and child health interventions. The 
project will support activities to address the weaknesses identified in the Health Care 
Medical Waste Plan.  
 
Component 2:  Community Booster Response to Malaria (COMBOR):  This component 
will deal with the demand-side constraints to effective malaria control programming.  For 
example, while ITN ownership by households is rising, actual use is lagging behind. This 
project component will support community demand-driven interventions: (i) directly 
through financing of sub-projects by community based organizations, and (ii) through the 
facilitation of interventions by communities and local leaders to strengthen the malaria 
control activities of other implementers.  The community response to malaria will help to 
both extend the geographic coverage of malaria interventions, particularly in the rural 
communities, and increase the use of the interventions.  It will involve the communities 
to promote the behavior change that is necessary for malaria interventions to be effective 
within them. The component will be piggy-backed on the brand name and network 
infrastructure of the CRAIDS demand-driven fight against HIV/AIDS. This community 
demand-driven component (COMBOR) will complement the more supply-oriented 
CBMPCP, which is under Component 1.  The activities to be supported under the 
COMBOR component will focus particularly on behavior change communication, 
Page  3
advocacy on the appropriate usage of malaria prevention interventions, and capacity 
building for malaria prevention and control at the community and district level.  
 
Component 3: Program Management:  This component will support strengthening the 
MOH at all levels  to provide technical leadership in the areas of malaria control, as well 
as maternal and child health, coordination and implementation of the program, human 
resource capacity strengthening and strengthen monitoring and evaluation of the 
interventions including support to improve the M&E systems. To enable operational 
learning, this component will support a rigorous impact evaluation combined with 
process and qualitative reviews to captures the effect of the project (particularly the 
results-based financing scheme) on coverage of key interventions, health outcomes and 
various aspects of the health system. In addition, this component will support the 
documentation of the RBF implementation process and development of relevant case 
studies on the Zambia RBF experience for national and international dissemination.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented in all the 72 districts of the country. The results-based 
financing program will be implemented in 1 district in its first phase, 9 additional districts 
in its second phase and possibly scaled-up to all 72 districts in its third phase.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Hermine De Soto (ECSSD) 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno (AFTEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Incremental Health Care Waste: there are no additional categories of health care waste 
that will be generated by the project. The inappropriate handling of infected materials 
constitutes a risk not only for the staff in hospitals and in municipalities who are involved 
Page  4
in health care waste handling and transportation, but also for families and street children 
who scavenge on dump sites, most which are inadequate.  
 
The existing health care waste management plan in the Ministry of Health has been 
revised and updated to include an amendment outlining progress to date on the 
implementation of the health care waste management plan and an activity plan for 
implementation during the extension of the restructured project. Given the nature of the 
activities, an emphasis will be put on the handling of medical waste at rural facilities in 
Zambia. This amendment will be disclosed at the Infoshop.  
 
Please note that the restructured project will not support the procurement of insecticides 
or DDT, which lowers the environmental risk of the project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No such long term impacts are foreseen.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
During the implementation of the project, the World Bank financed a safeguards activity 
plan that included activities, such as, the procurement of incinerators, capacity building 
of MOH and provincial staff in health care waste management, preparation and 
dissemination of waste management guidelines, rehabilitation of the environmental health 
school to start a B. Sc. program in Environmental Health. The Bank also provided 
support for a survey to review the health care waste management in Zambia, which was 
used to develop the updated Health Care Waste Management Plan 2008-2010. During 
regular supervision mission, including from a Sr. Environmental specialist, progress on 
the implementation of the environmental activity plan was reviewed. The implementation 
has been consistently rated as satisfactory. For all these reasons, it is perceived that the 
borrower has adequate capacity to plan and implement the measures described.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The regulatory agency for environmental issues in Zambia is the Environmental Council 
of Zambia (ECZ).  The key stakeholders are communities, civil society organizations, 
private sector and the Government.  During the preparation of the Malaria Booster 
Project a number of stakeholder consultations took place on vector control. Since the 
project restructuring does not trigger any new safeguards issues but lower the 
environmental risk of the project, no further consultations with stakeholders have been 
taken place as part of the restructuring.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 N/A 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/22/2009 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/15/2009 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/15/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  6
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Monique Vledder 
04/22/2009 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Paul-Jean Feno 
05/07/2009 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
05/13/2009 
Comments:   
