Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/29/2008 
Report No.:  AC3829
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Zambia 
Project ID:  P110458 
Project Name:  Water Sector Performance Improvement Project - Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader:  N. Jane Walker 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 25, 
2008 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2008 
Managing Unit:  AFTU1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (75%);Sewerage (25%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Administrative and civil service 
reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.00
1.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the original Water Sector Performance Improvement Project (WSPIP) as 
stated in the Financing Agreement (DFA) is to support the Recipient's efforts towards 
the:  
 
(i) improvement of access to, and sustainability of, the water supply and sanitation for 
services in Lusaka; and (ii) development of a comprehensive institutional structure 
supporting a coordinated approach to water supply and sanitation investments. The first 
objective is the responsibility of LWSC and the majority of project resources (95%) are 
devoted to this objective. The second objective is the responsible of the Ministry of Local 
Government and Housing (MLGH) and about 5% of the project supports the achievement 
of this objective.  
 
The revised objective of the Project, which incorporates this Additional Financing, is (i) 
to improve the technical efficiency and financial sustainability of LWSC and improve 
access to water supply and sanitation services for urban consumers in Lusaka Province, 
and (ii) to strengthen effectiveness of national water supply and sanitation planning.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The original project included two components: Component A, which provided support to 
LWSC for investment, reform, and operations, and Component B, which supported 
MLGH in developing a comprehensive approach to water supply and 
sanitation.Component A comprised four sub-components, including a sub-component to 
support implementation of the Development Financing Agreement for Performance 
Enhancement (DFAPE) (which included the financing of operational costs), and a sub-
component financing emergency goods and works for the repair of key system assets.  
 
Three urban districts have recently been added to LWSC's responsibilities.  The new 
districts urgently require both investments in water assets and operational cost support.  
For this reason, the original subcomponent financing goods and works will be expanded 
to cover the new districts; in addition, the sub-component will also finance operational 
cost support for the new districts.  The final major change in Component A is the addition 
of a new sub-component that will support the integration of the new districts into the 
corporate structure of LWSC.  
 
The revised project components are as follows:  
 
Component A:  Support to LWSC  
 
(a) 
support for the implementation of the Development Financing Agreement for 
Performance Enhancement (DFAPE);  
 
(b) 
goods and works for rehabilitation and operation of bulk water production, 
distribution systems, repair and extension of water and sewer networks and plants, and 
boreholes, including design and supervision services, and operational cost support;  
 
(c) 
design and implementation of a human resources strategy;  
 
(d) 
the preparation of designs, carrying out of feasibility studies, and completion of 
an environmental impact assessment for a follow-up project;  
 
(e) 
support for the restructuring of LWSC, aimed at integrating the management of 
the additional districts within LWSC’s corporate structure through the coordination of 
financial systems, human resource polices, investments in telecommunications and 
remote access systems, capacity development and community outreach programs.  
 
Component A will be supported through the provision of consultant services and 
training, goods, works, and operating costs, which will include licenses and fees, 
operating costs of vehicles, electricity and other utility costs, and logistical support.  
Specific project activities in the new districts under sub-component A (b) will support the 
immediate rehabilitation and augmentation of water and sewer/sanitation facilities.  In 
particular, production and treatment facilities will be rehabilitated to their original design 
capacity.  
 
Page  3
Component B:  Support to MLGH for the preparation of a coordinating mechanism for 
water supply and sanitation, including:  
 
(a) 
development of a national water supply and sanitation policy;  
 
(b) 
development of a national rural sanitation and hygiene program; and  
 
(c) 
support for the development of a financing mechanism for the water supply and 
sanitation sector.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project activities will take place at various locations in the districts of Kafue, Chongwe, 
Luangwa, and Lusaka.  As works involve both repairs to water supply infrastructure and 
repairs to and extension of water delivery infrastructure, minor, location-specific, and 
manageable environmental impacts are expected to exist during construction.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt (AFTEN) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Potential negative environmental and social impacts (loss of vegetation, water pollution, 
noise, disruption to traffic, pedestrian walkways as well as utility services, generation of 
sludge, destruction of property, stormwater entrainment) are expected to occur for short 
periods during the implementation of works financed by the Project.  The bulk of the 
impacts fall under construction-phase works, mainly trenching and excavation works. 
Trenching would be for water supply lines, which are mainly small diameter, and for 
sewer pipelines, which are wider in diameter. Trenches for the former will mostly be up 
to 1.5m in depth and approximately 0.5m wide.  Trenches for sewers will be of depths up 
Page  4
to 2m and widths up to 1.5m.  Secondary or indirect impacts of the trenching works will 
be disruptions to traffic, pedestrians, and safety issues where trenches are located along 
pedestrian pathways and where they may block access to property in both residential and 
commercial areas.  The remainder of the impacts will be site-specific -- within the LWSC 
operating sites in the three districts.  
 
Given its location, the proposed project has triggered O.P. 7.50 (Projects on 
International Waterways), because the water infrastructure to be rehabilitated under the 
project draws water from (i) the Zambezi river, which flows through eight countries, and 
(ii) the Kafue River, a sub-catchment situated entirely in Zambia of the Zambezi River.  
However, as the total amount of water that is abstracted from the Zambezi and the Kafue 
due to the rehabilitation work is about 0.001% and 1.04% of the average river flows, 
respectively, it has been determined that the exception provision of OP 7.50 applies and 
the requisite exception memorandum has been prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None of the environmental or social impacts are expected to be long term.  Overall, there 
is expected to be a significant net positive social and environmental benefit to the 
affected communities.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To ensure that the future rehabilitation activities are carried out in an environmentally 
and socially sustainable manner, the borrower has prepared (i) an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF); and (ii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
 
The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process (including a 
requirement for public consultations with relevant stakeholders and potentially affected 
persons during the screening process) which will be applied by qualified personnel to 
future rehabilitation activities. The ESMF includes an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP); Environmental Guidelines for Contractors; a summary of the 
Bank's safeguard policies; and provisions for an environmental training program. The 
RPF outlines the policies and procedures to be implemented by qualified personnel or 
consultants in the event that future rehabilitation activities involve land acquisition which 
might lead to loss of access to economic assets, loss of livelihoods and/or land. An RFP 
has been prepared in cases where civil works causes inpacts on assets and/or livelihoos. 
However it is not expected that the project will cause land acquistion and relocation.  
 
Both documents will be disclosed in Zambia and at the Bank's Infoshop prior to 
appraisal.   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders in the project include (a) government ministries and departments 
responsible for, among other things, the environment (Ministry of Tourism, Local 
Government and Housing, Agriculture and Cooperatives, Energy and Water 
Development, Health, Lands and the Lusaka City Council); (b) statutory bodies and 
parastatals (Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company; Zambia Electricity Supply 
Corporation; Environmental Council of Zambia; and National Institute and Scientific 
Research); and (c) communities.  
 
During the preparation of the ESMF, the consultant held (i) informal meetings at the 
community level in the areas of the works; (ii) ad hoc discussions with key government 
agencies and NGOs as appropriate; and (iii) a formal workshop for key stakeholders to 
present the draft report findings. Issues of concern included disturbance to water supply 
and sewer networks; loss of business; compensation of affected people; loss of farm land; 
as well as expectations that improved infrastructures will contribute to employment 
opportunities, improved quality of life. These concerns have been incorporated into the 
ESMF as appropriate, and further public consultations will take place during the 
environmental and social screening process which will be applied at the planning stage of 
future rehabilitation activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/22/2008 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 Yes 
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
09/22/2008 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
09/16/2008 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
09/22/2008 
 
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Was the document disclosed 
prior to appraisal?
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) 
review and approve the EA report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process 
framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector 
Manager review the plan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
N/A 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms N. Jane Walker 
09/23/2008 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt 
09/25/2008 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
09/29/2008 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
09/29/2008 
Comments:   
