Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC4485 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/06/2009 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Zimbabwe 
Project ID: P117212 
Project Name: Zimbabwe Emergency Agriculture Input Project 
Task Team Leader: David Rohrbach 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 2, 2009 
Estimated Board Date: July 15, 2009 
Managing Unit: AFTAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Crops (100%) 
Theme: Global food crisis response (100%) 
SPF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 Borrower 
0.00 
 
Global Food Crisis Response Program 
7.00
7.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To increase access to improved seeds among 300,000 smallholder farmers in targeted food-
insecure communal areas of Zimbabwe.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1. 
Sub-component 1.1: Direct Distribution of Maize Seed (US$5.4 million). The project will 
be implemented by GRM International (a private sector entity), and will pay for the purchase and 
distribution costs for approximately 2,750 tons of improved maize seed to be directly delivered 
to smallholder households classified as food insecure. The seed will be purchased through 
tender, to be undertaken by GRM in conjunction with Crown Agents.  Bidders will be eligible 
from domestic and regional seed producers who own certified seed of varieties released for sale 
in Zimbabwe, and suitable for production in the country's smallholder production zones.  The 
seed distribution will be targeted to rural farm households based in Zimbabwe's communal areas 
who have been unable to produce enough grain during the 2008/09 summer cropping season to 
meet their family consumption requirements. Higher priority will be provided to female headed 
households, and those with high dependency ratios caused by HIV/AIDS or similar health 
problems. In coordinating the project, GRM will oversee a network of about 20 NGOs, all of 
whom are well-experienced in working with local communities to identify the neediest farm 
Page  2
households who can make good use of the seed inputs provided. None of the seed will be 
distributed in Zimbabwe's newly resettled areas where land rights may still be contested.  The 
project will be undertaken within the framework of the DFID-funded Protracted Relief Program 
(PRP), which is the largest and most consistent source of agriculture assistance and input 
distribution for smallholders in Zimbabwe. Under GRM management, working with the NGO 
partners, the PRP has been providing poorer, small-scale farmers with seed and fertilizer for the 
past four years. This program also provides advice on conservation farming, assistance with 
water and sanitation, and funding for rural programs to ameliorate the effects of HIV/AIDS. The 
successful implementation of these efforts has encouraged participation in the PRP from the 
Governments of Australia, Netherlands, and the European Commission.  None of the seed will 
be distributed in Zimbabwe#s newly resettled areas where land rights may still be contested.  
Each designated household will receive 10 kg of certified maize seed, and approximately 
275,000 farm households will be assisted.  Distribution to the farmers must be completed by end 
October/early November, 2009 to meet summer planting requirements.  
 
2. 
Sub-component 1.2: Voucher Based Seed Distribution (US$0.7 million). The project will 
additionally pay for the purchase and distribution of approximately 250 tons of hybrid maize 
seed through rural retail shops in exchange for vouchers.  This is a pilot effort to work with the 
national seed industry to rebuild its retail distribution systems. This seed will be purchased 
through tender, undertaken by GRM in conjunction with Crown Agents following the same 
procedures as under Component 1.1 above.  Each farmer will receive a voucher redeemable for 
10 kg of certified maize seed at a designated retail shop. Approximately 25,000 households are 
expected to gain access to seed through these vouchers.  The same profile of food insecure 
households as in Component 1.1 will be targeted, the same time frame will apply, and the same 
land restrictions will obtain.  
 
3. 
Component 2. Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 0.84 million)  
 
Under this component, funds under the project will be provided to GRM as a grant, and GRM 
will be responsible for implementing all aspects of the project.  The decision to use GRM as 
grantee to implement ZEAIP assures access to the skills of a well experienced supervisory and 
implementation institution linked with more than 20 NGOs in the country.  The ZEAIP  
provision of maize seed is likely to be complemented by the provision of fertilizer funded by 
several sources, including DFID (under the PRP initiative), the proposed State and Peace 
Building Program (SPF) funded Community-Based Transitional Recovery Support Project 
(CTRSP),  and other donor support through the PRP framework.  A sub-set of these NGOs will 
also be contracted by GRM to monitor the satisfactory implementation of the seed voucher 
program, including provision of advice and guidance to farmers.  GRM will prepare terms of 
reference satisfactory to IDA for a project evaluation, which will be funded under the project and 
contracted by GRM to an independent entity unconnected with any of the implementing 
agencies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project would be broadly distributed amongst smallholder farmers in smallholder production 
zones located in Communal Areas only.  No holdings located on lands that have been involved in 
resettlement programs would be eligible.   
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS) 
Ms Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Although the pest management policy is triggered, a C classification is proposed for the 
reasons cited in the safeguard preparation plan.   
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  07/07/2009 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It should be noted that, although the Pest Management Safeguard Policy is triggered, a #C# 
classification is proposed for the following reasons.  The only use of pesticides is for the 
treatment of the seeds mostly against fungi and some soil insect pests. This treatment (mainly 
fungicide and some insecticide based) is undertaken by the seed companies in their facilities 
designed for such purposes and includes the use of adequate protective equipment.  The 
treatment is completed in these facilities prior to distribution to the farmers and/or retail 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
outlets.  The seed companies are well established local, regional and international entities 
accredited under Zimbabwean regulations to supply seed, and required to treat seed safely 
and effectively.  At least four of the prospective suppliers have entities with international 
reputations and with branch offices in several neighboring countries including South Africa.  
They have been leaders in research, particularly in the development of seed hybrids suitable 
for local conditions.  Their treatment of seeds with pesticides has been standard practice in 
Zimbabwe for many years, and is fully familiar to the smallholder farmers.  The pesticide 
treatment involves the use of fungicides and insecticides with technical active ingredients 
that are slightly hazardous (Pirimiphos-methyl is WHO class III) or unlikely to present acute 
hazard (Captan-based fungicides are WHO class U) according to the  WHO recommended 
classification of pesticides by hazard.  
 
It should also be noted that the project will comprise a one-time purchase to deal with the 
current food crisis, and involves the provision of seeds sufficient to produce subsistence 
quantities of grain to about 300,000 poor households.  None of the seeds are genetically 
modified.  Project implementation will be subject to the application of the Zimbabwe 
Pesticide Act of 2006.  
 
While the project does not finance the provision of fertilizer, it is likely that many of the 
beneficiaries will receive support for micro-dosing.  This will involve the application of very 
small quantities (10 to 20 kg) of Nitrogen fertilizer, which is about 20 to 25% of the 
recommended rate.  The application is so small, and the distribution of the farmers so widely 
spread, that the risks of run off are negligible.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David Rohrbach 
07/06/2009 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
07/06/2009 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
07/06/2009 
Comments:   
