Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2006 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/08/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P098358 
Project Name: Afghanistan Health (supplement) 
Task Team Leader: Benjamin P. Loevinsohn 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 23, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Health (90%);Central government administration (10%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Child health (P);Population and reproductive 
health (P);Other communicable diseases (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives are to: (i) assist the MOPH to achieve its stated goals of reducing the rates of 
infant and child mortality, maternal mortality, child malnutrition, and fertility through expanding 
delivery of the BPHS and increasing equity in the delivery of services; (ii) strengthen the 
Government by increasing MOPH’sstewardship over the sector including a greater role in health 
care financing, coordination of partners, and overseeing the work of NGOs; and (iii) build the 
capacity of Afghan health workers to provide and manage health services.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Extension and Expansion of the BPHS: The supplemental grant will finance the expansion of the 
PPA approach in which NGOs compete for contracts with the MOPH to deliver the BPHS. The 
eight new areas (clusters) that will be covered are not currently being served and contain about 
1.15 million people in remote and sometimes insecure parts of the country (including Paktika 
and Paktiya). The new PPA areas have been selected by the MOPH in coordination with other 
partners (particularly USAID) and generally represent districts where no clinics have been 
established and where health services have rarely been provided. The clusters vary in size from 
Page  2
65,000 to 230,000 population and, except in one case, represent groups of districts, rather than 
whole provinces. The supplemental grant will also allow currently existing PPAs that cover 7 
provinces to be continued for another 18 months as well as expand one PPA, in Badghis 
Province, to cover the whole province, instead of the current three out of seven districts. When 
the new PPAs are signed, almost five million people will be receiving the BPHS from PPA 
NGOs. The supplemental grant will support the continuation of the MOPH-SM in three 
provinces near Kabul with an estimated population of 1.1 million.  
 
Polio Eradication and Measles/Neo-Natal Tetanus Control: The supplemental financing will 
provide $6 million to support polio eradication efforts during 2006 and 2007. These will 
primarily be National Immunization Days (NIDs) which provide oral polio vaccine to all 
children under five years of age and Vitamin A to children 9 to 60 months. The supplemental 
grant will also provide $2 million to support measles and neo-natal tetanus campaigns aimed at 
significantly reducing the threat to child survival that these diseases represent. The funding will 
be used to procure vaccine, needles, and syringes, through UNICEF, while operational costs are 
picked up by other partners.  
 
Beginning to Strengthen Hospital Management: The supplemental grant will finance a series of 
annual hospital assessments to be carried out by a third party. These assessments will provide the 
MOPH with independent information about quality of care, utilization, equity, and availability of 
inputs in all district and provincial level hospitals in the country. By tracking hospital 
performance, the MOPH will be able to judge the effectiveness of ongoing efforts by the MOPH 
itself and USAID to strengthen hospital management and make course corrections. The 
supplement will also finance the recruitment of an international hospital policy consultant to 
assist the MOPH over the next two years.  
 
Enhancing Stewardship Functions, Including Capacity Building: The additional funding will 
support the training of approximately 200 new community mid-wives and about 1,000 new 
community health workers (CHWs). The MOPH will carry out a survey of central and provincial 
MOPH managerial staff that examines what they think they’ve learned in the last few years, what 
things they would like to learn, and what sorts of thing they likely need to learn in order to be 
effective managers. The results of the survey will guide future capacity building efforts. The 
supplemental grant will continue to 2008 existing monitoring and evaluation activities and the 
building of central and provincial government capacity.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The supplemental project will be implemented in the 11 provinces covered by the original 
project. Seven additional provinces have been included in an effort to expand services to remote 
and sometimes insecure areas.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As part of the original project, the MOPH implemented environmental policies to address waste 
management. After production and distribution of guidelines, waste management has greatly 
improved: a third party assessment found proper disposal of sharps in 46% of health facilities 
studied in September, 2004. This increased to 76% of health facilities in May, 2005. The MOPH 
is determined to maintain and further strengthen the waste disposal mechanisms set in place so as 
to reach 100% coverage of health facilities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  3
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An environmental assessment was carried out in 2003 as part of the preparation of the initial 
grant. The results of this assessment were used to formulate health care waste management 
policies by the Ministry of Public Health. The progress of implementation of the policies is being 
tracked through annual health facility surveys (which show a significant improvement in waste 
management). Hence, a new environmental assessment is not required.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/01/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
N/A   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Benjamin P. Loevinsohn 
12/04/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/04/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Anabela Abreu 
 
Comments:   
