Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC497 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 20, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Afghanistan 
Project ID: P083964 
Project Name: Education Quality 
Improvement Program 
Task Team Leader: Keiko Miwa 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 10, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2004 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for 
the knowledge economy (S);Gender (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Christophe Bosch 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IDA: 60 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
The project will improve the quality of educational inputs and processes as a foundation for a 
long-term strategy to improve the quality of educational outcomes. This will be achieved through 
the investment in human resources (teachers, principals and educational administration 
personnel), physical facilities, promotion of school-based management and capacity building of 
provincial and district education departments. The project will also promote education for girls 
by emphasizing the priority of female teachers and students in each component activity. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
Component 1.  Quality Improvement 
1.1.  Development 
of Teachers and 
Principals  
 
A program for in-service certificate-based training of teachers covering 
approximately one-third of the teachers every year a period of three 
years; the first priority will be female teachers. Support will be provided 
to the Ministry of Education (MOE) to develop a comprehensive 
development program (possibly flexible modular type) for teachers and 
principals. 
1.2.  School 
Improvement Grant  
School-level grants based on school improvement plans developed by the 
School Management Committees, with the active participation and 
oversight from communities, and technical assistance provided by 
provincial and district education departments. Capacity building will be 
provided to schools to develop school improvement plans, manage 
financial accounts, and mobilize communities. 
 
 
Page  2
 
 
1.3.  Development 
of MOE, provincial 
and district 
education 
departments  
Technical and financial support to PEDs and DEDs to build their 
institutional and physical capacity, including training and cross-
fertilization in support of school-based management for PED and DED 
staff.   
 
Component 2.  Construction and Rehabilitation of Schools  
2.1. Construction 
and rehabilitation 
of primary, middle 
and secondary 
schools 
Finance existing government-registered schools with teachers on payroll 
(i.e., no significant implications for recurrent costs except O&M), with a 
priority on girls schools, co-ed schools and boys schools which plan to 
open up sections for girls. 
 
Component 3.  Policy Development and Monitoring & Evaluation  
3.1.  Policy 
Development  
Continuing technical assistance for the ongoing Emergency Education 
Project to help the MOE implement a medium-term policy framework 
and make necessary adjustments and prepare a sound annual National 
Development Budget. Technical assistance will also support the annual 
exercise of data collection from schools, utilizing the data for planning 
and decision making.   
3.2   Monitoring & 
Evaluation  
Baseline and follow-up surveys at the end of the second year; annual 
surveys to monitor the cost, impact, and implementation of the school-
based funding scheme; annual updating of the school mapping database 
and evaluation of construction progress; and the introduction of 
appropriate student assessment through a pilot activity.  
 
D.  Project Location  
 
Development of teachers and principals is expected to cover a large portion (if not all) of the 
country.  Provinces and districts to be supported by school improvement grants are not yet 
decided. Priorities will be given to provinces which received comparatively less support in the 
past, and lower enrollment especially for girls. Provinces and districts for school construction 
and rehabilitation are not yet decided but will be decided based on coordination with other 
donors, needs, implementation feasibility and priority for girls’ schools. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
As a result of more than two decades of conflict, exodus of trained personnel, low salaries, and 
the lack of exposure to new approaches, the Borrower’s institutional capacity is generally weak, 
especially in such specialized areas as safeguard policies. To address this issue, IDA is preparing 
a Technical Assistance project on safeguard issues for key ministries including the MOE. 
Page  3
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
X 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because of school rehabilitation construction activities although no new 
land acquisition is envisaged.
 
The project will apply the principals of the Environmental and 
Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) for emergency projects in Afghanistan. 
 
The relevant elements of the Codes of Practice contained in the ESSF will be reviewed, and any 
proposed enhancements will be incorporated in the ESSF.  
 
An Environmental Specialist will be working with the government and IDA teams to help 
facilitate the application of the environmental framework for Afghanistan. A Social Specialist 
will also be working with the team to help on issues related to community involvement in new 
schools.   
 
The voluntary contribution of land by the community, where necessary, will follow the 
procedures established in other ongoing/planned projects in Afghanistan and will ensure that the 
proceedings are conducted in a transparent manner and are appropriately documented. 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
 
[ ] A   [ X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
April 2004 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Keiko Miwa 
1/15/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
2/20/2004 
Comments 
Acting Sector Manager: 
Rosita Van Meel 
2/19/2004 
Comments 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
