                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                         Report No.: AC1337



Date ISDS Updated: February 17, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

 Country: Afghanistan                               Project ID: P089040
 Project Name:                                      Task Team Leader:
 Strengthening Higher Education Program             Keiko Miwa
 Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 2005        Estimated Board Date: May 19, 2005
 Managing Unit: SASHD                               Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan
 Sector: Tertiary education (75%)                   Theme: Education for the knowledge economy (P);
 Vocational training (25%)                          Gender (S); Other financial and private sector
                                                    development (S); Education for all (S)
 Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Christophe Bosch (Environment) and Asta Olesen
 (Social)
 Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 40.0
 IDA: 40.0

B. Project Objectives

The development objective of the proposed program is to progressively restore basic operational
performance at a group of core universities in Afghanistan. This will provide an institutional base for an
agenda focusing on tertiary education development, capacity building and reform.

The proposed program is envisaged as the first-phase of a long-term higher education development in
Afghanistan. In addition, it aims to act as a catalyst to attract various resources to Afghan tertiary
education with a long-term development framework.

C. Project Description

The program will support the strategic planning and implementation of the development and reform
program at key higher education institutions through block grant (investment) and university partnership
program (software). This is envisaged as the first phase of the Bank's long-term support in the
development of higher education system in Afghanistan.

Component 1. Program Development and Quality Improvement in Key Higher Education
Institutions (US$38.5 million)

1.1. University Partnership Programs (US$7.5 million)

This component would facilitate and finance partnership program agreements for three universities in
Kabul (Kabul Education University, Kabul Technical University, Kabul University) and four regional
universities (Heraat, Balkh, Nangarhar, Kandahar) with established foreign universities, including those
from the Region. Foreign universities are expected to contribute to a share of the financing for this

objective. Financial and technical contributions from foundations will be actively sought in the process.
The partnership program would include, but not be limited to:

   Support for the strategic development planning process at national and institutional levels;
   Support for curriculum revision and development;
   Support for preparing facility (including library, lab) development plan;
   Visiting professorships in Afghanistan for the partner institutions;
   Fellowships for Afghan professors to study at partner institutions;
   Joint-research and publication program; and
   Support in administrative reforms.

Priorities will be given to faculties which address the national development needs and enhances national
identify of Afghanistan, including, engineering, agriculture, finance, administration, IT, public health, and
literature/languages.

Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the institution(s) in Afghanistan and an overseas
university will be signed for three years. However, the annual renewal of the MOU will be subject to the
satisfactory performance of the partner university.

1.2. Block Grants to Universities/Faculties (US$31 million)

To complement Component 1.1, block grants would be awarded to key faculties and universities, with
annual renewal subject to adequate performance against targets. The seven universities listed in
component 1.1 will be participating in the block grants. First, faculty would develop a strategic
development plan with technical support from the faculty of partner universities. Based on the plan and
the prioritization of university and faculty needs, grant proposals would be prepared. As part of the grant
proposal preparation, at least two consultations with faculty and students are required to ensure that
prioritization of the institution's needs have been decided upon in a consultative manner. An independent
committee would evaluate the grant proposals, ensuring that it is focused on outcomes, and award the
block grants. The independent committee to evaluate the block grant proposal would consist of: Deputy
Ministers of Higher Education (Administration and Academic Affairs), the director of planning in
MOHE, a representative from the private sector, and a representative from a "peer" university. Criteria
and positive and negative lists of block grants will be agreed upon before the program effectiveness.

The usage of the grants and achievement of early targets will be assessed by an independent committee.
Upon successful implementation of an annual plan and the preparation of the following year plan, the
next tranche of block grants would be released. Bi-annual meetings will be held for participating
universities/faculties to share the experience of strategic planning and block grant implementation, which
will create opportunities for cross-fertilization.

Three universities in Kabul and two in provinces will begin the block grant during the first year of
program implementation. Based on the lessons learned from the first year, the other two universities in
provinces will begin the block grant program from the second year.

Component 2. Higher Education System Development (US$1.5 million)

2.1 Support for New Governance System (US$0.75 million)

Technical assistance would be made available to the Ministry of Higher Education to define the
relationship between the Ministry and higher education institutions and to facilitate/promote the
autonomy and accountability of the institutions. A simple and decentralized Management Information

System will be developed. Support would also be given to review the financing strategies of higher
education, including rationalizing of funding formula, mobilizing of external resources. Support would be
given to institutions to implement credit system, and to address any other institutional development plans.

Technical assistance will also be provided to advise the government on the reform of the employment
structure including career paths, salary scale and incentive system (including the opportunity to consult)
of the university professors.

2.2 Support for a Quality Assurance, Accreditation System (US 0.75 million)

Support would be provided for the development of an autonomous accreditation and quality assurance
system for both public and private universities. One of the options will be link up with a regional
accreditation and/or quality assurance body.

D. Project location (if known)

Three universities in Kabul (Kabul Education University, Kabul Technical University, Kabul University)
and four regional universities (Heraat, Balkh, Nangarhar, Kandahar). Technical assistance would also be
made available to the MOHE in Kabul.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


                   Safeguard Policy
 Applicable?
                   If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
       [ ]         Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

       [ ]         Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

       [ ]         Pest Management (OP 4.09)

       [ ]         Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

       [ ]         Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

       [ ]         Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

       [ ]         Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

       [ ]         Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)

       [ ]         Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*

       [ ]         Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ ] B [ X] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)



*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims on the
disputed areas

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

The proposed program will be prepared under the Bank's Operational Policy 8.50 Emergency Recovery
Assistance. The program is classified as environmental category "C." No construction, land acquisition or
other activities which could trigger safeguard policies are supported by the program.

A Quality Enhancement Review was held in October 2004.

IV. APPROVALS


 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                       Keiko Miwa                                       2/17/2005
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards                     Frederick Edmund Brusberg                          Date
 Coordinator:
    Comments
 Sector Manager:                         Michelle Riboud                                    Date
    Comments

