Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/18/2005 
Report No.:  AC1585
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P089100 
Project Name:  Regional Trade Facilitation Project (ATI) Supplemental Credit 
Task Team Leader:  Sherri Ellen Archondo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 31, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTFS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and contractual savings (100%) 
Theme:  Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Export 
development and competitiveness (S);International financial architecture (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
12.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall project development objective is to contribute to poverty alleviation through 
private sector led growth in participating countries by improving access to financing for 
productive transactions and cross-border trade. The project aims to bring together a group 
of countries in the Southern and Eastern African regions that are willing to address the 
market?s perception of risk in Africa by setting up a credible insurance mechanism.  This 
insurance scheme is managed by the African Trade Insurance Agency (ATI), a 
multilateral institution established by treaty.  ATI currently has ten member countries and 
anticipates increasing its membership to include countries in West and Central Africa.   
 
3. Project Description 
The original project, approved in 2001, consists of Political Risk Insurance Facilities 
(PRIF) for participating countries, and financing for the start-up operational costs of ATI. 
The proposed Supplemental Credit to ATI includes two components: (i) additional 
funding for ATI's operating costs; and (ii) technical assistance.  
 
(i) ATI's operating costs: The first component of the proposed supplemental credit is to 
replenish the credit for ATI's operational costs in light of ATI's current and projected 
cash-flows.  Operating expenses of ATI including salaries, general administration costs, 
Page  2
consultants, travel costs and other miscellaneous expenses would be covered by the 
supplemental credit.  
 
(ii) Technical assistance:  The second component of this credit is to provide technical 
assistance to ATI to build its capacity for new product development. It is foreseen that 
ATI will hire consultants to: (i) develop an operations manual and provide training in 
credit assessment and financial and risk analysis for the underwriting of large 
transactions; (ii) develop an operations manual and provide training in credit assessment 
and financial and risk analysis for the underwriting of small and medium sized 
transactions; and (iii) conduct a feasibility study on the establishment of a database on 
commercial banks in ATI member States to support ATI?s underwriting function and 
provide information to third parties on these banks to attract additional financing.  
 
The proposed Supplemental Credit to Burundi would provide additional funding for 
Burundi's Insurance Facility under the RTFP. Transactions in ATI's pipeline have 
exhausted the capacity of Burundi's Facility  This component will increase the size of the 
Facility to ensure that ATI can meet demand.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
AFRICAN TRADE INSURANCE AGENCY (ATI)  
 
Nairobi, Kenya (Regional Implementing Agency)  
 
Contact Persons:  
 
Mr. Caroli Ochola Omondi, Acting Chief Executive  
 
Caroli.Ochola@Africa-ECA.com  
 
Underwriting Department  
 
Email: underwriting@ati-aca.com  
 
Tel: +254-20-271-9727 or 272-0999  
 
Fax: +254-20-271-9701  
 
Project will be implemented in E. Africa Region, currently covering 10 countries.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTSD) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The sub-projects supported by the project are demand driven and thus are not known in 
advance.  The environmental category of the project is therefore "Financial Intermediary" 
(FI).  ATI?s Operations Manual takes this into account and allows for different standards 
to apply for projects of different environmental risk categories. As a FI project, the 
Operational Manual clearly indicates that, before approving a sub-project, ATI must 
verify through its own staff, outside experts, and/or existing environmental institutions, 
that the sub-project meets the environmental requirements of the appropriate national 
guidelines and procedures, and is consistent with OP/BP/GP/4.10 and other applicable 
environmental safeguard policies of the World Bank.  
 
The project?s environmental guidelines reflect the fact that the political risk insurance 
that will be made available under the project will cover short-term trade transactions, and 
that quick responses to applicants will be key to the success of the project. Therefore the 
environmental screening procedures are as streamlined as possible, particularly when the 
projects are expected to have minimal environmental impact.  
 
The Operations Manual includes standard guidelines and procedures for all participating 
countries and provides detailed guidance for ATI?s staff.  The manual includes standard 
environmental screening categories, descriptions of the types of projects that would fall 
under each category, and environmental screening forms to be filled out by applicants 
and ATI. The manual also establishes the steps to be taken by applicants applying for 
political risk insurance regarding the provision of environmental information on the 
project, and the applicants? responsibility to provide truthful and accurate information in 
their application(s), at the risk of being denied coverage if untruthful information is found 
to have been provided.  It also describes how ATI will assess the potential environmental 
impact of, and environmentally screen projects applying for insurance using the 
information provided by the applicant.  
 
Page  4
In addition, the manual contains up-to-date information on national environmental laws, 
regulations and policies, specifies national requirements and circumstances, and includes 
an interim policy framework based on World Bank standards for countries where national 
requirements are not acceptable.  It also lists the ministries/agencies with which ATI 
needs to communicate to obtain information on the projects/companies applying for 
political risk insurance (status of their licenses to operate, etc.), and contains a list of 
banned import goods.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
none   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
none   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The operations manual clear defines the procedures which the implementing agency 
(ATI) will follow upon receiving requests for insurance.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The operations manual was initially disclosed in 2001 prior to appraisal of the original 
project.  This supplemental credit has not warranted any necessary changes to the current 
procedures.  For convenience we are resubmitting the operations manuals to InfoShop for 
disclosure in connection with this supplement.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2000 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/10/2002 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/10/2001 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Sherri Ellen Archondo 
05/13/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
05/18/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
05/18/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
05/18/2005 
Comments:   
