Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1478 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/15/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P094103 
Project Name: Regional Communications Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Mavis A. Ampah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 31, 2006 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (60%);General information and communications sector 
(20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Trade facilitation and market access (P);Infrastructure 
services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To support populations and businesses across the Eastern & Southern Africa region to have 
access to quality and affordable telecommunications services.  This is an engine of shared 
growth achieved by (i) accelerating the physical rollout of backbone infrastructure (investment 
intervention based on public-private partnerships to leverage private sector investment in 
infrastructure) and (ii) removing monopoly regimes through policy and regulatory support to 
ensure that once in place, the infrastructure is accessible to all operators on open, transparent and 
non-discriminatory terms.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed 10-year, 3-phase APL (RCIP 1, 2 & 3) will assist Eastern and Southern African 
countries to implement a strategy of effective connectivity by (i) offering technical assistance to 
promote further sector liberalization and resolve market efficiency gaps, (ii) financing 
coordinated backbone deployment to avoid redundant infrastructure initiatives and focus on 
Page  2
missing links, (iii) designing public private partnership (PPP) arrangements to leverage private 
sector investment.  
 
RCIP 1 will include two main components:  
 
.
Policy Reform and Capacity Building Technical Assistance Support (USD 10 million 
IDA contribution).    This component will provide technical assistance to and training of staff of 
relevant National and Regional organizations to accelerate market liberalization and cross-border 
connectivity, especially in those countries which are lagging on the reform agenda.  This will 
include updating legal and regulatory frameworks, ensuring competitively priced wholesale 
network access, simplifying licensing procedures and increasing transparency.  In addition, 
detailed feasibility studies will be conducted on the cross-border links of the countries 
subsequently involved in RCIP 2 and 3.  
 
.
Infrastructure Financing (USD 90 million IDA Contribution).    This component will 
provide public financing and guarantee support to leverage private investment in a submarine 
cable from Eritrea to South Africa, mainly in international waters, and landing points along the 
coast of East Africa, as well as terrestrial links to the capitals of coastal countries and hinterland 
champions. The balance of the funding would be mainly from private sources, IFC and other 
development partners (total estimated costs for the project are $300m for the submarine cable 
and terrestrial links to selected capitals). In order to ensure the most efficient use of IDA 
resources, project funding of infrastructure will be limited to countries that have opened, or have 
committed to open,  their international segment to fair competition through simplified cross-
border interconnection regimes and licensing procedures,  and are willing to ensure open access 
to the cable. Triggers based on these competitive and open access principles will be considered 
in determining the transition from RCIP 1 to subsequent phases of the program.  
 
RCIP 2 and 3 will depend on detailed feasibility studies,  to be carried out under RCIP1, and 
will place significant emphasis on further development of cross-border terrestrial backbones to 
connect landlocked countries in the region to the most appropriate landing points in neighboring 
coastal countries, as well as terrestrial backbones to support national backbone infrastructure 
building within countries.  Landlocked countries in Eastern and Southern Africa are especially 
disadvantaged as they need to interconnect with incumbents or national long distance operators 
in intermediary countries to backhaul traffic to the landing point and often pay exorbitant prices 
in the process.  Effective cross-border links and conducive regulatory frameworks will be 
supported under these phases.  National backbones of participating countries will also need to be 
developed to further deepen diffusion and use, and subsequently traffic generation, in the region.  
 
The ISDS deals only with the first phase of the program (RCIP 1)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
RCIP1 will involve the participation of up to 8 coastal countries (Madagascar, Mozambique, 
Tanzania, Kenya, Somalia, Djibouti, Eritrea and Sudan ) and up to 3 landlocked countries (such 
as Uganda, Rwanda). The choice of countries in RCIP 1 is based on a critical mass of regional 
reforms, and a combination of factors including a credible national commitment to reform with a 
Page  3
clear timetable, geographic proximity and membership in an existing regional consortium set up 
to develop the cable project.  
 
Note 1: Since Sudan and Somalia are currently not World Bank borrowers, other World Bank 
Group instruments (including IFC and MIGA) may be considered to address their specific 
contexts.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The NEPAD e-Africa Commission is receiving Engineering support from the Development Bank 
of Southern Africa through which it is able to plan effective deployment of cable and terrestrial 
infrastructure.  NEPAD, or one of the concerned regional economic commissions, may be the 
organization that oversees preparation of the overall environmental and social impact assessment 
of the project, but the institutional arrangements for this work are still under discussion. The 
countries that are expected to develop the cable have in their respective countries regulatory, 
social and environmental guidelines for developing communications infrastructure. The capacity 
of these institutions will be reviewed and recommendations will be provided during the 
environmental and social impact assessment study.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The impacts of submarine cable installation are typically relatively minor.  However, the 
connections from the main cable to individual countries may affect coral reefs, mangroves and 
other coastal ecosystems.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Feasibility studies will provide more information to determine the extent to which the 
locations of coral reefs will affect decisions on alignments of the main cable in the Red Sea and 
Gulf of Aden and the connecting cables to individual countries   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
ROWs and terminal facililty locations will need to be sensitive to presence of physical 
cultural property.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is probable that land will have to be acquired for the structures at the landward ends of 
connecting cables and for rights of way from the sea to those structures.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The main cable will pass through international marine waters and the connecting cables will 
transit the territorial waters of at least eight countries.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/31/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  Detailed 
environmental studies are normally conducted by the cable-laying company as part of final 
alignment selection after award of contract, and this will be the case for the main submarine 
cable.  Environmental impacts will need to be considered country-by-country for connecting 
cables and on-land facilities.  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) may be needed for 
individual countries, depending on needs for land acquisition.  The safeguards studies to be 
completed prior to appraisal will result in an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 
Framework (ESMF) that provides an overview of the sensitive features of the environment 
that could be affected and a description of the project activities that could cause impacts. The 
ESMF will provide the guidelines for the detailed studies for the main cable and for 
individual country environmental assessments and/or environmental management plans.  The 
ESMF will also contain principles and guidelines for preparation of RAPs, in lieu of a 
resettlement policy framework which would not be a meaningful document for a projet 
affecting so many countries.  The ESMF will be disclosed in participating countries and the 
InfoShop, and it will include procedures for disclosing the reports from the more detailed 
studies that will be conducted during implementation.  The key technique for minimizing and 
managing the environmental and social impacts of the project is sound selection of cable 
alignments, and this will be the main focus of the safeguards work.  The target date for 
completion of the ESMF is October 2005   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mavis A. Ampah 
04/11/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/11/2005 
Comments:  Approval from Thomas Walton received via e-mail on April 12, 2005 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Pierre A. Guislain 
04/11/2005 
Comments:  Comments from Pierre Guislain received April 14, 2005 and incorporated in the 
document. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
