                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                   Report No: AC508
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/17/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: AFRICA                                                Project ID: P082502
Project: 3A-West African Gas Pipeline (IDA S/UP)               Task Team Leader: Michel E. Layec
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 16, 2004                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: November 30, 2004                               IDA Amount ($m):
                                                                     IDA GUARANTEE: 50
Managing Unit: AFTEG                                           Sector: Power (80%); Oil and gas (20%)
Guarantee: [ ] Partial Credit [X] Partial Risk                 Theme: Regional integration (P)
Status: Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The proposed West African Gas Pipeline (WAGP or the Project) will contribute to:

(a)      improving the competitiveness of the energy sectors in Ghana, Benin, and Togo by promoting the
use of cheaper and environmentally cleaner gas from Nigeria in lieu of solid and liquid fuels for power
generation and other industrial, commercial uses, and diversifying energy supply sources; and

(b)      fostering regional economic and political integration that would support economic growth, and in
particular the development of the West Africa electricity market.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

Overview of the Pipeline System

The West African Gas Pipeline is a regional energy infrastructure project for West Africa.

The Project aims to construct a new high-pressure natural gas pipeline, which will supply natural gas from
Nigeria to markets in Benin, Ghana, and Togo.

The gas to be transported in the new pipeline will be produced and processed in the western part of the
Niger Delta in Nigeria. From there, it will be transported via an existing high-pressure gas pipeline, the
Escravos-Lagos Pipeline System (ELPS), to the existing terminus of that system near Lagos, Nigeria,
where the new pipeline will commence.

From that point, the new pipeline will run about 56 km onshore, to the Nigerian coast, and from there
straight out to sea. From there it will run in a westerly direction roughly parallel to the coast, generally
about 15 to 20 km offshore, in water depths ranging from about 15 to 70 meters. The initial construction
of the WAGP will terminate at Aboadze in western Ghana, the site of the Takoradi Thermal Power
Stations.

Lateral pipelines will be laid, to permit natural gas to be delivered along the way, at regulation and
metering stations to be situated at landing points at Cotonou in Benin, Lomé in Togo, and Tema (near
Accra) in Ghana.

                                                                           2
                                                                                                         ISDS




                                     WEST AFRICAN GAS
                                     PIPELINE PROJECT


                                                                              Niger
                       Mali


                             Burkina Faso


                                                     B
                                              T      E
                                             O       N        NIGERIA
                                             G        I
                               GHANA         O       N


                                                           Lagos
                                              Lomé Cotonou
                                        Tema

                             Takoradi                            Escravos




The total length of the new pipeline will be approximately 678 km, including the length of lateral pipelines.

The estimated initial construction cost of the WAGP is US$ 520 million, and prior to commencing
construction the Sponsors (see below) of the Project will have spent about US$70 million. This
construction cost estimate has been determined via a competitive bidding process.

The initial installed capacity will be about 200 MMscf/day. In addition, the pipeline will be sized to cater
for expansion to meet anticipated future growth in demand, up to a maximum capacity expected to be
about 470 MMscf/day. The cost of the several stages of expansion to achieve maximum capacity will be
approximately US$ 115 million. An investment decision to construct the new pipeline is expected in
late-2004. This would lead to pipeline startup in late-2006.

From time to time, Nigerian Gas Company (NGC) is expected to incur some expenditure in upgrading
ELPS for the additional WAGP volumes of gas and interconnections for inputs and output, as well as some
additional operation and maintenance expenses associated with the additional volumes. NGC will recover
its investments and additional costs through transportation charges under its Gas Transportation
Agreements (GTAs) with N-Gas, the newly formed gas trading company for WAGP.

After about five years, the Producers (see below) are also expected to incur some costs in upgrading and
installing gas gathering systems and possibly gas treatment facilities upstream of ELPS, in the oil
production areas of the Niger Delta and elsewhere. The Producers will recover their investments and other
costs through gas sales under their contracts with N-Gas or any other entity that ships gas through WAGP.

The Gas Producers

The gas to be transported in WAGP will be gas produced from the western part of the Niger Delta in
Nigeria. Two existing oil-producing joint ventures will be producing and processing the gas. One is a joint
venture of Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation (60%) and Chevron Nigeria Limited (40%). The
other is a joint venture involving NNPC (55%) and local affiliates of Shell (i.e., SPDC) (30%), TOTAL
S.A. (i.e., Elf) (10%), and Eni S.p.A. (i.e., Agip) (5%).

                                                       3
                                                                                                           ISDS


Under 20-year contracts, the two joint ventures will each supply 50% of the gas to be supplied for WAGP,
up to 120 MMscf/day. Hence, the total proportions of gas supply are:

                  NNPC:                                            57.50%
                  CNL:                                             20.00%
                  SPDC:                                            15.00%
                  Elf:                                              5.00%
                  Agip:                                             2.50%

In addition, backup arrangements are to be implemented between the two joint ventures to provide
additional security of supply.

The contract price of gas commodity is US$ 0.50 per MMBtu, escalating with inflation and an oil index.

Ownership of the Pipeline System

To date, the Project has been sponsored and funded by a six-company consortium that in August 1999 was
mandated by the Governments of Benin, Ghana, Nigeria, and Togo to develop the WAGP. Chevron
Nigeria Limited, the Nigerian affiliate of ChevronTexaco Corporation, is the managing Sponsor. Those six
companies or their affiliates are expected to own the Project company which in turn will own and operate
the new pipeline.

The pipeline will be owned and operated by a newly formed company, WAPCo, which is incorporated in
Bermuda. A comprehensive shareholders agreement for WAPCo has been executed, under which each
member of that six-company consortium has ownership entitlements in WAPCo. Final ownership of
WAPCo will depend on the participants making the necessary capital contributions which are provided for
in that agreement, but at this stage the following corporations or their respective affiliates (Sponsors) are
expected to be the participants in WAPCo in the following percentages:

                     ChevronTexaco Corporation:                                 36.7%
                     Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation:                   25.0%
                     Royal Dutch / Shell:                                       18.0%
                     Government of Ghana:                                       16.3%
                     Societé Beninoise de Gaz SA:                                 2.0%
                     Societé Togolaise de Gaz SA:                                 2.0%

The latter two companies are two small private companies based in Benin and Togo, respectively, that are
expected to develop local distribution systems for gas transported in the WAGP.

Technical Information

The pipeline will be a 20-inch lined pipeline. Initial installed capacity will be about 200 MMscf/day, with
incremental expansion of capacity planned, up to an expected ultimate design capacity of 470 MMscf/day.
The pipeline size has been chosen on the basis of overall minimum transportation cost (using the concept of
the weighted average tariff detailed in the IPA) and other aspects including operational considerations.

The development plan envisages a compression station being constructed at Lagos Beach, the last point
where the pipeline is onshore in Nigeria before heading offshore. This compression station will
subsequently be expanded as the pipeline capacity is increased in future years to meet additional demand.

The compression installed initially will be 2 x 12,500 horsepower centrifugal units (one unit as 100%
standby). This will be capable of being increased by adding an additional four more 12,500 horsepower

                                                         4
                                                                                                            ISDS


units in future years to gain the ultimate expected capacity of 470 MMscf/day.


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project area, from Ghana east to Nigeria, lies along the Gulf of Guinea shelf. The continental shelf is
narrow in the Project area, ranging from 10 km to 90 km in width. The shelf breaks into the slope at
approximately the 100 m isobath. A reef of ancient, fossilized coral lines the seaward edge of the
continental shelf throughout the Project area. The onshore part of the Project in Nigeria lies in the
southwest part of the country. The geology of this area is mostly sedimentary, with five major geological
formations in this area: recent alluvium; coastal plain sands; Ilaro Formation of sands, clays, and shales;
Ewekoro Formation of shales and limestones; and the Abeokuta Formation of sandstones and clays. The
coastal plain sand is mostly soft, poorly sorted, clayey sands; pebble sands; and sandy clay.

No critical natural habitat, either terrestrial or marine, will be converted. There are no living coral reefs in
the vicinity of the pipeline. There are known sea turtle nesting areas near pipeline beach crossings, and the
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) contain an elaborate sea turtle protection protocol.

Important cultural resources exist in the vicinity of the Project, such as medicinal plants in Benin; the Gao
Lagoon and nearby sacred grove and shrine near Tema in Ghana; a sanctuary, sacred trees, and a cemetery
near Gbetsogbe in Togo; and, in Nigeria, churches, gravesites, praying grounds, shrines, and the homes and
palaces of traditional rulers. In the planning of the pipeline right-of-way and related facilities, care was
taken to avoid community and population centers. There are no significant archeological features along the
right-of-way.



B. Check Environmental Classification: A (Full Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes    No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes    No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes    No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes    No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes    No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes    No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes    No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes    No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes    No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes    No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

                                                        5
                                                                                                              ISDS


II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
A methodical and rigorous impact assessment was conducted to establish severity levels of specific Project
activities on each of the potentially affected environmental media and socioeconomic aspects. The impact
assessment process took into account mitigation measures already incorporated in the Project design
specifications. (A set of general mitigation principles were applied to address the linear nature of the
design and construction of the onshore pipeline installation Examples include: avoiding sensitive receptors
in site and route design, avoid vegetation losses and/or reinstate vegetation, minimize the footprint size in
site and route design, conserve and reuse topsoil, and develop and maintain alignment sheets that reduce
impacts by making all relevant operational control information available by operation and geographic
location.) When potential impacts were initially judged to be high or moderate even with the planned
mitigation measures, additional measures were recommended to reduce the anticipated impacts to lower
levels. In assessing socioeconomic impacts, it was assumed that the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
would be properly implemented. The RAPs intend to mitigate displacement, disruption of current land use,
and reduction in means of livelihood for people affected by the Project. The result of the assessment of
WAGP was that no potentially high severity impacts (as defined by the methodology) would remain after
the planned mitigation measures are applied in accordance with current commitments and plans. All of the
residual impacts become either moderate or low severity.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Environmental and socioeconomic secondary impacts could occur "upstream" or "downstream" of the
Project. For the initial gas supply to WAGP, wells and infrastructure are already in place, so there will be
no significant drilling or gathering system installation upstream, in the Niger Delta, for the first five to ten
years of operation. To address potential impacts of future increases in gas production that may occur, a
covenant in the Access Code will require any supplier shipping gas through WAGP to be in compliance
with applicable national environmental regulations. Downstream of the Project, the most immediate
sources of potential impacts are modification of the electric generating facilities of the Foundation
Customers. Covenants in the legal documents condition delivery of gas by WAPCo to the Volta River
Authority facilities in Ghana on certification that the necessary environmental audits and Environmental
Assessments (EAs) have been completed and implemented. In Benin and Togo, Communauté Electrique du
Bénin has delivered to the Bank a written commitment to prepare and implement EAs, RAPs, and
environmental audits satisfactory to the Bank for facilities in Cotonou, Maria Gleta, and Lomé.

Beyond the issues of upstream and downstream development, few indirect or secondary impacts were found
to be significant, either in the country EAs or the regional EA, the latter having been designed to examine
impacts from a broader perspective. The regional EA did not reveal any significant cumulative impacts ­
that is, impacts of WAGP construction or operation in conjunction with other planned infrastructure
projects or development activities. Adverse impacts can of course result from development that may be
induced by the increased supply of electricity and gas if it is not planned and managed in accordance with
national environmental regulations.


II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
WAGP will provide a number of important benefits at the local and national level for the people of Benin,
Ghana, Nigeria, and Togo. WAGP provides a clean, reliable energy source for expanding power
generation in Benin, Ghana, and Togo and thus reduces the energy supply gaps in these countries.
Monetary benefits to the countries are also realized through taxes paid by WAPCo. The Producers will
realize additional revenue from the sale of gas transported by WAGP. Local economies will benefit from

                                                        6
                                                                                                           ISDS


WAPCo's commitment to hiring employees and contractors from surrounding communities.

The Sponsors have prepared a regional EA and individual country EAs and EMPs for Benin, Ghana,
Nigeria, and Togo. The conclusion of the assessments was that no potentially high severity impacts would
remain after the planned mitigation measures in the EMPs are applied in accordance with current
commitments and plans. All of the residual impacts become either moderate or low severity.


II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
         The Project alternatives considered in the EA reflect the business capabilities and objectives of
WAPCo and a limited number of competing power options and/or alternative energy resources. Besides the
No-Project and Proposed Project Alternatives, the EA evaluated a select number of alternate scenarios.
Two alternatives considered ­ developing gas-fueled power generation and export stations in Nigeria, and
exporting natural gas as LNG ­ meet some of the energy supply objectives but do not provide comparable
benefits. These alternatives either would produce more substantial environmental and socioeconomic
impacts than WAGP, would not provide as timely a solution, and/or would incur higher costs for the same
benefits as WAGP. A renewable fuels alternative would not contribute to flare reduction in Nigeria and
presents challenges in terms of reliability, security, and feasibility for Benin, Ghana, and Togo. In
addition, it is doubtful that the renewable fuels alternative could provide sufficient power for industrial
uses.

         Alternatives for the pipeline routing were considered: combined onshore/offshore, onshore only,
and offshore only. The selected option, a combination of onshore and offshore routes, provides the greatest
benefits at the lowest level of environmental and socioeconomic impacts and least cost.

         The EA considered design alternatives for nearly every aspect of the Project. Selection of preferred
alternatives when devising, considering, and choosing between design options were based on a number of
factors including: overall safety of the public and workers; environmental impact; potential impacts to
communities; acceptance by stakeholders; best available practicable technologies; feasibility of
construction, operation, and maintenance; and cost of construction, operation, and maintenance. Final
design of the pipeline route was given considerable attention due to the linear nature of the Project and the
extensive overall length. Within the preferred Onshore/Offshore Option, more specific routing options
were considered and chosen in order to minimize environmental and socioeconomic impacts. Alternate
construction techniques for installing the pipeline across the shorelines were also considered. In Nigeria,
horizontal directional drilling (HDD) was selected as it created the least disturbance in the Badagry
wetland-lagoon-barrier island crossing from the Lagos Beach Compressor Station. In Ghana, blasting and
trenching across the rocky seafloor was selected over HDD (which was not feasible) and a rock saw (which
created spoils management problems).


II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Management of environmental and social impacts will be by means of an EMP included in the EA for each
country but published as a free-standing document as well. The regional EA contains a consolidated EMP.
The EMPs include monitoring to check whether the WAPCo operational controls and mitigation measures
conform to planned arrangements, including regulatory requirements, whether they are being properly
implemented, and whether they are effective. Third party monitors from within the Sponsors' organizations
will assist in oversight of EMP implementation, and WAPCo will contract with environmental firms to
conduct independent audits at intervals. WAPCo will develop final arrangements for monitoring and
auditing in consultation with the Bank and national regulatory agencies. The audit reports will be made
available to regulatory agencies and the Bank, MIGA, and Zurich/OPIC. Virtually all elements of the
EMPs will be implemented by WAPCo, which is committed to provide the essential personnel and

                                                       7
                                                                                                          ISDS


specialized skills. Budgets have been calculated for EMP implementation during construction and
operation. Government agencies will be welcome to participate in various monitoring and auditing
processes.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The extensive stakeholder consultations were conducted by WAPCo during preparation of the EAs and
RAPs. The first consultations actually preceded EA preparation, having begun at the conceptual stage of
front end engineering design as early as 2000. Consultations on the EAs were initiated by WAPCo in
September 2002 and have continued up to the public hearings held by the environmental agencies of Benin,
Ghana, Nigeria and Togo in March and April 2004 as part of the national review and clearance procedures.
Drafts of the EAs were publicly disclosed at a total of 41 locations across the four countries prior to the
hearings.

The country EAs and RAPs and the Regional EA were subsequently reviewed by the World Bank, revised
by WAPCo's consultants, and cleared in final draft form for disclosure in accordance with Bank policies.
The documents were posted on the WAGP website and re-disclosed at the same 41 locations, plus the
Public Information Centers in the Bank's country offices and the InfoShop in Washington. Disclosure was
completed on July 7, 2004.

Final versions of the EAs incorporating changes requested by the national governments and additional
changes requested by the Bank were prepared and delivered to the Bank during October 2004, along with
free-standing EMPs. They will replace the previously-disclosed versions at the same locations. No
additional work was required on the RAPs, hence re-disclosure is not necessary.

The Bank undertook missions in the four countries to independently appraise and validate the consultation
process conducted by WAPCo. The results of those missions are unambiguous and can be summarized as
follows. In 15 meetings ­ five with national NGOs and national chapters of international NGOs ­ and 10
with chiefs, village notables, and citizens of communities along the pipeline right-of-way (ROW) ­ Bank
staff confirmed that there is broad general support for the Project. Not one of the 952 individuals and 11
NGO representatives that attended spoke in opposition to it, and many expressed impatience with the length
of time being taken to get the Project started.

There was consensus among the communities that they had received enough information about the Project
during the consultations. Community members were generally satisfied with the outcomes of the
consultations; they had received acceptable responses to most of their questions and concerns, and, in at
least three key locations, their advice to WAPCo had directly resulted in design changes. The views of
NGOs were more varied, but the majority expressed favorable opinions of the consultations. One NGO in
Ghana felt that the consultation process emphasized Project benefits and downplayed potential negative
aspects, one in Nigeria criticized the process as not being truly consultative (a point of view that was not
confirmed by the rest of the discussion with this and two other Nigerian NGOs, considering that fact that
they had not read any of the Project documents), whereas three NGOs in Togo were pleased to have been
actively involved in EA preparation and to have seen all of their recommendations incorporated in the final
draft EA. Emphasis during Project preparation, in the minds of both NGOs and communities, must be on
fulfilling the commitments set out in RAPs and EMPs and expressed by WAPCo in public meetings.

Disclosure of EAs and RAPs conformed to Bank and national requirements, but the information at local
government centers was not as easily accessible to individuals in the communities as it should have been
because of sheer volume, complexity, location, language, and, in some cases, bureaucracy. NGOs were
more readily able to obtain the documents, although not all had done so. WAPCo has agreed with the
appraisal recommendations that short, local-language summaries explaining the obligations of the

                                                        8
                                                                                                           ISDS


respective parties under RAPs and EMPs should be prepared and distributed in the affected communities.
A useful addition would be an information workshop in each group of communities to provide pertinent,
practical information on topics such as risks and emergency response. However, this should not be done
before the Final Investment Decision date; to provide additional information before the communities can see
that the Project has begun will only intensify frustration and bad feeling among people that feel adequately
supplied (overloaded in some cases) with information and impatient with inaction. In the longer term, the
Bank needs to consider ways to improve the efficacy of disclosure for affected communities.

MIGA has also carried out its review of the Project in collaboration with Bank environmental and social
specialists assigned to work on the WAGP Project. Site visits by MIGA environmental and social
specialists were carried out as part of MIGA's environmental and social due diligence during Project
underwriting to verify that the Project will comply with MIGA's Safeguard Policies and environmental
guidelines. The WAGP Project is in conformity with MIGA Safeguard Policies and associated procedures
for public involvement and disclosure.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[X] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

                                                     9
                                                                                                    ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              12/31/2003      6/1/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          1/30/2004       2/1/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           1/30/2004       7/7/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        1/30/2004       7/19/2004
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              1/15/2004       6/1/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          1/30/2004       2/1/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           1/30/2004       7/7/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Michel E. Layec                                    11/16/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank                11/16/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour/Person/World Bank          11/16/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Marea Eleni Hatziolos/Person/World Bank            11/16/2004

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                                        11/17/2004
Sector Manager                        Yusupha B. Crookes

