Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1276 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/21/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P093826 
Project Name: Senegal River Basin Multi-purpose Water Resources Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Ousmane Dione 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 8, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (40%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%);Central 
government administration (20%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Environmental policies and institutions 
(P);Regional integration (P);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the MWRD program which comprises 2 phases, MWRD 1 and 2 
is to enhance regional integration among the four riparian countries of the Senegal River Basin 
by supporting multipurpose water resources development. This will in turn foster overall growth 
and improve the conditions of people living in the basin.  This objective will be achieved through 
(i) consolidating and modernizing the institutional, legal and technical framework of the Senegal 
River Basin to better serve the four riparian countries, (ii) developing concrete water resources 
development activities at the local level that generate significant income to reduce poverty, and 
(iii) defining and preparing new multipurpose infrastructure to harness the hydropower potential 
identified in the basin. In total, 2 million people are targeted in the first phase to benefit from this 
project. The project will focus on selected priority areas within the four riparian countries located 
in the upper basin, the upper valley, the lower valley and the delta.  
 
Page  2
Expected outcomes. The result indicators envisioned for the project include:  
 
a) 
OMVS legal, institutional, financial mechanisms updated and fully operational for 
effective execution of its mandate including increased tangible benefits to the four riparian 
countries and satisfaction of  specific basic expectations of the population living in the basin;  
 
b) 
Sustainable multipurpose water resources activities implemented to effect income 
generation and poverty reduction at local levels; and  
 
c) 
Regional planning and management framework developed for economically, 
environmentally and socially responsible multipurpose water resources development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Lending instrument. The proposed Adaptable Program Loan (APL) will span 10 years and be 
implemented in 2 phases (MWRD 1 & 2), of 5 years each.  The program will support the 
Nouakchott Declaration for the development of the Senegal River Basin by focusing on five key 
targeted activities, namely: (i) modernizing the river basin institutions within the context of the 
Inclusive Framework, (ii) regional water resources planning, management and development, (iii) 
expanding regional multipurpose water resources infrastructure, (iv) mitigating the health 
impacts from the related multipurpose water infrastructure, and (v) fostering economic growth 
while improving the social and environmental conditions in the Basin. The rational for using the 
APL instrument is to ensure long-term commitment and sustainability in scaling up multipurpose 
water resources development activities in the Senegal River Basin. The phased approach 
facilitates the prioritization of investments in alignment with appropriate funding. The APL 
instrument will also allow OMVS and the riparian countries of the Senegal River Basin to 
consolidate the benefits deriving from jointly-owned and managed infrastructure. The scope, 
magnitude and timing of the second phase will depend on successes achieved during 
implementation of the first phase and on the prioritized investments identified by the riparian 
countries in Senegal River Basin Master plan, also to be financed under the MWRD1.  
 
Overview of program design. The overall amount proposed for MWRD 1 & 2 is US$ 250 
million, of which the estimated cost of MWRD 1 is US$100 million, inclusive of an IDA loan of 
US$70 million and proposed US$30 million from national counterpart funds and donor co-
financing. Individual sector investment activities were considered as an alternative approach, in 
parallel with donor activities, however this did not promote progress on regional integration. The 
regional integration process establishes the inter-related parameters for sustainable multi-purpose 
development and multi-sectoral investments, realized only by strengthened institutions and 
engaged and informed stakeholders.  
 
MWRD 1 Components: The first phase does not directly engage in hydropower investments but 
will provide the framework for future engagement in such development. It includes three main 
components as outlined below:  
 
1. 
Regional Water Resources Management (US$11 million)  
 
The first component will support actions at the regional level in order to consolidate and 
strengthen policies, plans and actions relating to integrated water resources development. 
Implementing the Inclusive Framework will require the strengthening of institutional knowledge 
and technical capacity but also strengthening of the legal, institutional and financial frameworks.  
 
Page  3
Component activities will:  
 
-
Modernize OMVS and Enhance Institutional Capacities. This component will enhance 
the management and technical capacities as well as the systems of monitoring and evaluation.  
The institutional co-ordination, communication, information exchange and stakeholder 
participation among relevant institutions will also be improved thereby reinforcing the OMVS 
network and information management. This will likely involve:  
 
i. 
SOGED review of responsibilities and capacity enhancement;  
 
ii. 
OMVS strategic coordination and collaboration with national water technical bodies 
including SAED-SONADER-PDIAM and SDE-SNDE-EDM;  
 
iii. 
Modernization of OMVS and National Cellules including revamping the institution, 
defining human resources management and performance evaluation tools, improving access to 
database and information with more accountability, transparency at all levels;  
 
iv. 
Modernization of Permanent Water Commission, to include modalities for water flows 
and energy reserve (allocations) principles from multi-purpose infrastructure;  
 
v. 
Strengthening of local-level organizations (such as WUAs, women?s, farmer 
cooperatives) to include management practices and access to financial credit systems; and  
 
vi. 
Developing the legal and financial modalities for the application of the Water Charter.  
 
-
Enable Guinea's inclusion to OMVS. The continuation of the Inclusive Framework 
dialogue requires the update and adaptation of the OMVS institutions and legal frameworks to 
include Guinea as the fourth riparian country. The legal and institutional strengthening will 
include: (i) update the institutional and legal framework, within the OMVS High Commission; 
(ii) prepare the additional legal instruments necessary to effectively implement the Inclusive 
Framework in line with the Water Charter principles; and (iii) define a new cost-sharing formula 
to accommodate Guinea as a new member of OMVS.  
 
-
Rehabilitate the OMVS Documentation Center. Securing the institutional history and 
expanding the information and knowledge network of the OMVS requires the rehabilitation of 
the Senegal River Basin Document Center in Saint-Louis. Activities will:  
 
i. 
Rehabilitate, upgrade, and secure the building facilities;  
 
ii. 
Acquire equipment for archiving and library establishment;  
 
iii. 
Train and develop management capacity of center staff;  
 
iv. 
Develop internet functionality with web access to relevant information; and  
 
v. 
Support or establish specific conventions with other institutions such as, the Sub-Saharan 
Africa Foundation Institute (IFAN), the Documentalists and Archivists School (EBAD), and 
relevant universities for more effective management and dissemination of Basin information.  
 
2. 
Local Level Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development (US$52 million).  
 
Building on the participatory process currently underway, and as part of the implementation of 
the Water Charter, this component will mainly focus on addressing the needs and expectations of 
the local stakeholders, to enable them to benefit from the regional infrastructure development, 
within targeted areas suitable to realize fast results on the ground. The planned activities are 
framed in a manner to ensure, appropriate responsibility assignments to- and accountability of- 
the relevant technical bodies with stakeholders, participation and involvement in decision 
making, while providing significant income generating benefits. The sub-component activities 
Page  4
would be demonstration in character, with the objective of learning from the experiences, 
dissemination of the acquired knowledge and scale up in other areas in the Basin.  
 
This component will include specific integrated activities identified within the countries and 
focusing on the following sub-components:  
 
-
Development of small hydraulic and related infrastructure. This subcomponent will 
facilitate the development of recessional agriculture, expansion and rehabilitation of irrigation 
and drainage schemes in suitable areas.  Key activities will : (i) design and develop infrastructure 
to improve access to and delivery of water for irrigation (intakes, pumping stations etc.), (ii) 
provide training for appropriate irrigation methods and related crop diversification and 
enhancement processes to enable farmers to make adequate choices for sustainable agricultural 
practices, (iii) identify suitable options for agricultural products, processing and marketing, and 
(iv) rehabilitate docking facilities at Rosso between left and right banks of the river between 
Mauritania and Senegal and transfer the ownership under OMVS's common works.  
 
-
Improvement of traditional fisheries. This sub-component will contribute to sustainable 
and efficient development of traditional fisheries, key activities will: (i) promote sustainable 
fishing practices and fish production processing, (ii) provide technical modernization to enhance 
fishermen?s livelihoods (training and equipment such as nets, boats, processing and storage), and 
(iii) support institutional strengthening for sustainable development of the fisheries activities.  
 
-
Integrated Land and Water Management: This sub-component will support planning and 
management of land and water resources at the community and sub basin levels to provide 
community stakeholders tools and mechanisms for sustainable and long-term local development. 
Key activities will (i) identify areas of land and water resources degradation; (ii) map key micro-
watersheds suitable for local income generation activities, (iii) implement soil protection and 
conservation activities, (iv) introduce programs to restore and maintain river banks and (v) 
provide support (develop a forestation map and program, training, etc.) for agro-forestry.   
 
-
Reduction of waterborne diseases. This sub-component will focus on addressing 
waterborne diseases, primarily as it pertains to reducing Schistosomiasis, and identify and 
assessing vector control aspects of malaria and reducing the impact of malaria on the people in 
the Senegal River Valley. Key activities will (i) improve specific water resources management 
practices to limit the proliferation of waterborne diseases, (ii) provide appropriate 
schistosomiasis mass treatment for targeted communities, (iii) study options for vector control 
for malaria and identify  and implement appropriate options to limit its spread, (iv) provide 
education on appropriate health practices, and (v) put in place mechanisms to prevent the 
diseases from spreading to other areas in the Basin including improving access to potable water 
and sanitation in vulnerable areas.  
 
3. 
Regional Multipurpose and Multi-sectoral Master Planning (US$7 million)  
 
Complementing the on-going efforts initiated under the WAPP framework for a regional 
enabling environment for least cost energy, the Comprehensive Senegal River Basin Master Plan 
Page  5
(Schema Directeur et de Gestion des Eaux du fleuve Senegal) will take into consideration all 
relevant sectors for optimal and sustainable planning, use, and management of the Basin?s water 
resources, and make available the appropriate information necessary for sound decision-making. 
The component activities will:  
 
-
Prepare the SRB Comprehensive Master Plan. Within the broad framework of the 
SDAGE, the sub-component activities will (i) evaluate and prepare several assessment studies, 
which take into account technical, policy, economic, environmental and social concerns 
(including health), over the range of potential multi-purpose and multi-sectoral investments in 
the Basin , (ii) prepare the SRB Regional Master Plan, and prepare sub-basin development plans 
that could further guide OMVS in member countries in implementing decentralized water 
resources management, and (iii) prepare an Options Assessment and a Strategic Regional 
Environmental Assessment for future deployment of the multipurpose hydropower of the Basin, 
to include but not limited to the, Balassa and Koukoutamba sites in the Guinean portion.  
 
-
Complete Gouina hydropower feasibility study. Within the context of hydropower 
development of the OMVS second generation of dams , sub-component activities will finance 
the appropriate studies for the Gouina hydropower project, activities will (i) prepare relevant 
technical studies necessary for the connecting transmission lines from Gouina, and (ii) prepare 
the appropriate social and environmental safeguard assessments and (iii) define the financial 
arrangement and implementing modalities for ready launch of the project through the WAPP 
third APL phase.  
 
-
Gourbassi, Koukoutamba and Balassa feasibility studies.  This component will (i) prepare 
relevant technical preliminary studies for the development of these sites; (ii) prepare the 
feasibility studies for the sites prioritized by the riparian countries and (iii) prepare the 
appropriate social and environmental safeguards assessments.  
 
-
Ensure stakeholder participation in Multipurpose and Master Planning.  This will be done 
to facilitate and ensure consensus building and to publicize support for the hydropower projects 
upfront of actual development and commencement of works.  
 
MWRD 2 components will depend largely on the implementation results of MWRD 1. This 
will include the selection of the second round of local level multi-purpose water resources 
development activities to be scaled up and the priority investments then to be made. Since the 
economies of the four riparian countries are highly vulnerable to water variability and energy 
shortages, additional multi-purpose infrastructure will be needed. Preliminary technical studies 
and consultations among the four riparian countries have already led to the pre-selection of the 
three dam sites mentioned above. The additional technical studies to be carried out in MWRD 1 
(identified in component 3 above) will determine the development prioritization of these 
facilities. It is then envisaged that such development will be undertaken in MWRD 2. Suitable 
performance indicators will be introduced and the relevant institutional and other necessary 
adjustments made to transition from MWRD1 to MWRD 2.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  6
The precise locations of project sites and specific activities will be confirmed during project 
preparation through a priority based analysis to determine project sites and anticipated activities. 
To date, the project which will focus on nine main areas of the basin located in the departments 
of Matam, Podor and Bakel (Senegal), the Gorgol, Brakna and Trarza Regions (Mauritania); the 
Circle of Kayes and Bafoulabe (Mali) and the Moyenne Guinea region (Guinea).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower has experience from the PASIE and on going GEF project. Technical assistance 
will be provided to fulfill the World Bank safeguard requirements.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
For MWRD 1, OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered due to the site specific water 
resources development activities in the Basin. The project will finance a) development of small 
hydraulic and related infrastructure, b) expansion and rehabilitation small irrigation and drainage 
schemes, c) development of recessional agriculture, d) improvement of traditional fisheries, e) 
development of agro-forestry activities, and f) stream bank stabilization. During project 
preparation, the Borrower will prepare an Environmental Assessment (EA) inclusive of both 
environmental and social issues, for known project sites and activities will be prepared, whereas 
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be done for those sites 
and/or activities not determined by time of disclosure, prior to appraisal. The EA and ESMF will 
be submitted and disclosed according to World Bank disclosure policies in all four countries. 
Within the project design, a Strategic Regional Environmental Assessment will be prepared as 
part of the SRB comprehensive master plan, in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders to 
capture the broader multi-sectoral environmental and social issues of regional integration and 
multi-sectoral development.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The EA baseline assessment will identify whether OP 4.04 Natural Habitats might be 
triggered. If triggered, then the Borrower will be responsible to ensure appropriate measures are 
taken to comply with OP 4.04.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Anticipated reforestation activities for integrated forests for sustainable economic 
development may trigger OP 4.36, for which the Borrower will be responsible to ensure 
appropriate forestry management plans are prepared and implemented as part of project 
implementation.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
OP 4.09 Pest Management is triggered due to the proposed agricultural activities in select 
project sites. The project will not finance directly or otherwise the purchase of fertilizers or other 
inputs. During project preparation a comprehensive Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be 
prepared for activities in Guinea, Mali, Mauritania, and Senegal. A pest management plan has 
been prepared for the PDIAIM in Mauritanita, which could be used as a template and adapted to 
this project. The Pest Management Plan will be prepared separately but included as part of the 
EA.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
During project preparation, the project sites for new irrigation schemes will be identifie
d
in 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
the EA baseline assessment, and determine whether OP 4.11 Cultural Property is triggered at any 
new irrigation schemes.  In situations where impacts cannot be avoided and OP 4.11 is triggered, 
appropriate measures will be taken by the Borrower to mitigate any impacts, this OP in not 
triggered for proposed rehabilitated sites. Measures to address cultural property will be included 
in the EA.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land and other economic 
resources and on livelihoods. OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered if there are any 
possible issues related to personal, communal or public land acquisition; therefore a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared during project preparation. If any of the 
proposed activities trigger OP 4.12, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared. The 
RPF will be submitted and disclosed according to World Bank disclosure policies in all four 
countries prior to appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
OP 4.37 Dam Safety may be triggered with the new irrigation schemes proposed under the 
project. Dam safety inspection will be coordinated by the OMVS.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The project activities will take place in the Senegal River Basin, which is an international 
waterway among Senegal, Mali, Mauritania and Guinea.  As such, OP 7.5 International 
Waterways is triggered. In accordance with OMVS guidelines, all riparians will be notified of 
project activities in the Senegal River Basin to meet the requirements of OP 7.5 prior to Bank 
appraisal of this project.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/29/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
EA to be completed tentatively by September 2005. All of the Borrowers assessments and 
feasibility studies (EA, ESMF, PMP, RPF) are expected to be launched in June, 2005 and the 
completed and assessments disclosed prior to appraisal, proposed for November, 2005. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
During the preparation the Borrower will engage in a consultative process, through a 
minimum of two consultations (one on the Terms of Reference of the Environmental 
Assessment and one on the draft Environmental Assessment Report) with national and local 
stakeholders. The project will comply with all relevant World Bank safeguard and national 
policies, and meet the requirements of the World Bank?s Disclosure Policy.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ousmane Dione 
06/20/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/21/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
06/20/2005 
Comments:   
