Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC510 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/11/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P072202 
Project Name: Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Project 
Task Team Leader: William Leeds Lane 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 26, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 19, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Biodiversity (P);Other environment 
and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
12.73 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FONDS FRANCAIS DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT MONDIAL 
1.00 
 
NORWAY: MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
3.00 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
6.60 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
12.00
22.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The SWIOFP is seen as the first phase of a long-term commitment to sustainable management of  
 
offshore marine fisheries in the Western Indian Ocean. There are therefore .project. and  
 
.program. objectives. The Program Objective is to develop sufficient knowledge and sufficient  
 
legal and institutional capacity to act on that knowledge to manage the fishery in the 200 mile  
 
Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ) of the participating Project countries to obtain maximum  
 
economic returns from this resource, consistent with a management strategy that stresses  
 
environmental sustainability and socially equitable distribution of the benefits of exploitation  
 
(see Annex 6 for SWIOFP Vision Statement). The Program Objective is expected to be 
achieved  
 
over a period of about 15 years, broken into two phases. The first phase is the currently  
 
proposed SWIOFP, which is expected to have a life of 7 years and focus more on science and  
Page  2
capacity building. The second phase would be between 7-10 years and apply the knowledge  
 
gained through national management and regional coordination groups to achieve the Program  
 
Objective of environmentally and socially sustainable management of the offshore fishery  
 
resource.  
 
The Project Objective relates specifically to SWIOFP and reflects the ecosystemic approach to  
 
fish stock identification. The project objective of SWIOFP is to identify important fish stocks  
 
within the Southwest Indian Ocean, preliminarily determine fishing pressure on these stocks, 
and  
 
identify how the environment defines the life history (systematics) of these to be better able to  
 
identify variability in yearly estimates of stock health and differentiate between environmental  
 
and anthropogenic causes of any differences in the measure of fish stock health.  
 
3.
Rationale for GEF Involvement  
 
GEF involvement will help identify and reverse any depletion of fisheries in the LMEs of Sub-  
 
Saharan Africa, and will assist the individual coastal countries bordering these LMEs to meet 
the  
 
fisheries targets set by the WSSD, It will also identify commercially important species of fish  
 
within the 200 mile EEZ that are currently, or might be in the future, under commercial  
 
exploitation. Likewise, the SWIOFP will identify possible linkages and establish long-term  
 
monitoring programs to determine the relationship between environmental factors and the  
 
systematics of important fish species. GEF involvement in this regional activity promotes  
 
improved monitoring and more effectively management, especially of fish stock that are  
 
migratory or that straddle national boundaries  
 
The proposed SWIOFP is eligible under provisions of the GEF/OP8 that relate specifically to  
 
LME.s. Of particular relevance are Paragraphs 8.2 and 8.21 of the GEF that support responsible  
 
and environmentally sustainable use of marine fisheries. The SWIOFP aims to identify the  
 
biodiversity conservation and resource use issues, prioritize these issues, develop capacity to  
 
address these issues, and set the stage for regional management of fish stocks in the 200 mile  
 
Exclusive Economic Zone of the countries bordering the West and Southwest Indian Ocean 
(see  
 
section 2, above, and Annex 4 for a description of how SWIOFP fits, as one of three .project  
 
legs. supporting the Somali and Aguhlas Currents LME Program). It is very unlikely that any  
 
single country would have the ability to identify, much less manage, the fish migratory and  
 
straddling fish stocks within its waters, given the high cost of manpower and facilities to study  
 
and protect these regional fisheries.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
SWIOFP project is a multinational, GEF initiative aimed at improving the scientific  
 
understanding of the main physical and ecological features of the WIO, and how these and  
 
anthropogenic activities impact of marine fish stocks. The main source of environmental data  
 
will feed into SWIOFP from its .sister. Oceanographic and Coastal Demonstrations Projects 
that  
 
form the other 2 parts of the Somali and Aguhlas Currents Large Marine Ecosystem Program  
 
SWIOFP itself focuses on fisheries, including large pelagics, and is designed to maximise the 
use  
 
of
existing information, collection of pertinent new data, enhancement of institutional capacity  
 
and promotion of regionally shared responsibilities towards resource management.  
Page  3
Nine countries, including one developed country (France), are participants in the SWIOFP. The  
 
study area is perhaps the largest of any ever included in a GEF or Bank project. Because of the  
 
inherent difficulties in working across such diverse political and geographical areas, the 
activities  
 
supported by SWIOFP are, of necessity, quite limited. There are only three project components:  
 
i) Identification and assessment of current status of important fish stocks within the 200 mile  
 
EEZ of participating countries, with particular emphasis given to straddling and migratory  
 
stocks; ii) Obtaining an estimate of the location, distribution, targets and intensity of fishing  
 
pressure on these stocks; iii) establishment of a regional, project coordinating unit that can  
 
evolve or merge into an existing regional marine fisheries coordinating body; iv) Building  
 
capacity and harmonizing legislation regionally to manage the offshore fishery.  
 
The regional nature of SWIOFP requires a unique approach to preparation of the project  
 
components. During the preparation phase, project coordination takes place via a SWIOFP  
 
Secretariat, hosted by Mozambique (which will be replaced by an, as yet, unspecified regional  
 
management structure). During implementation each country will have its own National  
 
Secretariat, managed by a National Coordinator, which is currently the preparation focal point  
 
identified by that country. Implementing Institutions will be identified within each country to  
 
assist with executing various national components of the SWIOFP. This proposed structure is  
 
seen as indicative. The eventual operational structures of SWIOFP will need to be agreed to at  
 
plenary level. At present, however, identification of Project activities, integration of  
 
national/regional agencies and programs into SWIOFP, and how the Project will be  
 
implemented in a harmonious way within and between participating countries is the  
 
responsibility of 5 committees hosted by different countries within SWIOFP. These are:  
 
The Science Plan- South African leadership (See Annex 1): Guide and integrate all components  
 
of
the project, including institutional capacity development and the scientific basis for the  
 
ultimate management strategy and its implementation. These mainly include preliminary fish  
 
stock identification and assessment and fish pressure surveys.  
 
Database Management and Data Interpretation/Dissemination- Kenya leadership (see Annex  
 
2): Analysis of existing fisheries information, development of a regional database and data  
 
access protocols, and fisheries statistic program/methodology harmonization.  
 
Procurement and Operational Issues- Tanzania leadership (see annex 5): Harmonizing  
 
procurement activities and developing the basis for regional procurement of leased vessels,  
 
leased surveillance aircraft and other regional Project assets. Development of protocols for use  
 
of
regional Project assets;  
 
Legal Issues- France leadership: Includes agreements between SWIOFP countries to cooperate  
 
in conduct of the Project (access of Project assets and staff immigration on Project business,  
 
etc.), Project activities to harmonize relevant fisheries legislation, Project activities for regional  
 
enforcement of harmonized regulations, etc.  
 
Regional management structure- Madagascar leadership: Development of national Project  
 
implementation and Regional Project coordination bodies and how these will interface with  
 
existing regional groups.  
 
3.1.
Funding  
 
Funding is sought from GEF and multi/bilateral organizations. However, individual countries  
 
will benefit from any improved use of EEZ resources potentially resulting in increased  
 
government revenues. This more efficient and environmentally sustainable management 
justifies  
Page  4
government support for the Project. In fact, the Project has already secured strong support and  
 
commitments from participating countries, with a preliminary schedule of contributions in cash  
 
and in-kind that can be directed to the project.  
 
GEF/IDA: Use of GEF funds in the SWIOFP will play a catalytic role in expanding 
government  
 
management into areas of environmental conservation and biodiversity protection of the 
offshore  
 
marine waters which they currently can not address. More importantly, GEF-support in the  
 
initial phase of the LME Program (of which the SWIOFP is but one part) will leverage 
continued  
 
support of conservation and environmentally sustainable development principles by 
governments  
 
over the long-term through the larger and more ambitious second phase of the LME Program.  
 
This relation between science and the transition to sustainable development is seen as occurring  
 
even without major GEF involvement in phase 2 of the LME Program.  
 
Bilateral Grant: Informal discussions have already been held with ICEIDA and NORAD. A  
 
regional donors conference, called by Mozambique on behalf of all countries in the SWIOFP, is  
 
planned for 2005.  
 
The SWIOFP would progress through 3 stages. The first stage of about 12-14 months would  
 
focus on harmonization of legislation, collection and analysis of existing data, development of  
 
software tools, and harmonization of data collection and analysis procedures for new data  
 
developed, and capacity building initiated. Once this was complete and a data collection  
 
program designed to fill the gaps in existing knowledge of the offshore fishery, the field  
 
monitoring program to collect new information describing fish stocks and basic systematics, 
and  
 
fishing pressure in the Project study area would begin. Collection of new data and 
establishment  
 
of
a
baseline would run for 24-30 months. Once the baseline is established and data analysed,  
 
the countries would develop a Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis (TDA), identifying regional  
 
issues that need to be addressed by SWIOFP countries. This would be followed by a Strategic  
 
Action Plan (SAP) that identifies how each country proposes to address the regional issues  
 
identified in the TDA. This is expected to require 18 months and would lead into and support  
 
development of a follow-on project to SWIOFP.  
 
3.2.
Progress to date  
 
Much has already been achieved during this first PDF-B preparation phase. In order to share the  
 
project.s development responsibilities and to create a regional sense of .project ownership., the  
 
preparation phase has been structured into several themes allocated to different countries (see  
 
annex 3, for details of remaining preparation actions of various working groups):  
 
Theme Initiated Country Status  
 
Regional secretariat Yes Mozambique 1st phase Complete  
 
Study area defined Yes All 1st phase Complete  
 
Vision defined Yes All 1st phase Complete  
 
Science plan Yes South Africa 1st phase Complete  
 
Operations and procurement Yes Tanzania 1st phase Complete  
 
Project management No Madagascar -  
 
Capacity building No - -  
Page  5
SWIOFP/LME interface No - Underway  
 
Legal instruments No France Underway  
 
Information & data  
 
management  
 
Yes Kenya 1st phase Complete   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Generally the 200 mile Exclusive Economic Zone, excluding the coastal areas of each  
 
participating country. The inshore boundary deferentiating coastal from 200 mile EEZ study  
 
area for SWIOFP will be set by individual countries.  
 
Figure: Map of 200 mile EEZ.s of SWIOFP Countries   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
This is a regional project. Main Project objectives are to build capacity to manage the offshore  
 
fishery resource in an environmentally sustainable manner in countries that don.t have this  
 
capacity at present, link managerially weaker countries to SWIOFP countries that have strong  
 
fisheries management skills and experience, and to harmonize fisheries legislation to ensure  
 
uniformly strong management practice across the entire study area defined above.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The SWIOFP is a GEF International Waters Project.  By definition it would trigger the BP 
7.5 Safeguard Policy.  However, there are no international waters issues that must be discussed 
between riparian countries as all countries riparian to the Southwest Indian Ocean are directly 
(Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique, South Africa, Comoros, Madagascar, Seychelles, Maruitius and 
France) or indirectly (the provisional government of Somalia) involved in the Project.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  6
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/20/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
QER successfully completed and minutes circulated   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William Leeds Lane 
08/10/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
08/11/2005 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
08/10/2005 
Comments:  AFTS2 agrees to accept transfer of safeguard responsiblities 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
