Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1588 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/07/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Africa 
Project ID: P094084 
Project Name: West Africa Agricultural Productivity Program (WAAPP) 
Task Team Leader: Yves-Coffi Prudencio 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P096794 
GEF Focal Area 2: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P096058 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 6, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 22, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (60%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (40%) 
Theme: Export development and competitiveness (P);Technology diffusion (P);Trade 
facilitation and market access (P);Land administration and management (S);Biodiversity 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
105.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
16.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
6.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
20.00
26.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the 4-year, first phase WAAPP (the Project) is to rationalize and 
strengthen the capacities of key regional agricultural technology/knowledge generation and 
dissemination (TGD) institutions and the capacities of related national institutions in West 
Africa, and to adequately fund the programs they implement for a more cost-effective delivery of 
regional and national public goods (agricultural technologies and knowledge) to achieve the 
environmentally sustainable food security, growth and poverty reduction objectives of the 
region.  
 
The global environment objective of the project is to contribute to the strategic objectives of 
GEF operational programs on biodiversity and land degradation by building, through the 
strengthening of regional and national TGD institutions and programs, regional and national 
Page  2
human and institutional capacities to monitor, evaluate and mitigate global environment threats 
in the region by using relevant modern scientific and technological knowledge and tools.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would support the following components:  
 
Component 1; Support to capacity building of key regional agricultural TGD institutions and 
their programs ($40 millions)  
 
1.1 
A system rationalization exercise, via institutional and financial audits, will be carried out 
during project preparation to identify a set of key regional agricultural technology/knowledge 
generation and dissemination (TGD)institutions and programs that provide cost effectively 
regional public goods that cannot be economically provided at the national level, and which can 
have significant and immediate impact on food security and economic growth in the region. The 
project would support the rationalization and strengthening of the capacities of the selected key 
regional TGD institutions and the programs which they finance and implement.    
 
1.2 
The component will focus on rationalizing and strengthening the regional agricultural 
TGD infrastructure in West Africa. It will include the CGIAR centers in its analysis but will 
support mainly the non-CGIAR regional institutions.  The regional institutions and programs 
proposed for support by CORAF/WECARD and FARA in their current strategic plans (1999- 
2014) are strong candidates that will eventually be evaluated and supported by the project. These 
include: (i) the Biotechnology and Biosafety program of CORAF for developing regional and 
national capacities for the application of molecular techniques to production constraints, in 
particular for developing resistance to pests and diseases, genetic resources management, the 
creation of gene banks in particular, etc., building commonalities and capacities in biosafety 
procedures and creating biosafety awareness; (ii) the BASIC (Building African Agricultural and 
Scientific Capacity) program of FARA, which is focused on reforming agricultural education in 
agricultural universities and centers of excellence, by revising and updating agricultural curricula 
and learning approaches and materials, building capacities in agribusiness, innovation systems 
approaches, risk management, implementing training/staff exchange programs, etc.; (iii) the 
NEPAD/FARA program for Dissemination of New Agricultural Technologies in Africa 
(DONATA) for the dissemination of technologies able to have an immediate impact on 
production, productivity, and incomes (such as NERICA rice, tissue culture banana, improved 
cassava technologies, striga-resistant maize, and improved sweet potato) ; (iv) The FARA's Sub 
Saharan Africa (CGIAR) Challenge Program for complementary support if necessary; (v) the 
CORAF  regional research cooperation networks for animal production, crop production, natural 
resources management and technology transfer (Annex 5); (vi) the CORAF-sponsored  centers of 
excellence such as the regional center for the study of crop adaptation to drought (CERAAS) in 
Senegal, the International Livestock Center for sub-Humid zones (CIRDES) in Burkina Faso, the 
International Trypanosomiasis Center (ITC) in the Gambia; (vii) the CORAF sponsored research 
poles such as the poles on irrigation and fallow; (viii) CORAF research scholarships, fellowships 
and professional associations programs; (ix) the mandates of CGIAR centers in the region may 
be revised and complementary funding be provided for new research areas (e.g. research on dates 
and Arabic gum at ICRISAT); (x) the capacities of CORAF and FARA would also be 
strengthened in the process.  
Page  3
1.3 
Human resources trained in Africa and particularly in the region are less affected by brain 
drains than those trained outside of Africa and are thus more reliable for national capacity 
building. Regional training institutions or centers of excellence that are potential candidates for 
support include: (xi) the regional veterinary medicine school of Dakar; (xii) the regional school 
of rural equipment engineers (EIER) in Burkina Faso; the Katiebougou regional agricultural 
mechanization school in Mali, etc. (xii) the regional agricultural university of Thies in Senegal; 
(xiii) the Sahel institute (INSAH) in Mali; (xiv) AGRHYMET in Niger; (xv) Regional private-
public sector cooperation initiative for TGD such as the STCP (sustainable tree crops program, 
expanded to all key tree crops) would also be eligible for support; (xvi) Technology users 
associations such as ROPA (regional farmers organization) and INTERFACE (regional 
agribusiness organization) and their programs such as the technology development facility (TDF) 
program of INTERFACE. (xvii) regional association of agricultural extension and training 
service providers and their active involvement in CORAF's programs; (xviii) remote or missing 
critical research cooperation networks such as agro-industry and agricultural mechanization TGD 
networks. A missing link program most likely to be supported by the project would be: (xix) the 
regional communication/interconnectivity of all the above mentioned institutions and others in 
the region for effective networking and information sharing.  
 
1.4 
GEF resources will be earmarked and used on a competitive demand-driven basis to 
strengthen the scientific and technical capacities of key regional institutions for global 
environment M&E and mitigation, as well as the content and funding of their programs in order 
to build necessary institutional and human capitals for global environment management in the 
region. GEF resources will be used for instance to promote the teaching and use of GIS, tele-
detection, remote sensing and radar aperture tools in land use planning or land management, in 
M&E, impact assessment; carbon sequestration certification, new land management technologies 
(watersheds and river basins, the development and enforcement of regional biosafety regulations 
as well as cattle transhumance regulations, etc. Activities eligible for GEF support under 
WAAPP are listed in the Annex.  
 
Component 2 Financial resources mobilization and  harmonization of Financial Management 
Systems ($ 3 millions)  
 
2.1 
The project would support financial resources mobilization efforts to attract funds from 
various donors to establish, replenish and scale up a multi-donors trust fund (MDTF) . It would 
also support efforts to simplify and harmonize the financial management systems (FMS) and 
procedures of such funds so as to significantly reduce transaction costs faced by regional and 
national institutions in mobilizing funds and in reporting on their uses. The World Bank would 
administer the MDTF. The project would also support resource mobilization efforts for the West 
Africa Agricultural Development Fund (ECOWADF) to be administered by ECOWAS.  
 
2.2 
The project would also strongly encourage private sector participation in the financing of 
TGD institutions and programs. It will support activities needed to mobilize private sector 
investments in agricultural TGD in the region.  
 
Page  4
Component 3:  Support to national TGD programs and institutions. ($50 millions)  
 
3.1 
The project would support on a demand-driven basis country-specific programs that 
would be related to the regional programs, so as to ensure an effective impact of the latter at the 
national level. Such programs would normally contain mainly downstream activities that reflect 
and complement upstream activities of the regional programs , such as adaptive research, 
technology dissemination, application of curricula reforms at the national level, facilities for 
regional institutions hosted by a country, national scholarships or fellowships for training and 
research in regional institutions, agricultural trade promotion activities, etc. The project would 
also support the strengthening of the capacities of the relevant national TGD institutions to 
complement and implement regional programs or to apply their results on the ground at the 
national level. Sub-regional agricultural TGD cooperation initiatives between two or more 
countries would also be part of the national programs and would also be eligible for support. A 
complete menu of eligible activities is presented in the Annex.  
 
3.2 
The project would support such national programs and institutions in four countries 
though the following  AAPP-related projects (i) the agro-pastoral product diversification, 
intensification and market development project (PAFASP) of Burkina Faso; (ii) the agricultural 
services and farmers organization support projects (PASAOP) of Senegal and Mali; (iii) the 
proposed national agricultural productivity program (2nd  phase of AGSSIP) in Ghana. The 
specific national program activities to be funded through WAAPP will be identified and costed 
during project preparation.  
 
Component 4: Agricultural Productivity Initiatives Funds ($45 millions)  
 
4.1 
The project would support on demand other pertinent national and regional initiatives 
from national and regional institutions or stakeholders for trade negotiations, policy dialogue, 
policy harmonization and reforms, regulatory and institutional harmonization or reforms, market 
information systems and institutions aimed at creating the large and integrated markets necessary 
for efficient technology generation and diffusion.  
 
4.2 
Regional and national competitive funds will be made available and accessible on 
demand to fund such pertinent market integration initiative as well as other TGD initiatives and 
agricultural risk management initiatives.The Annex presents the menu of activities eligible for 
funding under the WAAPP.  
 
Component 5 Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  ($8 millions)  
 
5.1 
The project would strengthen the capacities of its implementation agencies and fund their 
management, monitoring and evaluation activities. CORAF would have project management 
responsibilities at the regional level for TGD activities, and ECOWAS would have such 
responsibilities for market development, policy and regulatory reforms or harmonization and risk 
management related activities.  Project management responsibilities at the national level would 
be handled within the national agricultural research and extension system (NARES) by the 
implementation agencies or units (PIUs) of national agricultural productivity and market 
development projects, or PRSCs.  
Page  5
5.2 
Internal and external M&E systems would be established with most likely the 
involvement of NEPAD and FARA for regional programs and that of CORAF and FARA for 
national programs   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project location is West Africa. Regional activities will be implemented in all or subsets of 
the fifteen member states of the Economic Community of West Africa States (ECOWAS. 
Additional support for national activities will be provided to the Phase 1 horizontal APL 
countries which are: Senegal, Burkina Faso, Mali and Ghana.   
 
E. 
 Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Institutional capacity for safeguard policies exist at the national level in ECOWAS member 
states and can be pooled to implement the project at both regional and national levels. ECOWAS 
being the Economic Community of West African States.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr John A. Boyle (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The net social and environmental effect of this project is expected to be positive since it 
would provide agricultural and natural resources management technologies and build 
institutional and human capacities to improve the management of natural resources, biodiversity 
and land management in particular. However, it is possible that certain environmental safeguards 
may be triggered from the regional and national programs that the project would support 
(biotechnology and biosafety program, dissemination of new agricultural technologies, 
etc.).Assessment of social and environmental sustainability would be embedded in the approval 
process of regional and national programs to be supported (through competitive grants 
mechanisms) by the project to ensure that any environmental or social impact will be mitigated. 
A
Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared, approved and 
disclosed. The SESA would examine the existing and potential environmental and social risks 
associated with stronger agricultural technology generation and dissemination (TGD) in the 
region, and consequent increases in agricultural production.   It would be undertaken in 
partnership with the targeted project institutions, plus relevant environmental/social 
institutions/organizations.   It would identify evident risks and how their minimization can be 
accomplished by these institutions/organizations as the program unfolds.  Preparation of the 
SESA would lay the foundation for ongoing collaborative work during program implementation.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The extent to which programs that the project would support, such as the dissemination and 
use of modern land use planning technologies and the promotion of biotechnology, would 
negatively affect natural habitats  is not clear. They will normally ensure that natural habitats are 
protected, restored , or managed and used in a sustainable manner. Natural Habitats may be 
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
triggered if inadequate protection-restoration and management practices are used. The risk will 
be assessed and addressed in the SESA mitigation measures. Any potential negative impact that 
might occur will be handled by the project consistent with Bank safeguard policies.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The Pest Management policy may be triggered  by the generation, dissemination and 
adoption of new agricultural production and intensification technologies, such as biological 
control technologies and agro-chemicals (insecticides, herbicides) that might reduce the number 
of some pests but increase the number of some others. The SESA will examine the risk 
strategically. It will identify key interventions (by country and/or crop) where risk reduction is 
most needed and doable, and can be funded by the project (eg. through policy, regulatory, 
extension, or capacity building activities); and further studies to clarify and prioritize other risks 
and what can be done about them.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The extent to which some of the capacity building activities, such as the promotion of 
modern land use planning technologies, would result in involuntary ressetlement is not yet 
determined. That will be assessed in the context of the SESA.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/22/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Preparation of the Strategig Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) document.  
 
TORs approved: September 5, 2005  
 
Consultants recruited: September 20, 2005  
 
Starting Date: November 1, 2005  
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
Completion Date : February 28, 2006  
 
Disclosure in Country: March 22, 2006  
 
Dusclosure at Infoshop: March 22, 2006   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Yves-Coffi Prudencio 
06/30/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
07/01/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
07/01/2005 
Comments:   
