Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1448 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Western Africa 
Project ID: P075994 
Project Name: WAPP APL 1 (1st Phase - COASTAL TRANSMISSION BACKBONE) 
Task Team Leader: Amarquaye Armar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
2.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
10.00 
 
KUWAIT: KUWAIT FUND FOR ARAB ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
 16.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.50
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed project is to create a unified electricity market among member 
states of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), in order to reduce 
electricity supply costs, improve the security and reliability of electricity supply and thereby 
foster regional energy integration through the establishment of the West Africa Power Pool 
(WAPP).  
 
WAPP is an integral element of the ECOWAS members? efforts for all states in West Africa to 
establish access to stable and continuous energy supply, which they regard as essential for 
economic development and social stability. The creation of an area without internal frontiers for 
energy contributes to economic and social progress, sustainable development, and more 
specifically to establishing a stable framework for the energy business. These higher level 
objectives are expressed in the ECOWAS Energy Protocol. ECOWAS member countries are 
Page  2
resolved to interconnect their energy markets based on a common solidarity and consistent with 
the rules applicable to the ECOWAS countries. WAPP further presents a political opportunity to 
provide a driving force towards a more comprehensive economic and political integration of the 
region.  
 
The World Bank is participating in the effort of building and strengthening the WAPP to 
promote cooperation and regional integration in West Africa. To this end, the ?Regional 
Integration Assistance Strategy for West Africa? (RIAS) was presented to the World Bank Board 
on August 2, 2001. The proposed APL program is a key component of the World Bank?s support 
for the WAPP and is designed as the principal vehicle for providing IDA co-financing to support 
the physical integration of the power systems of 10 of the 15 ECOWAS member states.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The primary focus of IDA support to WAPP in the period of 2005 - 2011 Phase 1 under the 
proposed IDA APL Lending Instrument (APL 1, 2 and 3) will be co-financing of priority 
interconnection lines, key regional hydropower generating facilities, program preparation and 
implementation assistance and technical assistance to progressively put in place the WAPP 
Cooperation Model, including the necessary institutional and regulatory capacity building. This 
ISDS applies to APL 1 only, which is to finance the construction of the 330 kV transmission line 
from Aboadze to Volta in Ghana.  
 
The proposed size of the IDA commitment for APL 1, 2 and 3 is US$ 350 million. About US$ 
30 million is earmarked under APL 1 in support of (i) construction of the Aboadze-Volta 
transmission line by the power utility in Ghana, (ii) technical assistance for the power utilities of 
Ghana, Togo and Benin (for the completion of the 330 kV WAPP Zone A Transmission 
Backbone from Prestea, Ghana, to Sak?t?, B?nin), and (iii) to Senegal (to assist in pre-
investment activities associated with the proposed OMVS 60 MW F?lou Hydropower Project).  
The remainder is earmarked for APL 2 (FY06) and APL 3 (FY07) to support (i) the construction 
of the Zone A Transmission Backbone, (ii) the power utilities from Mali and Cote d?Ivoire to 
finance development of the 225 kV WAPP (Zone B) Transmission Hub, (iii) strengthening of the 
Ghana grid, (iv) Hydropower rehabilitation in Zone A, and (v) Hydropower development in 
Zone B.  
 
The strategic priorities for IDA co-financing under APL 1 and 2 include:  
 
(1) Investments to upgrade the capabilities of transmission system operators (TSOs) of 
ECOWAS Member States so that they can implement policy decisions to assure regional security 
of supply under the WAPP Cooperation Model.  Examples of such investments include those to: 
(a) upgrade load dispatch and real-time system stability and control capabilities; and (b) establish 
a
new control center;  
 
(2) Investments to remove critical bottlenecks along designated WAPP transmission corridors 
and installing additional transmission lines so as to meet the N-1 criteria for the WAPP 
Cooperation Model;  
 
(3)Pre-investment activities to facilitate development of critical multi-national hydropower 
generation facilities within WAPP; and   
Page  3
(4) A wide range of technical assistance, for institutional/regulatory/power systems 
development and project preparation and implementation, to help put in place the WAPP 
Cooperation Model; and engineering/environmental services for the preparation and 
implementation of investment projects (including but not limited to IDA-financed projects under 
the APL) to facilitate the establishment of a unified electricity market among ECOWAS Member 
States.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The APL 1 investment project consists of one country project located in Ghana. The project is a 
330 kV transmission line from Aboadze to Volta of 216 km length with appropriate terminations 
at Aboadze and Volta. The transmission system will consist of the transmission line itself 
(including about 430 towers of 40 meters height, conductors and their supports), its associated 
right-of-way (ROW), and two 450MVA 330/161kV autotransformers to be installed at the line 
ends at Aboadze and Volta switching stations to provide connection to the rest of the system. 
The total land area to be taken up by the ROW will be approximately 8.6 km2 corresponding to a 
40 m wide strip running along the entire proposed 215 km route. In all, about 38 communities 
are affected by the project. There will be no need for resettlement of persons. The land taken for 
the tower base and the access roads will be permanent, whereas the land taken for the ROW will 
allow for continued cultivation by farmers with crops not exceeding 1.5 meters. Alterations in 
tower spotting will assist in circumventing a few sacred groves and shrines (especially Guako 
Grove at Pokuase), the Yenku Block "B" forest reserve, and the Apra Hills forest reserve.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Ghana's electric utility, the Volta River Authority (VRA), has implemented numerous World 
Bank projects in accordance with the World Bank's rules. For APL 1, VRA has prepared an 
Environmental Impact Assessment and a Resettlement Action Plan for the Aboadze-Volta 
transmission line. Both were reviewed by the World Bank and found to be adequate. Minor 
World Bank comments are currently being addressed by VRA. VRA will in addition develop an 
Environmental Management Plan, which will include rules for the management of wastes, rules 
for compliance with Ghana's Forestry Divisions Guidelines, traffic management, environmental 
and safety hazards (including environmental awareness programs for workers). VRA will also 
submit an annual environmental report. An Environmental Permit has been issued by Ghana's 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), which allows VRA to commence construction of the 
transmission line.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
For the proposed project, category B is proposed for APL 1 in view of the limited complexity 
of the investment to be undertaken, and given that only one country (Ghana) is involved. For the 
proposed investment a full environmental and resettlement assessment has been conducted and is 
available for project appraisal, as recommended under the World Bank's safeguard and social 
impact policies. Later installments of the APL program may contain components that could be 
rated into A-category or C-category.  
 
In order to streamline investments in the WAPP in the future, West African countries will 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
engage from APL1 onwards in a process of harmonizing environmental and resettlement 
standards across the region. For this purpose a framework program is being developed and to be 
implemented under ECOWAS leadership. Moreover, Environmental Framework Documents 
(EFD) will be developed in cooperation with countries for all future lending activities in the 
APL. It should also be mentioned that a key feature of the regional interconnection scheme is the 
expected positive impact on the environment as it will allow the increased use of less 
environmentally harmful power generation sources such as gas and hydropower to displace oil-
based generation, which produces higher levels of atmospheric gases (including carbon dioxide) 
and particulate emission. On the basis of the above project categorization as "B", the 
responsibility to handle safeguards is assigned to the task team, with clearances to be issued by 
the Sector Manager. The safeguards team members are John Boyle and Dan Aronson.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
See comments made under EIA.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/17/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan (Actual)  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/11/2005  
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure  02/24/2005  
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 02/24/2005  
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework (Actual)  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2004  
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure  02/28/2005  
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 02/28/2005   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Amarquaye Armar 
03/03/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/04/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joel J. Maweni 
03/04/2005 
Comments:   
