Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/08/2005 
Report No.:  AC1759
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Africa 
Project ID:  P072202 
Project Name:  Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Project 
Task Team Leader:  William Leeds Lane 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 26, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 19, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Biodiversity (P);Other environment 
and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
12.73 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 
FONDS FRANCAIS DE L'ENVIRONNEMENT MONDIAL 
1.00 
 
NORWAY: MINISTRY OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
3.00 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
6.60 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
12.00
22.60 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective relates specifically to assessing the current status of 
offshore fisheries within the 200 mile Exclusive Economic Zones (EEZ?s) of coastal 
states in the South West Indian Ocean. The project aims to generate scientific knowledge 
and develop legal and institutional capacity to implement an action plan in order to 
mange these fisheries for maximum economic returns, consistent with a management 
strategy that stresses environmental sustainability and socially equitable distribution of 
the benefits of exploitation. The project will adopt  an ecosystem approach which will 
lead to an improved understanding of transboundary and environmental influences on 
stock health, the life histories of key species and variability in inter-annual estimates of 
stock abundance.  
 
Page  2
Outcomes  
 
(i) 
To identify and study exploitable offshore fish stocks within the SWIO, and more 
specifically to become able to differentiate between environmental (LME-related) and 
anthropogenic impacts on shared fisheries.  
 
(ii) 
To develop institutional and human capacity through training and career building 
needed to undertake and sustain  an ecosystem approach to natural resource management 
consistent with WSSD marine targets;  
 
(iii) 
To foster development of a regional fisheries management structure for 
implementing the LME-based approach to ecosystem based management through 
strengthening the , Southwest Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (SWIOFC) and other 
relevant regional bodies;  
 
(iv) 
To mainstream biodiversity in national fisheries management policy and 
legislation, and through national participation in regional organizations that promote 
sustainable exploitation of fisheries resources..  
 
Indicators  
 
1)  Awareness raised amongst key stakeholders (Coastal States) on the TDA and;  
 
2)  TDA recognized by the Coastal Sates;  
 
3)  SAP approved by the contracting parties (Coastal States);  
 
4)  Coordination and synergy established between  regional efforts;  
 
5)  Improved analysis of historical, existing and new data.   
 
3. Project Description 
COMPONENT 1: Assessment of Data and Information Technology including; 
Subcomponent 1: Fisheries data collection and evaluation; Subcomponent 2: Compiling 
of a data atlas for SWIOFP; Subcomponent 3: Establishment of Information Technology, 
data handling and communications systems  
 
COMPONENT 2: Assessment and sustainable utilization of crustaceans, 
including;Subcomponent 1: Assessment of deep-water crustaceans, and Subcomponent 2: 
Assessment of shallow-water crustaceans  
Page  3
COMPONENT 3: Assessment and sustainable utilization of demersal fish, including;  
Subcomponent 1: Assessment of deep-water demersal fish, and Subcomponent 2: 
Assessment of shallower water demersal fish  
 
COMPONENT 4: Assessment and sustainable utilization of pelagic fish, including;  
Subcomponent 1: Assessment of large pelagic species, and Subcomponent 2:  
Assessment of mall pelagic species  
 
COMPONENT 5: Monitoring and surveillance of fishing effort and catch  
 
COMPONENT 6: Assessment of utilization of non-consumptive marine biological 
resources, including;  Subcomponent 1: Mapping of non-consumptive resources, 
Subcomponent 2: Bi-catch interactions with fisheries, and Subcomponent 3: 
Identification of bio-indicators of ecosystem health  
 
COMPONENT 7: Development of resource management structures, including;  Sub-
component 1: Identification of relevant national and international legislation and other 
instruments relevant to the SWIOFP goal, Sub-component  2: Harmonization of 
legislation between countries.  
 
Sub-component, and 3: Development of regional resource management structures and 
capacity   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The geographic focus of SWIOFP is the Agulhas and Somali Currents LMEs.  The 
Agulhas Current Large Marine Ecosystem (ACLME) stretches from the north end of the 
Mozambique Channel to Cape Agulhas and is characterized by the swift, warm Agulhas 
current, a western boundary current that forms part of the anticyclonic Indian Ocean gyre. 
The Somali Current Large Marine Ecosystem (SCLME) extends from the Comoros 
Islands and the northern tip of Madagascar up to the Horn of Africa. It is characterized by 
the monsoon-dominated Somali current, which has a strong, northerly flow during the 
summer, but reverses its flow in the winter. These two LMEs are both complex and 
interactive, and are strongly influenced by the South Equatorial Current, which is 
funneled across the Mascarene Plateau east of Madagascar before diverging north and 
Page  4
south to become components of the Agulhas and Somali Currents. These LMEs are 
characterized by a dynamic system of ocean currents and upwelling cells, which regulate 
climate and influence weather patterns, sea temperatures, water chemistry, productivity, 
biodiversity and fisheries.  They also represent an important repository of living marine 
resources, which underpin the livelihoods of coastal communities in 10 countries and 
territories.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The SWIOFP is a GEF International Waters Project.  By definition it would trigger the 
BP 7.5 Safeguard Policy.  However, there are no international waters issues that must be 
discussed between riparian countries as all countries riparian to the Southwest Indian 
Ocean are directly (Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique, South Africa, Comoros, Madagascar, 
Seychelles, Maruitius and France) or indirectly (the provisional government of Somalia) 
involved in the Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
none   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
not relevant   
 
Page  5
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
not relevant   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr William Leeds Lane 
08/10/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr William Leeds Lane 
08/30/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
09/08/2005 
Comments:  This is a transfered project.  Approval is by Sector Manager rather than RSC. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Karen Mcconnell Brooks 
09/30/2005 
Comments:  AFTS2 has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities 
