Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  48981 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Albania 
Project ID: P078933 
Project Name: Education Excellence and Equity Project 
Task Team Leader: Richard R. Hopper 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 1, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (35%);Secondary education (30%);Tertiary education 
(20%);Central government administration (10%);Sub-national government administration 
(5%) 
Theme: Education for all (33%);Vulnerability assessment and monitoring 
(17%);Administrative and civil service reform (17%);Decentralization (17%);Education 
for the knowledge economy (16%) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00 
 COUNCIL 
OF 
EUROPE 
15.00 
 
EC: European Investment Bank 
15.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the Education Excellence and Equity Program is to support the implementation 
of the first phase of Albania’s National Education Strategy 2004-2015.  The support will focus 
on improving the quality of learning outcomes in basic education, expansion of coverage in 
general secondary education, and the first stage of the reform of tertiary education.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed program would support the implementation of the National Education Strategy, 
and the development and the initial implementation of the tertiary education strategy which is 
complementary to pre-university education strategy.  
 
Page  2
1.  Governance: strengthening management capacity and decentralization.  The first priority 
area aims to improve the leadership and managerial capacity of the education sector.  This 
includes activities associated with the decentralization of the education service delivery, 
especially strengthening the leadership, decision making and resource management at the school 
level, the reform of the Ministry of Education and Science to move towards performance based 
management system, and full development and utilization of the educational management 
information system (EMIS) for decision making.  This is expected to form an institutional 
foundation to address other priority areas.  
 
2.  Improving the quality of learning outcomes.  The second priority area focuses on the quality 
of teaching-learning inputs, processes and outcomes in a holistic manner.  It will address the 
issues of curriculum reform, including the development of national curriculum framework, 
rationalization of subjects, content articulation, vertical and horizontal integration and textbook 
development.  To enable and implement curriculum reform, teacher training and development 
has to be closely aligned; the content and processes of teacher training will also be reformed.  
The reform in the student assessment will continue through strengthening the capacity of the 
National Center for Evaluation and Assessment, development of national plan for evaluation in 
education, and improving the transparency and integrity of national examination system.  
 
3.  Investing in and rationalizing modern educational infrastructure, especially in secondary 
education.  The third priority area is to address more efficient (re)allocation and investment in 
physical infrastructure and human recourses and to upgrade the learning environment especially 
at secondary level.  This priority area will support the MoES in making investment decision 
based on school mapping which takes into consideration of the declining fertility rate and 
migration factors.  Science laboratories and IT facilities, which are essential for increasing the 
competitiveness of school graduates, will be provided to general secondary schools in line with 
the new curriculum and teacher training to be supported in priority area 2.  
 
4.  Setting the stage for tertiary education reform.  The fourth priority area is to set the stage for 
the reform of the tertiary education system.  Albania signed the Bologna Declaration in 2003.  
This priority area will fist support the MoES and universities to carry out a thorough review of 
the system to identify and sequence reform activities, which include, the development of a 
degree and credit system comparable in other European countries, increasing financial autonomy 
and accountability of universities, strengthening the quality assurance mechanism, and 
promoting university partnership arrangements.  It also aims to expand the opportunities for 
students by mobilizing private financing and provision and making the use of public resources 
more efficient.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
To be decided/Nationwide.  (The proposed program adopts a sector-wide approach to support the 
national education strategy, and specific location where the funds will be spent cannot be 
ascertained).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
In the previous project, the Education Reform Project (2000-2004), the Borrower developed and 
enforced an Environmental Management Plan to mitigate identified risks related to rehabilitation 
Page  3
of schools, procurement of non-lead paint, proper disposal of construction waste and sanitation 
materials, tree planting and raising community awareness of environmental issues.  Through this 
project, the capacity of the Ministry of Education and Science has gradually built to address 
safeguard issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Johnson Appavoo (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is a SWAp with relatively low environmental risk.  An Environmental 
Management Plan will be prepared to guide civil works investments for the education sector.  
Rehabilitation will not require land acquisition or loss of income with respect to illegal or 
unauthorized users of land; OP4.12 is not triggered.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/24/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EMP will be based on previous education projects in Albania with respect to safeguards 
compliance, and adjust the EMP (or supervision approach) accordingly. The EMP will be 
disclosed in country and in Infoshop before appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Keiko Miwa 
10/20/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Rita Klees 
11/28/2005 
Comments:  I clear as acting safeguards coordinator 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Maureen Anne McLaughlin 
10/20/2005 
Comments:   
