Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/13/2005 
Report No.:  AC1439
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Albania 
Project ID:  P086807 
Project Name:  Albania Integrated Coastal Zone Management and Clean-up Project 
(APL-1) 
Task Team Leader:  Rita E. Cestti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 12, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 9, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);Solid waste 
management (30%);General public administration sector (15%);Ports, waterways and 
shipping (15%);Other social services (10%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Other environment and natural resources management 
(S);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.96 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.62 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.82 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
5.20 
 
NETHERLANDS, GOV. OF THE  (EXCEPT FOR MOFA/MIN.OF 
DEV.COOP.) 3.67 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
2.23
17.54 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall objective of the proposed APL-supported Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management and Clean-up Program (ICZMCPr) is to protect the Albanian coastal 
resources and cultural assets and promote their sustainable development and 
management. The Program objective will be achieved through: (i) establishing an 
integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) institutional and policy framework and 
strengthening the broader regulatory capacity at the central, regional and local levels for 
protection of coastal and marine natural resources; (ii) increasing access to basic services 
associated with improvement of the quality of life and attractiveness of the coastal areas; 
Page  2
and (iii) implementing sub-projects aiming at promoting sustainable tourism sector 
development. The APL-supported program will be implemented in two phases over 7 
years.  
 
Since Albania is making efforts in developing environmental laws and regulations and 
in harmonizing them with European Union (EU) directives, the ICZMCPr will be aligned 
with strategic directions of the EU with respect to Integrated Coastal Zone Management 
and other EU environmental directives.  Similarly, ICZM institutional framework will in 
full harmony with the ongoing decentralization reform implemented by the Government.  
 
Phase 1. The APL's first phase consists of the proposed Integrated Coastal Zone 
Management and Clean-up Project (ICZMCP-APL1) and aims at setting-up and initiating 
an integrated coastal zone management approach to reduce coastal degradation. The main 
focus will be to enhance the legal framework, regulatory policy and governance of the 
coastal zone, promote integrated coastal zone planning and encourage community 
support for sustainable coastal zone management. Phase 1 will contribute in improving 
environmental conditions, enhancing the quality of life, preserving and improving the 
cultural and architectural heritage of targeted southern coastal communities, and reducing 
risks to human health in surrounding communities of the Porto-Romano industrial hot-
spot.  
 
Phase 2. The APL's second phase (ICZMCP-APL2) will further develop the 
institutional, legal and regulatory capacity for ICZM, particularly at regional and local 
levels and support regulated and sustainable coastal tourism development to serve as an 
engine for economic growth. Building on the ICZM framework set in place under the 
ICZMCP-APL1 and on lessons learnt, the ICZMCP-APL2 is expected to significantly 
expand the Program's support for coastal environmental infrastructure and rehabilitation, 
protected areas management, conservation and restoration of critical coastal and marine 
ecosystems, remediation of contaminated sites, and scaling-up community-driven tourism 
development; and to support public-private partnerships. Specific areas of support under 
the ICZMCP-APL2 will be worked out during phase one. The second phase is expected 
to be fully blended with the GEF-funded project under the forthcoming 
Mediterranean/Adriatic Seas Partnership Investment Fund.  
 
Triggers for Phase 2. The performance triggers to proceed to Phase 2 reflect the 
commitment of the Government to initiate and adopt the policy and institutional reforms 
supported by Phase 1, which is paramount for the overall success of the Program. The 
triggers for moving ahead with Phase 2 are:  
 
-
The ICZM institutional, legal and regulatory framework is established, implemented 
and enforced at both national and sub-national levels.  
 
-
The formulation of regional and local land use development plans in the coastal 
region have followed agreed land-use planning criteria and methodologies, have 
integrated strategic environmental assessment into the planning process, and have 
adopted a participatory planning approach.  
Page  3
-
The Southern Coast Development Plan (SCDP) and the accompanying Strategic 
Environmental Assessment and resettlement framework has been completed and adopted 
to guide investments in the southern coast of Albania.  
 
-
Institutional capacity for enforcement and monitoring of land-use plans, building 
regulations, and environmental impact assessment legislation has improved on the 
southern coast and results of monitoring and inspections to assess compliance are made 
available to the public.  
 
-
Porto Romano land use plan is formulated and adopted by the Municipal Council of 
Durres.  
 
-
Ministry of Territorial Adjustment and Tourism shows marked increased in 
environmental issues and concerns.  
 
-
APL Phase 1 clean-up and environmental/sanitation infrastructure investment 
activities are completed or demonstrate satisfactory progress (at least 70% commitment 
and 50% disbursement of Component B- Coastal Environmental Infrastructure and 
Rehabilitation).  
 
The development objective of the proposed Integrated Coastal Zone Management and 
Clean-up Project (ICZMCP-APL1) is to set-up and initiate an integrated coastal zone 
management approach to reduce coastal degradation through: (i) enhancing regulatory 
policy and governance of the coastal zone, land use and regional planning, and 
institutional capacity; (ii) initiating targeted municipal and community investments in the 
southern coast to improve environmental conditions, enhance cultural resources and 
encourage community support for sustainable coastal zone management; and (iii) 
reducing soil and groundwater contamination in the former chemical plant at Porto 
Romano.  
 
Key indicators for achievement of project objectives are the following:  
 
-
The Southern Coast Development Plan (SCDP) has been formulated and adopted by 
the National Council of Territorial Adjustment.  
 
-
Development of communal infrastructure in the southern coastal area is in compliance 
with the SCDP.  
 
-
Local land use planning and issuing of construction permits in the southern coast is in 
compliance with the parameters and measures set forth in the SCDP.  
 
-
New buildings in the southern coastal area do not disturb the existing spatial value and 
characteristics.  
 
-
Local, regional and national physical planning efforts and development initiatives are 
aligned with the principles and guidelines of the SCDP.  
 
-
Local and stakeholder participation is incorporated into coastal zone management 
decisions.  
 
-
At least 5,000 tons of household waste and 5,000 tons of construction and demolition 
waste actually collected and disposed off in proper facilities.  
 
-
At least 50% of samples from monitoring bathing waters and shellfish areas in the 
southern coast will be tested against Albania's standards and EU directives.  
 
-
Sustainable tourism and visitor expenditures in the southern part of Albania benefiting 
wider communities.  
Page  4
-
Reduction of soil contamination in areas adjacent to population centers in Porto 
Romano.  
 
-
Protected areas management plan for Butrint National Park developed with wide 
stakeholder participation and rules are enforced through appropriate by-laws.  
 
-
Participatory zoning and land use plans in place for at least 3 coastal municipalities 
and/or communes.  
 
-
Participatory local development plans formulated and adopted by at least 5 
communes/municipalities located in the southern coast.    
 
-
Execution of environmental impact assessment (EIA) in accordance with the EIA 
procedures and in compliance with Albanian law before obtaining environmental permits 
and starting construction and development activities in the southern coastal area.   
 
3. Project Description 
The APL Phase 1 project will consist of the following components and activities:  
 
Component A: Integrated Coastal Zone Management Policy and Institutional Capacity 
Building (US$3.72 million: US$1.80 million IDA; US$1.25 million PHRD; US$0.36 
million GEF; US$0.26 million GoA). The objective of this component is to enhance the 
capacity of the Albanian authorities to manage the coastal resources of the Adriatic and 
Ionian Seas through the development of an adequate operational policy, legal and 
regulatory framework as well as financial/economic instruments for ICZM; strengthening 
capacity to increase efficiency and effectiveness of regulatory, planning and management 
functions for ICZM at the central, regional and local levels; strengthening coastal water 
quality monitoring network; strengthening protected areas management in Butrint 
National Park; enhancing the knowledge base; and raising awareness of the coastal issues 
in Albania. Component A comprises two sub-components: strategic policy support and 
coastal management strengthening. Specifically, the component will support:  
 
-
Strengthening capacity at the central, regional and local levels to enforce regulatory 
responsibilities for land use planning and regulations including compliance with 
construction permits.  
 
-
Development and acquisition of adequate management tools such as integrated GIS-
based land use applications.  
 
-
Design and enactment of adequate financial and economic incentives to encourage 
behavioral changes in human activities in the coastal areas.  
 
-
Development of the policy and legal framework for ICZM.  
 
-
Establishment and capacity building of a functional ICZM institutional framework.  
 
-
Strengthening of the environmental monitoring capacity along the coastal zone.  
 
-
Development and codification of the SCDP.  
 
-
Formulation of a selected number of local land-use plans for coastal 
municipalities/communes.  
 
-
Updating of the protected area management plan for the Butrint National Park.  
 
Component B: Coastal Environmental Infrastructure and Rehabilitation (US$22.53 
million: US$10.98 million IDA; US$4.49 million GoA; US$0.45 million GEF; US$0.86 
million beneficiaries; US$0.54 PHRD; and US$5.20 million EU). The objective of this 
Page  5
component is to assist southern coastal municipalities and local communities to help 
preserve, protect and enhance Albania?s coastal and cultural resources leading to 
improvements on the environmental conditions of the coastal area and encouraging 
community support for sustainable coastal zone management. Specific physical 
investments will be processed on a rolling basis within the framework of the SCDP and 
local development plans.  The range of physical investments eligible will be established 
in advance, and have been grouped in three-sub-components: southern coastal solid waste 
management, Saranda gateway and coastal village conservation and development 
program. Specifically, the component will support:  
 
-
Improvements in solid waste management in the south coastal zone, including the 
design and construction of two municipal landfills in Saranda and Himare.  
 
-
Transformation of the Port of Saranda into a dedicated ferryboat and passenger 
terminal to facilitate access of passengers and vehicles to south Albania.  
 
-
Establishment of a Coastal Village Conservation and Development Program to offer 
financial and other form of support to local governments and communes located in the 
Ionic coast committed to comply with program requirements (through a "Partnership 
Agreement") for the implementation of sub-projects aiming at improving public utility 
infrastructure for environmental and cultural heritage protection and enhancement, 
supporting sustainable tourism development, revitalizing traditional architectural 
heritage; as well as to communes surrounding the Butrint National Park for promoting 
environmental protection and sustainable economic activities.  
 
Component C: Porto Romano Hot Spot Clean-Up (US$5.06 million; US$0.20 million 
IDA; US$3.66 Government of The Netherlands; US$0.87 million GoA; US$0.32 million 
PHRD). The objective of this component is to contain soil and groundwater 
contamination in the former chemical plant at Porto Romano, on the outskirts of Durres, 
considered as one of the most seriously contaminated locations in the Balkans. 
Component C comprises four sub-components: strengthening of implementation 
capacity, hydrogeological and environmental monitoring; carrying out critical 
remediation and rehabilitation works; and implementing a resettlement plan. The 
component will also build capacity in hazardous waste management within the Ministry 
of Environment, which could be further applied to deal with other critical hotspots 
throughout the country. Specifically, the component will support:  
 
-
Technical assistance and support on supervision.  
 
-
Capacity building in hazardous waste management.  
 
-
Establishment of long-term environmental monitoring system.  
 
-
Prevention and remediation works.  
 
-
Establishment of a model for replication for dealing with the clean-up of other 
hazardous hot-spots along the coast.  
 
Component D: Project Management and Monitoring (US$1.63 million; US$1.34 million 
IDA; US$0.15 million GEF; US$0.13 million PHRD). This component will provide 
support for project management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation. It will finance 
technical assistance, office equipment and furniture, training, and incremental operational 
Page  6
costs. Component D includes three sub-components: project coordination support; project 
implementation support; and monitoring, evaluation and communication support.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location is the Southern Coast of Albania   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan (ECSSD) 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will trigger OP/BPs 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), and the other policy 
safeguards that are applicable are:  OP 4. 12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and OPN 11.03 
(Cultural Property).  
 
The preliminary feasibility study has confirmed that the proposed rehabilitation of the 
Saranda Port will not affect the straight of Corfu. The adverse effects of the proposed 
harbor works in the Saranda Port, which are mainly associated with the operation of the 
new facilities, are considered limited and of small scale since the proposed works concern 
the expansion of an already operating harbor. Therefore the international waterways 
safeguard policy is not triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The potential social and environmental implications of the project are defined though the 
Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) and for the Southern Coast 
Development Plan they will be discussed in the SEA that is being executed as part of the 
preparation of the Southern Coast Development Plan.   
 
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No relevant treatment of alternatives imposed at this stage. They will be triggered during 
the implementation of this FI category.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The objective of the project is to protect the country's coastal and marine resources and 
promote environmental and social sustainable development of the coastal zone. As part of 
project preparation, the Government has drafted the ESSF to address environment, 
potential land acquisition as well as cultural property issues associated with the 
infrastructure investments that meet with the requirements of Albanian laws and Bank's 
operation policies on EA, involuntary resettlement and cultural property.  
 
The ESSF reviews the country's system and sets procedures to be followed during 
implementation. As a consequence, subprojects that trigger the Bank's safeguard will be 
cleared by the Bank prior to implementation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the project are the Ministry of Territorial Adjustment and Tourism, 
the Ministry of Environment, the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunication, the 
Saranda Port Authority, the Municipality of Durres, the Butrint National Park 
Administration, the regional Chark in Vlora and the respective municipalities and 
communes along the Southern Albanian Coast  
 
Preliminary consultations are planned for April 6 and 7 with all key regional and local 
stakeholders in Vlora, Himara and Saranda municipalities about the ESSF.  
 
As detailed in the ESSF, Bank's procedures for consultation and disclosure will be 
followed.  
 
The implementation unit (PCU, including the the Coastal Village Conservation and 
Development Implementation Team) will monitor project execution of subprojects to 
ensure that all requirements and specifications are met and environmental considerations 
are incorporated according to the EMP.  
 
The aims of the EMP and its execution are to: (i) include conditions and mitigating 
measures of project approval and ensure that these conditions are working effectively; (ii) 
verify that environmental impacts are as predicted or permitted; (iii) take actions to 
manage unforeseen changes; (iv) optimize environmental benefits; and (v) improve EIA 
practice in the future. The key tasks of monitoring EMP implementation are: (i) 
surveillance and supervision; (ii) impact and compliance monitoring; (iii) environmental 
auditing; (iv) evaluation of EIA effectiveness and performance; and (v) post-project 
analysis.  
 
Page  8
The Project Authorizing Official (PAO) respectively the assigned Deputy Minsiter of 
the MoTAT will supervise the work of the PCU and report to the Government through a 
Project Steering Committee on the overall project implementation.  
 
Based on the Albanian Law the Regional Environmental Inspectorate (REI), functioning 
within the Ministry of Environment as a specialized body of environmental control, is 
responsible for performing regular evaluation and monitoring of subprojects. Overall, the 
monitoring should focus on measuring compliance with pollution standards and 
requirement of related permits. However, the municipalities, communes and local 
associations are responsible for monitoring a subproject's performance during operation; 
their capacity should be built at the local level and municipal staff through appropriate 
training to undertake these activities.  
 
Since the proposed Southern Coast Development Plan is expected to develop land use 
zoning requirements, recommendations for demolitions of illegal structures along the 
coastal line to regulate land use may cause controversy. However, no large-scale 
relocation of people or communities is envisaged and Albanian laws provide for the 
possibility of legalization and regularization of property ownership. Further, as reflected 
in the Development Program Letter and the ESSF, the government is committed to 
ensuring that the SDCP will have adequate provisions to mitigate impoverishment risks 
to the poor and vulnerable as a result of these demolitions. The Bank position on 
involuntary resettlement is that affected people, regardless of their legal rights to reside or 
conduct economic activities in the project area, (accounted for in a census on or prior to 
the cut-off date), are eligible for resettlement assistance. If the Policy on Involuntary 
Resettlement were indeed to be triggered for the SCDP component, exceptions to those 
deemed eligible for resettlement assistance will be made on the basis of an assessment of 
their socio-economic profile. This profile will be ascertained during a comprehensive 
socio-economic survey of people living in and dependent on the affected structures for 
their livelihoods. The project will also include institutional strengthening and capacity 
building of all relevant government institutions, including the Construction Police, and 
the judiciary  to develop criteria and procedures for the classification of illegal buildings 
and ensure transparency during demolition activities.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/11/2005 
 
Page  9
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Preliminary consultantions will take place from April 6 through April 7. Formal 
consultantions in key locations in the southern coast are scheduled for the week of April 
11.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Rita E. Cestti 
04/01/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Frank Van Woerden 
04/01/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Radhika Srinivasan 
04/06/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/08/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
04/08/2005 
Comments:   
