INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC625
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 18, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of         Project ID: P087970
Project Name: Egypt: West Delta Irrigation  Task Team Leader: Aldo Baietti.
Infrastructure Development Project       Maher F. Abu-Taleb, Co-TTL
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 17, 005  Estimated Board Date: January 25 
Managing Unit: MNSRE                     Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (90%);Water  Theme: Water resource management;
supply (10%)                             infrastructure services for private sector
development; participation and civic
engagement; rural services and
.__ _ _ _ _ __   infrastructure.
Specialists in the task team: Ahmed Shawky (Environment and Water Quality Specialist);
Knut Opsal (Social Specialist); Hany Shalaby (Social/Environment Specialist; ETC)
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IBRD: 150
Other financing amounts by source: GOE                         US$20 mnillion
FOREIGN SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED)                                 US$40 million
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Prdject Development Objective (PDO) is to introduce a framework for financial
sustainability.of irrigation infrastructure in the West Deltal and for greater efficiency in the use
of water resources and their conservation through the involvement of farmer stakeholders and
private sector participation in major aspects the design, construction, operations and
maintenance.
Since the 1980s, approximately- 1,000 land holders in the project area have developed successful
commercial farming based on groundwater irrigation along the Cairo-Alexandria Desert Road.
However, such developments have come at the cost of rapid aquifer depletion and increased
salinity, making water quality and availability the main constraints to sustained agricultural
activity in the area. Groundwater levels have dropped significantly since the early 1990s and
Thle West Delia area covers approxiamately 250,000 feddans (100,000 hectares) thal are currently being served by grouindsvater
irrigation. The project area encornpasses 100,000 ha and involves 1,000 export-orientedfarmrgers, and a substantial work-force.



unless the situation is reversed, the water table is expected to drop further at an average annual
rate of 1-2 meters/year in many parts of the project area, placing at severe risk an annual
agricultural economy currently estimated between $300 million and $500 million.
The proposed project will assist GOE develop and implement an appropriate institutional,
regulatory and financing model to supply surface irrigation water available on the basis of full
cost recovery and private sector participation. In doing so, the project will have the following
intermediate performance benchmarks during implementation: (a) a contract between the VVDHC
and a private operator selected through a competitive bidding process, which delineates the roles
and responsibilities of the borrower (i.e., WDHC) and the operator (who will design, construct,
operate, maintain the irrigation infrastructure, and assume the debt service of the loan; (b)
participation by the farming community in the area (dominated by commercial farming), in the
determination of system design options based on their willingness and capacity to pay for the
cost of service, and (c) development of institutional arrangement such as, farmer cooperatives
and user associations to ensure that sriall investors/farmers are able to exercise voice in project
preparation and service standards.
C. Project Description
The proposed project will finance the design and construction of a surface water conveyance and
distribution system to the West Delta area, based on irrigation services beneficiaries want and are
willing to pay for. Accordingly, the actual design configuration and coverage of the total
250,000 feddans within the West Delta will be specified following the completion of
"willingness to connect consultations" involving 1,000 stakeholder farmers. Farmer associations
will be established in order to make the consultations manageable within the scope of project
preparation. The proposed project will be implemented on the principle of full cost recovery
based on volumetric tariffs. Responsibility for operations, maintenance and loan amortization
will be assigned to private operator, who will be selected through a competitive bidding process.
The proposed project will consist of three components for an estimated total projedt cost of
US $210 million:
•  Component No. 1: Investment loan to finance works for the final design and construction
of a surface water conveyance and distribution system to the West Delta area and to
connect participating farms (US$200 million, estimate based on the pre-feasibility study).
*  Component No. 2: Agricultural Marketing/Logistics Technical Assistance to small and
medium scale farmers use surface water (US$5 million). This component will provide
technical assistance to small and medium farmers, so that they can also access the
profitable export markets for the cash crops.
•  Component No. 3: Capacity building for the WDHC and MWRI for oversight of
operation and to disseminate on possible replication of adopted PPP approach to other
areas in Egypt (US$5 million).



D. Project location
The project's service area is 250,000 feddans (about 100,000 ha), located in the West Delta area
at both sides of the Cairo-Alexandria road, between km 45 and km 80, including Wadi El Faragh
and Dina farms. Farmers in this area (currently over-using groundwater) are located in three
zones: East and West Desert Road (145.631 feddans), Kata (8.724 feddans), and Menouf and
Khatatba (100.645 feddans) zones. The area is administered by 4 govemnorates: Cairo, Menufiya,
Beheiyra and Alexandriya. The project absorbs its ownerships, labor and population through
these governorates. Most of the job opportunities are absorbed through Menufiya, Beheira and
Sharkiya. The majority of skilled labor migrates from Cairo and Alexandria, and unskilled labor
from Menufiya, Beheiyra and Sharkiya.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
MIWRI is mandated for water quality monitoring and management. Potential para-state partner
agencies (e.g., for legislation enactment and enforcement) include the Ministry of State for
Environmental Affairs; the Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation; the Ministry of Local
Development and Organization for Development of Egyptian Villages; the Ministry of Housing,
Utilities and New Communities (mandated for urban sewerage and rural sanitation); and the
West Delta Holding company. These agencies, together with the "irrigator-groups/federations"
likely formed by the project (to support all of the project's aforementioned four components),
have the capacity needed to address the safeguard policies triggered by the project, thus acting as
"regulators" for the environmental and social externalities of the proposed PPP.
Key environmental, social and occupational health and safety issues that are of potential concern
in the project include: (i) land acquisition and prior land uses; (ii) sustainability of irrigation
water supply in the event of a conjunctive, surface/underground; (iii) impacts on
environmentally-susceptible areas; (iv) the need for adopting an Integrated Pest Management and
pesticide use; (v) impacts of air 'and wastewater emissions/effluents and solid wastes; and (vi)
general worker health and safety issues.
Regarding land acquisition and prior uses, the areas to the west of the Nile Delta are desert lands
with sparse human habitation, thereby involuntary resettlement may prove to be a minimal and
indigenous peoples estimated at almost a nil. Regarding sustainability of irrigation water, an
assessment will be made of the roles of the Ministry of Water Resources and Irrigation and the
Ministry of Agriculture and Land Reclamation regarding maintaining the water supply-demand
balance, specially given the country's limitation in water resources availability. Regarding likely
impacts on ecologically susceptible areas, during project preparation it will be verified whether
there are sites of ecological importance in the project area and remedies to factor in the
ecological aspects will be outlined. Regarding the Integrated Pest Management and Pesticide use,
during project preparation TORs will be furnished for developing an integrated pest management
system that includes management, biological and chemical control systems to be implemented in
the event the project is. financed by the Bank. Regarding likely impacts of air and wastewater
emissions/effluents, no significant air emissions are envisaged from the agricultural activities
under the project, given that candidate plantations being cash crops as opposed to land-
intensive/subsistence crops in the Delta traditional lands where for instance rice husks would



potentially pose air pollution hazard. However, wastewater will potentially emanate from the
washing facilities of many grower/farmers (potential significant contaminants will include
chlorine) and from septic tanks. The project preparation will address options for remedies and/or
treatment for such wastewater, towards a compliance with the Bank guidelines and the national
environmental legislation (on both ambient water standards and specific-water-body standards).
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?  Safeguard Policy
If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[XI      Environmental Assessment (OjYBP 4.01)
Likely coupled with a social/socio-economic assessment (SEA)
[I      Natural Habitats (2PIBP 4.04)
[X]      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Typically triggered in irrigation and drainage operations. However, modem on-
farm irrigation would facilitate fertigation and control of pesticide residues.
[XI      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
Likely minimal; will be scrutinized by the sociallsocio-economic/environmental
assessment.
Lr 3    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
[ ]     Forests (QCOP1  4.36)
[] J    Safety of Dams (OPJBP 4.37)
[TBD]      Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
-(L ]   Projects in Disputed Areas (PBP/GP 7.60)}
LX I     Proiects on International Waterways (Q   RP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[X] A  [] B  [ ]C  []FI [ ] TBD (to be deternined)
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
would be prepared. June 15, 2005
By suipporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice thefinal deternination of the parties clasims on the
disputed areas



B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
ISDS
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timning should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
IV. APPROVALS
ISigned ayid sttbtritted by:                  c                                     t    /°
'Task Team Leader:   _'Da; te
|Approved b7y:                                         Uf\/
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Sherif Arif                 7Df/ tet 
Comments                                                                        q       1t
Sector Manager:                     v Ka         jate
Comments
Project categorization will be re-visited after size, scope, and potential impact of the project is
determined at the completion of the preparation.
_                                     f~__
2 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires thaL safeguard-relaLed documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.



