Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1440 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/16/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P092836 
Project Name: Institutional Strengtheing - ANSES II TA 
Task Team Leader: Kathrin A. Plangemann 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 11, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims at improving the efficiency, transparency and accountability of the 
social security administration in Argentina through a reengineering of its structures, processes 
and incentive systems to enhance service-delivery. In particular, the project will:  
 
(i) 
improve management quality by providing ANSES with modern management tools 
(strategy, operations, change management) for enhanced service-delivery and greater efficiency;  
 
(ii) 
reduce administrative costs, and prevent fraud, and other instances of improper payment 
to ensure that adequate benefits can be delivered to beneficiaries, with a view to enhancing the 
quality of services, improving the targeting of beneficiaries and reducing the fiscal cost of social 
security payments;  
 
(iii) 
promote greater interaction of ANSES with other institutions, fostering the dissemination 
and expansion of good management practices and strengthening its coordination with and the 
institutional capacity of the Social Security Secretariat; and  
 
(iv) 
ensure greater public scrutiny through improved public and private oversight mechanisms 
as well as improved coordination through change management methodologies.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
As part of the post-crisis state modernization strategy, this project presents a fundamental pillar 
of the Bank?s public sector reform agenda in Argentina. Based on an incremental approach that 
targets carefully selected and clearly sequenced interventions in key focus institutions and areas,  
the projects consolidates and expands the achievements of ANSES I, helping build transparency 
and efficiency building blocks for public sector reform. On the supply side, the project thus 
provides tools for institutional strengthening that not only consolidate the advances made under 
ANSES I, but also present examples of good management practices replicable to other 
institutions. This is reinforced at the demand side through participatory mechanisms that 
generate greater demand for institutional reforms, capable of triggering further institutional 
reforms in other areas and institutions. Change management tools will help communicate, 
expand, and replicate best management practices to other institutions, while helping strengthen 
consensus and ownership of reforms to enhance their sustainability across the public sector.  
 
Component 1: Institutional reengineering of ANSES  
 
This component aims at consolidating the organizational re-engineering of structures and 
procedures to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of ANSES, with a view to enhancing its 
service-delivery. In line with ANSES?s strategic plan for 2005-2010, the component will finance 
the institutional modernization to foster the design and implementation of the modern public 
administration tools, particularly by: (i) designing a new organizational structure, with 
streamlined management, audit and IT functions; (ii) simplifying core business procedures, in 
line with international benchmarking and the accreditation of standardized quality management 
(e.g. ISO 9001); (iii) developing a citizens-centric and service-driven corporate culture, including 
higher service standards and additional services options; (iv) implementing new strategic 
management tools, including the strengthening of the results-based monitoring and evaluation 
system SIGA;  (v) overhauling the human resource management system, with greater incentives 
for performance-driven management; (vi) strengthening of internal auditing and procurement; 
and (vii) operationalizing the e-government strategy to support these changes and to more 
effectively and efficiently link ANSES? clients and stakeholders.  
 
Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the Social Security Secretariat  
 
In line with the objectives of expanding the modern management synergies across the public 
sector, improving greater accountability among social security institutions and to prepare the 
necessary management capacity for a potential future social security reform, the project will 
support the institutional strengthening of the Social Security Secretariat.  
 
The project will finance (i) the institutional strengthening of its management capacity, though 
improved strategic management and planning capacities, (ii) the institutional strengthening of its 
technical capacity to prepare proposals and studies on selected social security issues; (iii) the 
institutional strengthening of its technological capacity to support the above changes and to 
provide greater access to information; and (iv) the institutional capacity to interact with other 
institutions and stakeholders, such as other social security agencies like ANSES, the 
superintendencies and civil society and the private sector to promote greater coordination among 
social security institutions and to foster a greater public dialogue on social security issues.  
 
Given the lack of consensus on a social security reform for the next years, the limited support to 
the Social Security Secretariat, and the trend towards a gradual shift of some social security 
functions from the Ministry of Labor to the Ministry of Economy, this component is designed to 
respond to the government request not to support any policy changes, but rather to focus on the 
Page  3
institutional strengthening of the Secretariat, especially to strengthen its management capacity in 
relationship with ANSES and other social security institutions.  
 
Component 3: Transparency and E-government  
 
This component aims at enhancing the transparency of ANSES through mechanisms to enhance 
the efficiency of payment procedures, improve access and exchange of information, and prevent 
fraud and other improper instances of payments through greater internal and external oversight.  
 
This would be supported through (i) continued fraud control, through increased prevention and 
expansion of internal and external control mechanisms; (ii) reduction of discretion in payments 
through the enforcement of uniform guidelines and procedural redesign; (iii) automatization of 
payment procedures based on the accreditation of beneficiaries and the greater integration and 
consolidation of information of existing internal and external databases consolidation in the 
Social Security Single Database (BUSS); (iv) redesign of procedures for other welfare payments, 
such as the Single System for Family Allocations (SUAF) and the Single System for 
Unemployment (SUDE) to ensure improved targeting and greater savings; (v) acquisition, 
development and implementation of hardware and software and ICTs, such as design of an 
electronic signature mechanisms for payments, and (vi) reduction of litigation and the loss of law 
suits by ANSES through greater prevention, mediation, and greater attention to pending law 
suits.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Coordination and Participation  
 
The fourth component would promote improved interaction with other institutions to exchange 
management and beneficiary information and disseminate management practices, greater 
involvement of beneficiaries, stakeholders and the public at large for greater internal and external 
oversight, and greater coordination with other social security institutions.  
 
This component would finance: (i) the systematization, dissemination, and expansion of 
management practices developed in ANSES; (ii) increased interaction with other public sector 
and especially social sector institutions; including increased cooperation with the AFIP, 
RENAPER and SYNTyS as well as with the National Anti-Corruption Office, and with 
provinces to help cross-check data to detect improper payments and to reduce the fiscal cost of 
pension payments; (iii) strengthening greater oversight by civil society, including an expansion 
of social accountability mechanisms through the internet, radio, a complaints hotline, and score-
cards mechanisms; (iv) greater involvement of beneficiaries, including the creation of an 
advisory group composed of retirees and other beneficiaries, and representatives from civil 
society oversight groups to track performance and (v) change management mechanisms to 
develop a communication strategy, build greater consensus for change among staff and 
stakeholders, reduce potential resistance and generate alliances to ensure the envisaged change 
will be sustainable and irreversible.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Buenos Aires, Argentina   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Not Applicable   
 
Page  4
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/08/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
not applicable   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Kathrin A. Plangemann 
04/01/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
02/25/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
04/01/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
