Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1557 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/13/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P090993 
Project Name: AR- Essential Public Health Functions 
Task Team Leader: Fernando Lavadenz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 10, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Population and reproductive health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
170.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
70.00
70.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Specifically, the project will: (i) strengthen policy making, health intelligence, and regulatory 
capacity in public health at Federal and Provincial levels; (ii) assure supplies and performance 
monitoring  for key public health programs including, among others, immunizations, HIV/AIDS, 
and TB; and (iii) improve social participation, health promotion, health education, and 
communications for behavioral change.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Building on the experience of VIGIA (Argentina Public Health Surveillance & Disease Control 
Project), the proposed project would contribute to improving the health intelligence of the 
system, particularly at the provincial levels, developing real-time public health information 
leading to action at a local level across the national health system and in the local community. 
With this purpose, the project will identify an agreed set of core data, from existing data sources 
where possible, to support the agreed measures of progress to be used nationally and 
provincially. Building also on the LUSIDA (Bank financed AIDS and Sexually Transmitted 
Disease Control Project, closed on December 31, 2003)  experience and on the upcoming 
Working Paper on Allocation of Resources for the HIV prevention in Argentina  the proposed 
Page  2
project would implement a comprehensive package of interventions to prevent and treat 
HIV/AIDS at the provincial level. Additionally, transitioning from the emergency program, 
support will be continued for modernized, more equitable and better quality public health 
programs providing public goods such as vaccines, anti-retrovirals, TB treatment and 
communicable diseases in border areas. The emphasis of the new project will complement the 
costly curative health interventions with strong prevention and health promotion interventions, 
and contribute to an improved and more cost-effective public health response to changing health 
priorities, including non-communicable diseases and injuries.  
 
At this stage the project cost is estimated to be US$240 million with a Bank loan of 
approximately US $ 170 million, to be implemented over 5 years. The project would have the 
following three components:  
 
Component 1: Strengthen National and Provincial Stewardship for Public Health (US$ 35 
million).  
 
Component 2:  Assure access and expanding population coverage of a selected guaranteed 
package of public health programs (US$ 120 million).  
 
Component 3: Social participation, health promotion and communication. (US $15 million).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Argentina has been actively working in the area of environment and specifically in the areas of 
health, indigenous and social participation issues. Although adverse social and environmental 
impacts are not expected to be significant, an assessment will be carried out of the adequacy of 
the existing health care waste management system(s) to be able to deal with the additional health 
care wastes (for example, needles from vaccines, medications, bloodkits, and other vector control 
supplies) generated under the project, and, if needed, a health care waste management plan will 
be designed to ensure compliance with the requirements of the Bank's Environmental 
Assessment Policy.  
 
After the PCN meeting held on August 9, 2005, it was agreed that the task team will discuss 
with the QAT team the type of EA and EA instruments that will be needed and whether the 
project should be reclassified to Category C.  Furthermore, the existing indigenous assessments 
and IPDP developed by the government of Argentina for the Provincial Maternal & Child Health 
Investment Project and other recent projects will be evaluated during preparation to verify their 
applicability to the current project.  
 
Since the project seeks to ensure universal coverage of a guaranteed package of health services, 
it will directly benefit indigenous communities and dispersed rural populations who are currently 
not covered.  The project will also involve consultations at the provincial level and with NGOs 
regarding social protection issues. A municipality in the border region will be singled out for 
more widespread consultations. The project will also build on lessons learned from LUSIDA 
about the empowerment of people in HIV/AIDs-affected communities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An assessment will be carried out of the adequacy of the existing health care waste 
management system(s) to be able to deal with the additional health care wastes (for example, 
needles from vaccines, medications, bloodkits, and other vector control supplies) generated 
under the project, and, if needed, a health care waste management plan will be designed to 
ensure compliance with the requirements of the Bank's Environmental Assessment Policy.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Since the project seeks to ensure universal coverage of a guaranteed package of health 
services, it will directly benefit indigenous communities and dispersed rural populations who are 
currently not covered.  The project will also involve consultations at the provincial level and with 
NGOs regarding social protection issues. A municipality in the border region will be singled out 
for more widespread consultations. The project will also build on lessons learned from LUSIDA 
about the empowerment of people in HIV/AIDs-affected communities. The existing indigenous 
assessments and IPDP developed by the government of Argentina for the Provincial Maternal & 
Child Health Investment Project and other recent projects will be evaluated during preparation to 
verify their applicability to the current project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/19/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TBD   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Fernando Lavadenz 
09/07/2005 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
09/12/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
09/13/2005 
Comments:   
