Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1258 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 1, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P070963 
Project Name: Education for a more 
productive and equitable Argentina 
Task Team Leader: Suhas D. Parandekar 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 20, 
2001 
Estimated Board Date: October 17, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge 
economy (P);Education for all (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 150 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The project would lead to an increase in the educational attainment of the population of school 
going age in rural areas of Argentina and would lead to an improvement in the probability of 
gainful employment for students of technical and vocational education in rural as well as urban 
areas. Educational attainment would be measured in terms of the timely completion of years of 
education through official statistics of the MECyT and the probability of gainful employment 
would be measured by the uptake of graduates through tracer studies of graduates.  
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The project seeks to take on the task of supporting the improvement of educational attainment in 
rural areas and the revitalization of technical and vocational education in a complex environment 
of provincial diversity. These two programs are part of a larger group of national programs. The 
other national programs include school construction, student scholarships, pre-service and in-
service teacher training, textbooks and equipment, a program for improvement of school quality, 
and a program to strengthen the information base for the educational sector. The Government 
budget and the medium term expenditure plan already provides financing for these activities, 
whether financed from general revenues or from external loans and grants. The activities for 
rural and for technical and vocational education are the ones for which MECyT is interested in 
Bank financing. Bank support, if made available, would go towards speeding up implementation 
Page  2
of the program, increase the geographical scope of the program, and hopefully, an improvement 
in the quality aspects of the program. Strategic support of a national program is a new way for 
Bank support in the education sector in Argentina. The decision to support strategic elements of 
a
national program is derived in part from the lessons learnt from previous Bank operations in 
the education sector. A factor limiting the effectiveness of  some of the previous Bank financed 
projects has been that even though excellent schools were constructed with project financing in 
marginal areas of high poverty, the proportionally limited size of this effort hampered 
effectiveness in terms of systemic impact. While the absolute and relative magnitude of Bank 
financing would not be changing under the proposed scheme, the integral support of provincial 
activities under a national policy umbrella would mean a more leveraged impact than was 
possible with a scheme of financing of ‘Bank project’ activities, often under parallel 
administrative structures.  
 
The principle of partnership provides a strong foundation for the proposed operation. MECyT 
has requested Bank support for the selected national programs – this selection forms the first 
level of partnership. The second level of the partnership is constituted in defining, together with 
the national and provincial authorities, the scope and form of Bank support within these two 
programs. The main challenge here is to take advantage of the considerable provincial diversity 
by looking for common ground and seeking scale economies from ‘building blocks’ to 
consolidate from the provinces to the national level. There are two central concerns that would 
be used in determining the nature of Bank support – improving the probability of development 
impact; and simplification of executing procedures so the project would not be continually 
delayed, as has been the unfortunate experience of previous education projects in Argentina.  
 
MECyT has been working over the past year or so together with the provincial authorities and 
with other agencies of the national government (Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Labor, 
Ministry of Agriculture) to design a policy framework for Rural as well as for Technical 
Education. The long process of consultation has resulted in the development of a ‘menu of policy 
options’  that puts together the different alternatives in a systematic way, where the provinces 
can find federal support for constructing their own projects in these areas. The existence of a 
menu of options respects the provincial diversity without forcing a ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach. 
The Bank would be aiding a process of upgrading the quality of federal and provincial 
relationships. The proposed modality would provide a better opportunity for exchanges of 
experience between provinces and for scale economies to be exploited, at the same time as 
provincial ownership is strengthened. The project would finance the development and 
implementation of provincial level programs through nationally provided transfers to provinces. 
The transfers would be made on the basis initially of approved provincial programs, and 
progressively against the execution of those programs. During the project preparation process the 
Bank team would thoroughly analyse the mechanisms and eligibility criteria that both the federal 
and provincial governments would use for the decision making process regarding the menu of 
options.   
 
Rural Education (tentatively 70% of loan amount):
 
The provincial programs to be constructed from the menu of options regarding rural education 
would be centered around a pedagogical institutional model that is tailored to the specific local 
Page  3
context of each province and the diversity within that province.  A pedagogical institutional 
model, as the name suggests, deals with the pedagogy or the teaching-learning process, and it 
describes the institutional arrangements for the same, to be implemented with a view that more 
children would enter the education process at an appropriate age, benefit from a quality 
education, and graduate on time. The precise input-mix would not be pre-identified by the Bank 
nor by the federal government. Rather, the provincial government would present a 
comprehensive policy package constructed from the building blocks that will have been agreed 
during project preparation.  The elements or building blocks of provincial programs that the 
Bank would finance would include: (a) Technical assistance
to develop and adapt  appropriate 
models for providing education in rural areas (such as models of alternance, of traveling 
teachers, transportation of students); (b) Training
of teachers, school administrators and others in 
the effective and efficient use of the models; (c) Construction
and rehabilitation to repair or 
expand existing school buildings; (d) Provision of basic services
(electricity, water) where it had 
not been available before. If legal, fiduciary and sustainability issues can be adequately 
addressed, the project would also finance (e) Recurrent expenditures
in those cases where a clear 
argument can be made about the value of such expenditures regarding augmenting the human 
capital stock in the concerned provinces.  
 
The programs would be implemented through contracts between the federal government and 
respective provincial governments. As far as possible, these contracts would include numerical 
goals for student enrolment. While details still need to be worked out in consultation with 
national and provincial government authorities, the arrangement would make it possible for 
provinces with greater needs, who demonstrate success in achieving the results, to receive a 
higher allocation of resources in subsequent transfer periods. Resources from the national 
program would also be used to support strengthening institutional capacity in the provincial 
governments in a sustainable way.  
 
Technical and Vocational Education (tentatively, 25% of loan amount):  
The government considers technical and vocational education as an area of highest priority for 
improving the link between education and the labor market. Recent legislation for technical and 
vocational education has been introduced into congress 
–
this legislation is expected to fill a 
lacunae left by the previous reforms regarding secondary education, though new laws are only a 
beginning to refurbish technical and vocational education. The reforms of 1990s set an ambitious 
agenda regarding secondary education. A ‘modular’ education was to be provided, that would 
provide students with a diversified knowledge to enter the labor market or to continue on for 
higher education. Under the ‘polimodal’ reforms, students could choose between modalities of 
humanities, science, economics and organization, communication, and design and production of 
goods and services. Within each of these modalities, the idea was  to provide a more eclectic 
curriculum as compared to that provided under the old secondary school system of specialization 
in particular subject areas. These reforms sought to integrate general and technical secondary 
education in so called technical vocational tracks (Trayectos Técnico-Profesionales or TTPs). At 
the same time, what had been prestigious national technical schools were transferred to 
provinces, which had scarce resources to provide the maintenance expenditures of these schools. 
As indicated in a draft  Bank report on ‘
Skills i
n
Argentina’  
which is being prepared  in parallel 
to this investment lending operation, the implementation of the reforms has been highly uneven 
and a very confused mix of options is available to students, depending on where they live. The 
Page  4
Skills study re
ports that “In 2002, from a total of 6,772 secondary schools, 2,046 were still 
traditional secondary schools (30%), 1,982 were in “transition” (29%) and 2,744 were Polimodal 
schools (41%).” It is estimated that there are about 1,200 technical schools in Argentina.  
 
The national policy regarding technical and vocational education seeks to bring some order into 
the offering of technical and vocational education. It is very important to note that the new 
emphasis on technical and vocational education does not seek a return to some mistaken notion 
of halcyon days in the past – it is rooted in a modern understanding about the role that training 
and education systems play in fostering economic growth through productivity increases of the 
labor force.
1
The project would support selected elements of the national program to rejuvenate 
technical and vocational education. Following the same logic as for the support of rural 
education, the national government would transfer resources to provinces for revitalizing 
technical and vocational education. An important special aspect regarding the national program 
for technical and vocational education is that the program would seek to establish long-term 
partnerships with firms and employer associations, at all levels from the policy level making at 
the federal and provincial level, to the level of individual communities and educational 
establishments.  
 
The ‘menu of options’ that would provide the framework for the technical and vocational 
education component of the project would include the following three elements: (a) National 
Registry of Technical and Vocational Education
(certification of courses and programs offered 
by public and private sector establishments); (b) Sectoral networks
,
within and across provinces, 
to support development of agricultural, manufacturing and service sector clusters; (c) 
Competitively selected school improvement projects
developed by provinces to finance (i) a 
spectrum of ‘professionalizing practices’ in conjunction with the productive sector, including 
apprenticeship, dual system, systems of alternance, entrepreneurship including business 
incubators (ii) development of low-cost technology kits for distribution nationwide for science 
education across levels; and (iii) school and community based projects to improve equity and 
internal efficiency. The preparation process would lead up to the detailed description of the menu 
of options in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD). 
 
Monitoring and Evaluation (tentatively 5% of loan amount):
 
This project would seek to finance a range of innovative activities across provinces in a 
decentralized policy environment. For such a scheme to have a significant probability of success, 
it is very important to have scientifically designed and implemented evaluation mechanisms to 
be used for feedback into policy modifications. From alternative models to provide higher grades 
of education to disperse rural populations to alternative schemes of stimulating entrepreneurship, 
the nature of the project makes the role of rigorous evolution studies highly important. Tracer 
studies to follow technical school graduates through the labour market, or qualitative studies to 
understand differences in the success of communities to establish close links with private sector 
1
Acquiring Skills: Market Failures, Their Symptoms and Policy Responses
,
by Alison L. Booth and Dennis J. 
Snower (Eds.), Cambridge University Press, 1996; 
Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation
,
by 
Peter Evans, Princeton University Press, 1995;
.The Roles of Evaluation for Vocational Education and Training: 
Plain Talk on the Field of Dreams
,
by W. Norton Grubb and Paul Ryan, ILO 1999; 
Location, Competition, and 
Economic Development: Local Clusters in a Global Economy
,
by Michael Porter; and 
Community College/Cluster 
Connections: Specialization and Competitiveness in the United States and Europe
,
by Stuart Rosenfeld, in 
Economic Development Quarterly, 14(1), 2000.
 
Page  5
firms, would be vital for the success of the project. It has been agreed with the government that 
sufficient resources would be made available through a monitoring and evaluation component of 
the project for activities regarding both rural and technical and vocational education. The special 
attention paid to information collection under the aegis of the project would help to strengthen 
national institutional capacity in this area of considerable long term importance to public policy. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[
]
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[
]
B
[X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
2
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Suhas D. Parandekar 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
2
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
