INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC1288
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 13, 2005
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Argentina                    Project ID: P070628
Project Name: Provincial Road         Task Team Leader: Maria Marcela Silva
Infrastructure 2
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 29, 2005  Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005
Managing Unit: LCSFT                  Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Loan
Sector: Roads and highways (100%)     Theme: Rural services and infrastructure
(P);Other rural development (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Marco Zambrano
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IBRD: 150
Other financing amounts by source:                               ($m)
B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
1. The proposed project aims at improving the reliability of the provincial road sector assets and
the efficiency of their management as a means to support the country's competitiveness and
economic growth. Thus, by building upon the achievements of the on-going Provincial Roads
Project (AR-4093), the proposed project will further the agenda to meet the following
specific objectives for the rehabilitation and maintenance of the core provincial network: (i)
introduce the use of performance-based contracts as a key step toward implementing a
sustainable and cost effective road management strategy; (ii) strengthen the financial
planning process to support multi-year road programs within the available fiscal resources;
and (iii) bring about the required capacities in the provincial road agencies to confront the
introduction of new management strategies, gradually supporting their transformation into
results-oriented organizations.
2. Objectives (i) and (ii) apply only to those provinces that will participate in the works
components of the project while objective (iii), on a demand driven basis, will also cover
other provinces. In this respect, this project can be seen as the first operation of a more
comprehensive program that could include other provinces as they fulfill the requirements of
this project.



3. Better logistics through easier access to the national road network and to the main
consumption centers will provide more business development opportunities, contributing to
the growth of the province's economies. Furthermore, the introduction of CREMAs within a
network approach will have at least two additional positive effects: (i) through the use of
economically viable standards, overspending on some segments of the network is avoided,
making possible the allocation of resources to other segments of the network that historically
have been neglected; and (ii) the involvement of private firms over a long period of time
creates new and stable job opportunities in rural areas where the incidence of unemployment
is considerable.
C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
4. To meet the proposed Development Objectives three main components were preliminarily
identified based on a proposed Loan amount of US$150 million and a maximum financing
percentage of 75%:
5. Component 1 - Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance through performance-based
contracts (Estimated cost US$160 million of which US$120 million would be financed by
the Bank Loan). This operation will focus on promoting the design and implementation of
CREMA contracts on prioritized sections of the provincial primary network within at least 4
Provinces. The project would aim to cover a significant portion of high-priority roads
through performance-based contracts and gradually prepare the participating Provincial Road
Agencies to manage a results/client- oriented organization.
6. Over the last three months, the participating provinces have shown strong commitment to and
ownership with the above policies and strategies and have prepared in record time a
comprehensive program of combined rehabilitation and maintenance CREMA subprojects
covering a substantial portion of their paved network. So far, possible participating
provinces include: C6rdoba, Corrientes, Entre Rios, Santa Fe, Neuquen, and Chubut. These
provinces have already identified 32 possible mallas CREMA covering a total length of
4,881 Km and total costs for US$300 million. Among these provinces, C6rdoba, Corrientes,
Santa Fe and Neuquen are the most advanced in terms of definition and preparation of their
CREMA programs. C6rdoba has presented a CREMA program over 1,720 Km, Corrientes
729 Km, Santa Fe 2,035 Km, and Neuquen 296 Km.
7. Component 2 - Road Paving and Rehabilitation (Estimated cost US$40 million of which
US$20 million would be financed by the Bank Loan). Through this component, the Bank
would continue supporting rehabilitation and paving investments on selected segments of the
provinces' road networks that are crucial for provincial productivity but that cannot be
included on a CREMA-type contract given the nature of the works required. In such cases,
the provinces would be required to design adequate maintenance strategies to ensure the
sustainability of the proposed interventions.
8. Component 3 - Road Sector Management and Institutional Building (Estimated cost
US$10 million). In line with the overarching objective of developing a more comprehensive



road asset management strategy at the provincial level, this component would support
activities to strengthen participating road agencies to meet the demands imposed by the
introduction of performance-based contracts under a results-oriented approach. This includes
supporting the participating DPVs transformation into user-oriented agencies with clear
goals, strategic planning tools, systematic use of performance management systems,
integrated information systems and the ability to plan, contract out and monitor road
operations. The following areas of support/action have been identified so far: (i) management
and supervision of performance-based contracts; (ii) systematization of road condition /
traffic measurements; (iii) axel load control systems to minimize deterioration of the
provincial road network caused by overload of commercial vehicles; (iv) implementation of
routine maintenance management systems; and (v) information and communication systems
to widely disseminate what is being achieved increasing accountability for outcomes. The
project would also provide technical assistance to other provincial road agencies (in
technical, environmental, planning and managerial aspects) to prepare them to participate in
the program in the future. A follow-up operation would be needed to expand the CREMA
system to these provinces.
D. Project location (if known)
Provinces of C6rdoba, Corrientes, Entre Rios, Neuquen, Chubut, Santa Fe.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
Through the ongoing Provincial Roads Project (Loan AR-4093), environmental and social
procedures have been developed with Bank support. The Project Execution Unit (PEU) has a
very good experience in terms of Bank's Safeguards Policies. Participating provinces have also
developed the required institutional capacity in this regard with the creation of the
Environmental Units in the Provincial Road Agencies (DPVs) structure. The PEU has an
environmental specialist who is in charge of providing support to the participating provinces in
all matters relating to environmental and social management and is responsible for coordinating
with the Environmental Units of the DVPs, to comply with the environmental authority and the
Bank's safeguards.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable9 Safeguard Policy
If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[X]     Environmental Assessment (OP/B  4.01)
The Project does not foreseen significant environmental and social impacts given
that the nature of the proposed interventions (rehabilitation and maintenance),
would not jeopardize the natural environment or its area of influence. Any
temporal and direct impacts during project execution and road operation will be
prevented, mitigated and compensated to ensure the environmental sustainability
of the Project.
[X]     Natural Habitats (QfBP 4.04)



Potentially, a subproject included in one of the possible participating province's
road program could cross sensitive areas. In such case this Policy would be
triggered. An EIA and an Environmental Management Plan would be required.
Such intervention would also required the respective environmental license or
permission from the Environmental Authority.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/B  4.12)
Indiuenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
Safety of Dams (2P/BP 4.37)
[X]      Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
Chance find procedures would be established in the Environmental Management
Framework that is being proposed to be developed during project preparation, to
identify the instruments and steps to be followed in case of cultural property
findings.
[I]     Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
[1 ]    Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A  [X] B  [ I C  [ FI l[ TBD (to be determined)
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Prepare an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) aimed to define procedures
and responsibilities at all levels in the project cycle (PEU and Provincial Environmental
Units) for environmental screening, assessment and licensing of all road rehabilitation and
maintenance works to be carried out in the participating Provinces.
B. Prepare an Environmental Report (ER) with the results of the environmental assessment of
the first-year subprojects, applying the EMF.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                           I _
Task Team Leader:             Maria Marcela Silva                        Date
By' supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas



Approved by:                                             ' (I  .   -
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Jean-Roger Mercier I,"'~'\'>                      Date
Comments                                            ,         _
Sector Manager:                    Name                                              Date
Comments



