Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1466 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/05/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P093491 
Project Name: Urban Flood Prevention and Drainage APL 2 
Task Team Leader: Maryse D. Gautier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSFW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Other urban development (P);Water 
resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
70.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
26.00
26.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project would help reduce vulnerability of Argentina to flooding, through a mix of physical, 
institutional and financial measures.  It will be the second phase of an APL, planned over the 
next 7 years. The measures will aim at improving the security of economic assets and persons 
living in flood-prone areas by constructing defense facilities to reduce future losses due to 
floods, and by strengthening national and provincial institutions and systems for dealing with 
future floods. The specific objectives would be to enhance provincial capacity to deal with 
periodic flooding by (i) providing technically sound and cost-effective flood protection coverage 
of the most important economic areas, (ii) upgrading their flood preparedness and mitigation 
systems, and (iii) developing sustainable institutional mechanisms to support them.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Phase 2 has been prepared in the framework of the Federal Water Agreement and in close 
coordination with the Federal Hydraulic Committee (COHIFE), which developed a nationwide 
water management strategy. The preparation for phase 2 of the program is based on the portfolio 
of priority actions identified in the Flood Protection Project. The proposed project will have 4 
components:  
Page  2
Component 1. Development of key defense facilities  
 
This component would finance works to protect important urban areas against flood effects. It 
would include fortification of flood defenses in geographic areas with strong economic activity 
and greatest vulnerability to serious repeated flood damage.  Works would concentrate on raising 
bridges, improvement of existing and construction of new channels, embankments and small 
flood control works.  
 
Component 2. Improving Flood Preparedness  
 
For vulnerable areas not benefiting from further investment in structural defenses, the 
component would provide shelters as multipurpose installations, and improved housing in flood 
safe areas for lower income families. The shelters would be located adjacent to school or 
community centers to ensure their use and maintenance in non- emergency periods.  The housing 
component would follow the same principles as in the previous project, providing funding for a 
voluntary program of self-construction of houses by the community. The self-building 
component has been highly successful in the PPI and represents a valuable alternative housing 
solution for the population with the lowest income of population.  
 
Component 3. Technical assistance  
 
The component is aimed at strengthening the central and provincial institutions in flood risk 
management.  The activities will thus target the agencies involved in flood emergency and in 
developing prevention.  The technical assistance would be provided to:  
 
(i) 
Provide support to the National Hydraulic Department in improving the warning system, 
and developing a water strategy for other regions.  This subcomponent, limited to the water 
sector, will be coordinated with activities planned for the Integrated Water Risk Management.  
 
(ii) 
Help create and implement an institutional framework in each province to improve risk 
information and risk reduction.  It may result in the creation of provincial prevention units, 
where feasible.  Improvement of civil defense, or other involved agencies is also envisaged.  
 
(iii) 
Facilitate the development of risk management by the Provincial authorities, with 
contingency plans, urban planning regulations, and environmental management.  Initiate a 
discussion on risk transfer through incentives to private flood insurance.  
 
Component 4. Project Implementation and Administration.  
 
Technical assistance would be provided to help implement the project and carry out annual 
audits.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will finance structural and non-structural measures for flood protection in cities in 
the flood plains of the Parana and Uruguay River basins, in the Provinces of Chaco, Corrientes, 
Entre rios, Formosa, Misiones and Santa Fe.  Around 24 infrastructure sub-projects have already 
been identified.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
As part of the Argentina Flood Protection Project, a Regional Environmental Management Plan 
has been successfully implemented. This plan has included: (i) the protection/restoration of 
urban wetlands and environmental enhancement measures included in civil works n participating 
Page  3
urban centers; (ii) environmental capacity building of provincial governments; (iii) 
environmental screening of all infrastructure works; (iv) project specific environmental 
assessments as required fro the screening exercise; (iv) application of environmental guidelines 
for construction; and (v) monitoring and evaluation from a central environmental unit.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Civil works include polders, dredging, pumping stations, river training, drainage canals, 
among others, that will necessitate careful environmental screening, design and supervision. 
Some of these projects would be considered as Category A.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Some civil works could potentially affect urban and peri-urban wetlands. Regional project-
screening criteria preclude the financing of projects that would interfere with river-wetland 
connection systems.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
There is a potential chance of findings during construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Under a first scrutiny, none of the 24 proposed civil works should entail resettlement.  
However, a resettlement framework will be prepared during the EIA, to address any unexpected 
issue during project implementation.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/01/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
All sub-projects included in the Project were appraised during the first Flood Protection 
Project. Environmental Data Sheets for all 24 civil works have already been updated. An ex-
post evaluation of the environmental management performance of the Flood Protection 
Project will be prepared. This assessment will review the achievements of the previous 
regional environmental plans and will draw lessons for the preparation of the coming project 
(Loan 4117-AR).  The assessment will therefore provide the basis for 
strengthening/improving the Regional Environmental Management Plan.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maryse D. Gautier 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
