Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC853 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: May 13, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Argentina 
Project ID: P088624 
Project Name: AR Buenos Aires City 
Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader: Maryse Gautier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 14, 2004 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (100%) 
Theme: Other urban development 
(P);Access to urban services for the poor 
(P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Juan Schnack 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 140 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would increase the City resilience to floods through the protection of its critical 
infrastructure and the introduction of a risk management approach in the investments of the City 
Government.  The project will focus on the issue of risk reduction. It will also contribute to risk 
identification.   
 
To achieve this, the project will: (a) improve water draining from the Maldonado basin to the Rio 
de la Plata for 10 year return period floods, and (b) develop a program to reduce vulnerability to 
flood, with land use planning, building codes, construction practices, urban environment 
management, and increase information through hazard maps, contingency plans and vulnerability 
analysis.  
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
Component 1. Non-structural Measures (US$17M)
.
This component would finance actions aimed at providing institutional improvements of the City 
Government in flood emergency times and in flood prevention.  It would include (a) the 
Page  2
installation of a meteorological warning system, (b) the preparation and diffusion of contingency 
and emergency plans, with a communication program aimed at increasing awareness, (c) 
adjustments of the legal and regulatory environment, such as land use plans, building codes, 
environmental standards, (d) actions of public management, such as improvement of green areas, 
and tree plantation program, (e) improvement of solid waste management with higher flexibility 
of collection and increased public awareness, and (f) project management.   With regards to the 
sustainability aspects of the institutions, the Municipality is committed to lead the necessary 
studies for, and take the decisions to, set up an institutional framework for flood prevention, 
emergency situation, and infrastructure maintenance. 
 
Component 2.  Structural Measures (US$163M) 
 
The structural measures component has an estimated cost of US$163 million. It will finance the 
construction of two drainage tunnels running parallel to the Maldonado underground channel. In 
addition, the construction of the additional connectors that will link the two tunnels to the
 
existing drainage network has been estimated to cost US$ 22,6 millions. The hydraulic master 
plan identified and evaluated a significant number of existing alternative projects and of 
spontaneous proposals coming from different stakeholders. The consultant has selected 
alternatives based on various criteria, such as pipe and water storage technology, localization of 
water discharge, construction methodology of pipes and tunnels, and rate of flood frequency.  
The evaluation process concluded with the recommendation for the construction of two parallel 
tunnels supporting the existing channel of the Maldonado. The tunnels have been designed so 
that they will avoid the flooding of the City with rain events that have a frequency of up to 10 
years.  In order to confirm the pertinence of the choice, the Bank has contracted with an 
international hydrological consultant to provide his expertise on the selection process of the
 
technology.  The review should be completed by June, 2004.  
 
D.  Project location  
 
Buenos Aires the Capital City of Argentina, is located at the right margin of the Río de la Plata in 
the “ Pampa Ondulada”. Its surface is of about 200 km
2
,
its population of approximately 3 
million inhabitants. Due to the fact that within the area likely to be affected by the project the 
preexisting natural habitats have been totally replaced by urban components, it is not expected 
any impact on the natural environment.  Therefore, the major effects of the project are related to 
the social and economic components, as well on safety and health. The water gathered  by the 
tunnels will be discharged into the Río de la Plata.        
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The project implementation unit (SUPCE) has been supervising the consultant’s work during the 
production of the hydraulic master plan in the context of the Flood Protection project. This Unit 
will continue in its role and be the implementing agency of the new project. 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply?[OPCS4] 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
[
]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
[
]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)* 
[
]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category[w5]:    
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The Most significant environmental issues are associated with the construction management of 
the two tunnel. This type of works, unprecedented in Buenos Aires, will require careful 
environmental planning of construction activities. The management, transportation, and disposal 
will require careful sitting of disposal sites, site restoration practices, detailed and traffic 
management.  Interference with public service lines will need to be programmed way in advance 
and communicated to the communities. The management of urban impacts during construction 
will require a comprehensive set of environmental technical specification for construction and 
strong supervision. 
 
Reporting Schedule. According to the World Bank Operational Policies there must be a separate 
EIA report Law 123 of the “Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires” also requires that infrastructure 
works carried out by public or private entities providing public services, as well as related 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
activities, projects, and programs, are analyzed in terms of environmental impact with relevant 
effect.       
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.   
The EIA will be completed by the pre-appraisal mission in early August.  It will be reviewed on 
September 8, 2004 during the QER meeting and disclosed by September 15 the latest. The EIA is 
part of the feasibility study, financed by the Bank under the current Flood Protection project.  
The TORs were revised by the Bank, and the study implementation is followed by the Bank team 
on a regular basis. 
 
B.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Maryse Gautier 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Juan David Quintero 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
John Henry Stein 
Date 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
