Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/31/2005 
Report No.:  32514
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P057880 
Project Name:  Urban Heating 
Task Team Leader:  Gevorg Sargsyan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  District heating and energy efficiency services (70%);Oil and gas (30%) 
Theme:  Other urban development (P);Other rural development (P);Pollution 
management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.05 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
2.00 
 
UN DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAM - GEF 
2.90
6.95 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the Project is to support the Borrower to increase the use of clean, 
efficient, safe and affordable heating technologies in urban schools and multi-apartment 
buildings.  
 
The project will achieve this objective by (i) removing barriers and creating market 
conditions for the commercial provision of heating services; (ii) providing long-term 
financing to service providers and consumers for their investments in heat supply systems 
and energy efficiency measures; (iii) building the capacity of local financial institutions 
in financing heat supply and energy efficient systems to ensure sustainability after project 
closing; (iv) promoting efficient and safe boilers, heaters, and equipment to meter and 
control fuel and heat consumption; and; (iv) stimulating creation and effective 
functioning of self-regulating community organizations.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will support implementation of the Urban Heating Strategy and improve 
heating in schools through the following five components:  
Page  2
Component A: Community and private sector mobilization and development of an 
enabling environment for effective and safe provision of heating services (US$ 3.9 
million, of which IDA funding US$ 1 million). Technical assistance will be provided in 
two areas:  
 
A1.  Development of enabling environment for effective and safe provision of heating 
services including:  
 
-
Development of regulations, safety norms and standards, and certification of 
suppliers and equipment, for heating and  natural gas supply;  
 
-
Improvement of legal and regulatory framework to make HOAs more functional 
and to foster market-based provision of heating services.  
 
-
Assistance in preparation of sub-projects under B1.  
 
A2. Community and private sector mobilization through:  
 
-
Capacity building of heat service providers, local financial institutions, and HOA;  
 
-
Implementation of broad information campaigns and public education programs 
to inform the public about the available new heating technologies and their benefits, 
safety norms and standards, the need and benefits of using environmentally clean and 
safe heating solutions and the new approaches to community-led provision of communal 
services;  
 
-
Establishment of special advisory center(s) to provide private sector and 
communities with support on legal, technical, and financial issues of modern energy 
supply.  
 
Most of the technical assistance (TA) above will be supplied by UNDP/GEF and 
USAID in close collaboration with this project. If these and other donors commit to 
provide the necessary funding to address the TA, the freed-up IDA funds will be 
reallocated to other project components.  
 
Component B:   Financing of heating and related building infrastructure . Investment 
financing for heating of residential buildings will be supported under two 
subcomponents:  
 
B.1 Lending to project beneficiaries . Heat providers, HOAs, municipalities and 
individual home owners will be able to access funding for heating infrastructure 
investments. It is estimated that about 7,000 households in multi-apartment buildings 
without access to operational heating services would benefit from these investments. The 
Renewable Resources and Energy Efficiency Fund (R2E2 Fund or Fund )  will on-lend 
funds to eligible participating financial institutions (PFIs) that would in turn extend loans 
to beneficiaries.  In addition, the Fund may offer risk sharing arrangements to 
beneficiaries and PFIs.  
 
B.2 Capital grants to the poor.  
 
To enable the poorest households living in multi-apartment buildings to participate in 
the project and thus gain access to improved heating, this component will fund the 
Page  3
investments necessary for the connection of gas, heat and hot water supply to the 
apartments of the poor. Eligible households will be identified based on the existing PFBP 
Program. Roughly 10,000 poor households are expected to be provided with a basic level 
of service from clean heat sources using an output-based aid (OBA) approach for the 
disbursement of funds.  
 
Component C: School heating.  
 
Under this component grant financing will be provided to urban schools for investments 
in installation and rehabilitation of gas-based local heating systems and basic thermal 
rehabilitation. All urban schools outside Yerevan will be eligible for financing, provided 
they have a satisfactory technical state, including availability of gas supply in the area, 
and have suitable engineering design. Roughly 100 schools that will receive funding 
under this component will be selected based on the cost-effectiveness of the investment 
per student. If funds are left after investments financed in all eligible urban schools, these 
additional funds will be provided to schools in Yerevan.  
 
Component D: Support for project implementation. This includes technical assistance, 
goods, works, and logistical support to the R2E2 Fund for project implementation, 
monitoring and supervision.  
 
Component E: Project preparation. This component is identical with the project 
preparation facility, which supported various activities that provide the foundation for a 
successful project implementation: awareness building and mobilization of heat providers 
and consumers; removal of some of the legal and regulatory barriers; and design of the 
institutions involved in project implementation. Most importantly, 10 pilot projects were 
completed during the 2003/04 and 2004/05 heating seasons through HOAs, private sector 
heat service providers, and individuals.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Projects from all over Armenia are eligible for financing. Most of the projects are 
expected to be in established residential urban areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Inesis Kiskis (ECSSD) 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is specifically designed to provide access to environmentally sustainable 
heating technologies, encourage the replacement of electricity and wood with natural gas 
and reduce fuel consumption through energy efficiency investments in residential 
buildings and schools. If successfully implemented, the project will create preconditions 
for sustainable reforestation effort. The project is not expected to have any significant or 
irreversible long-term negative environmental impact  
 
However, during construction of new or repairing of old boilers, and while laying down 
the limited portions of new pipelines, and performing other project financed activities, 
some short-term, limited-scale disturbances might occur: increased dust and noise levels, 
exposure of workers to asbestos containing materials, accumulated piles of construction  
waste. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been published by the Borrower. 
The EMP contains a list of potential environmental impacts the project activities may 
cause, and identifies the preventive and mitigation measures to address them. The EMP 
will serve as a basis for determining what kind of additional environmental/safeguard 
studies, if any, would be needed in case of each proposed sub-project.  
 
At the moment of preparing this ISDS, the project team did not see the need to trigger 
any of the social Operational Policies. Most of the minor works are expected to take place 
inside apartments of benefiting apartment owners. Should there be a need to buildnew 
pipelines, they would be laid on public rights of way. In case the new pipeline or a new 
boiler house would be constructed on privately owned land, the project proponent would 
need to agree on a fair deal with the land owner for purchase or leasing the land.  The 
staff of the R2E2 Fund and loan officers in  PFIs  will be advised in such cases to 
approach the Bank for further guidance.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
Page  5
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project will be implemented by the R2E2 Fund and selected PFIs   The R2E2 Fund 
will also be implementing the Renewable Energy Project, currently under preparation.  
 
In order to be eligible for financing, the proposed investments would need to comply 
with Armenian national legislation and with the World Bank safeguard policies. The 
R2E2 Fund will be a newly established institution with only limited knowledge of the 
World Bank safeguard policies, although every effort will be made to hire staff 
knowledgeable on environmental and social issues Qualified specialists from the Heating 
PIU in charge of the project preparation may be transferred to the R2F2 Fund. Therefore, 
Component A of the project foresees TA support to train R2E2 Fund staff and loan 
officers in PFIs in the application of environmental and social safeguards.  
 
An Operations Manual, which will be prepared for use by all actors involved in project 
implementation, will contain an environmental chapter laying down all the steps and 
procedures which would allow to determine potential environmental and social impacts 
of the proposed investments, and how to correctly assign environmental screening 
categories. Also, the staff of the R2E2 Fund and loan officers at PFIs will be using for 
guidance the Environmental Management Plan, which has been prepared as a framework 
document for entire project prior to appraisal.  
 
The draft Operations Manual will be reviewed by the Bank, endorsed by Armenian 
Ministry of Nature Protection and eventually approved by Board of Trustees of the R2E2 
Fund.  
 
It is anticipated that most of the projects will be small in scale and scope and will have 
only limited short term impacts on the environment, which can be mitigated by good 
planning and adherence to good construction practice. Therefore, it is anticipated that in 
the majority of investments neither Environmental Assessment Reports nor 
Environmental Management Plans  would  be needed. Rather, the requirements for 
meeting environmental conditionalities would be described in the environmental chapter 
of each sub-project proposal and incorporated into bidding documents.  
 
It is very unlikely that any Category A project would be financed under this scheme. 
However, should such a large project be considered, the client would be obliged to 
prepare a comprehensive EA study under terms of reference and quality acceptable to 
Bank.  Based on the findings of the study further decisions would be made.  
 
Page  6
The R2E2 Fund and PFIs staff will be required to monitor regularly compliance of 
contractors and clients in each project, and in case of noncompliance undertake the 
necessary actions to reverse the situation.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Several social assessments have been undertaken between 1999 and 2001 during the 
preparation of the Urban Heating Strategy on which this project is based as well as during 
project preparation. The latest social assessment was implemented in late 2003 by a local 
NGO and included in addition to a large representative survey of urban apartment 
dwellers in four cities a number of focus group and community meetings to discuss issues 
and options for heating interventions. A conference, in which a broad range of 
stakeholders from the government and non-government organizations participated, was 
held to discuss the role of home owner associations in solving building level problems 
such as heating. The results of the project social assessment were discussed with 
stakeholders at a workshop in December 2003.  
 
The project team will continue to consult and share information with stakeholders on a 
regular basis during the process of project preparation. Stakeholders are expected to play 
an important role in implementation of the project. During the proposed public awareness 
campaign and in community meetings, the environmental and social aspects of the 
project in general and various heating investments will be discussed. Since the project is 
designed as a community-based project, it will be ensured that stakeholders' views 
regarding project selection, design, implementation and monitoring are taken into 
account.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/02/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/25/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gevorg Sargsyan 
04/19/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Inesis Kiskis 
04/19/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
04/19/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
01/18/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
04/20/2005 
Comments:  This is a transferred  project therefore the clearance from the safeguards coordinator is 
not  required 
