Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/12/2005 
Report No.:  AC1380
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Armenia 
Project ID:  P087011 
Project Name:  Rural Enterprise and Small-Scale Commercial Agriculture Development 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Frauke Jungbluth 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 7, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Agricultural marketing and 
trade (20%);Micro- and SME finance (20%);Agro-industry (15%);Agricultural extension 
and research (15%) 
Theme:  Rural non-farm income generation (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Other 
rural development (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Infrastructure services for 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.83 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
1.62 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
1.76 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
1.80 
 SUB-BORROWER(S) 
1.80 
 LOCAL 
FARMER 
ORGANIZATIONS 
1.20
10.01 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to support the development of Armenia?s small and 
medium-scale rural businesses by improving the ability of farmers and rural 
entrepreneurs to access markets and by stimulating market-oriented private and public 
investments in rural areas.  
 
The main target groups of the project are small and medium-scale farmers and rural 
entrepreneurs who would benefit from improved information services, access to finance, 
improved inputs and technologies, and support for marketing activities.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The proposed project would consist of four components to be implemented over four 
years.  The project would have a three-tiered approach by addressing critical gaps at the 
farm level, at the rural business and agro-processor level, and at the community level.   
 
Component A - Small Rural Business Support  
 
Component Objective:  The objective is to support rural businesses to improve the link 
between their production and markets.  The component aims to enable businesses to 
develop their supply chains efficiently, and to expand market opportunities through the 
provision of adequate financial services and targeted business support.  
 
Issues Addressed:  An increasing number of small and medium businesses are being 
established in rural areas for processing, service provision and production.  These 
activities are mostly agricultural but also non-agricultural in their scope, and, to a large 
extent, represent the engines of growth and a key source of rural employment.  Many of 
these emerging businesses have been supported during their establishment phases by 
various donor programs.  However, an insufficient range of financial and business 
management services and poor access to technological improvements to improve their 
competitiveness limits their continuing development.  
 
Target Group:  The project would work primarily with existing finance and business 
institutions to provide the services, and with developing and start-up rural businesses, 
registered associations and other legal entities.  
 
Component Activities: The component would provide support to the further 
development of small rural businesses and agro-processors through: (a) enhanced rural 
financial services such as credit for working capital requirements, long-term credit for 
investment purposes, and leasing programs for processing and agricultural equipment; (b) 
promotion of rural business linkages through a program of small grants provided on a 
competitive basis to introduce and demonstrate business and technological innovations 
that could improve market access and linkages between producers and processors.  
 
Rural Financial Services: The project will: (a) support capacity building to participating 
financial institutions (PFIs) in order to promote requisite lending skills, and facilitate the 
development and widespread use of suitable financial instruments and methodologies; 
and (b) provide badly needed long term capital.  
 
(a) 
Capacity Building.  The project will strengthen both sides of the credit nexus:  the 
supply side (i.e. PFIs) as well as the demand side (i.e. beneficiaries).  (i) PFIs will receive 
training on the specifics of agricultural lending/leasing, and in particular, the appraisal of 
medium and long term rural investments, including their associated risks and risk 
mitigation measures, product development, and downscaling to small rural borrowers.  
(ii)  Beneficiaries (i.e. farmers and agribusinesses) will receive advice on improved 
business planning and management, and the most appropriate financing options.  
 
Page  3
(b) 
Credit Line.  The project will provide resources for on-lending to farmers and 
farmer groups, agro-processors, and other agri-businesses through qualifying PFIs 
(commercial banks, leasing companies, credit organizations or micro finance 
institutions). In order to continue revolving these funds for an extended period beyond the 
project?s implementation phase, the project will support the establishment of a financially 
and administratively autonomous refinancing unit, together with IFAD.  
 
Promotion of Rural Business Linkages:  To assist emerging rural business entities to 
introduce innovative business practices and technologies, and to demonstrate such 
improvements to a broader audience of rural entrepreneurs, small grants would be 
awarded through a competitive grant program. The objective is: (i) to accelerate the 
transfer of improved technologies and business practices to others; (ii) to build capacity 
of rural service providers to support rural entrepreneurs; (iii) to assist small rural 
businesses to take advantage of economic opportunities; and (iv) to help the MOA 
establish public-private linkages for reaching farmers and rural businesses.  Around 100 
small grants from USD 8,000 up to a maximum of USD 20,000 will be awarded to rural 
business entities, with beneficiaries required to contribute at least 25 percent of the total 
cost of the proposed activities either in cash or in-kind.  Grants would be provided for a 
wide range of possible technologies in quality production, processing and marketing, 
business management and best business practices.  The program would include strong 
information and training programs to ensure that all potential beneficiaries were aware of 
the program and that proposals were of good quality and carefully selected.  A strong 
monitoring and evaluation program would also be instituted to ensure that 
implementation was carefully monitored, and that costs and benefits of the technologies 
were determined and made available to a wide audience.  
 
Component B - Farm-Focused Development Support  
 
Component Objective:  To enable farmers to improve their productivity, production 
quality and market access by developing a sustainable advisory system and increasing 
availability of quality planting material.  
 
Issues Addressed:  There is a substantial need to improve the productivity and efficiency 
of rural producers and the quality of production to better serve the emerging markets.  To 
accomplish this goal, the main areas identified are: (i) strengthening the advisory services 
system, including farm and business management, marketing and livestock advice, and 
(ii) improving access to good quality seeds and planting material.  Creditable progress 
has been made in establishing a demand-driven, decentralized extension system with 
support through the present ARSP, and the technology assessment program (TAP) has 
proven to be a good way to ensure applicability and acceptability of research results.  
However, the extension system is not yet in a position to operate without support and 
cannot be considered fully sustainable at this point.  There is a need to streamline the 
service to improve efficiency and outreach.  In addition, rural producers have limited 
access and understanding of markets, poor knowledge of credit and finance, limited skills 
in accounting and cash flow analysis, and problems in obtaining documents and legal 
advice.  Advisory services are required in these topics.  There is also a need to improve 
Page  4
farmers? access to quality seeds and seedlings, including introduction of new varieties 
that may better provide for the needs of the developing agro-processing sector.  
 
Target Group:  Small and medium farmers and farmer groups, including small-scale 
seed producers and livestock producers.  
 
Component Activities:  Two main sub-components have been identified: (a) 
strengthening the decentralized agricultural extension system to improve linkages with 
village-level authorities; to increase the effectiveness and outreach of the flow of 
information on technological, management and marketing improvements; and to further 
develop the technology assessment program (TAP) and on-farm demonstration activities; 
and (b) strengthening seed and seedling production capability of Armenian producers.  
 
Strengthening the Agricultural Extension System:  The project would aim to develop a 
sustainable advisory system based on a public-private contracting model, which is 
increasingly self-financing and responsive to the information needs of rural producers. 
The sub-component would include: (i) streamlining the advisory system to improve 
effectiveness; (ii) technology assessment and dissemination; and (iii) increasing village-
level outreach.  
 
Streamlining will be accomplished through regular farmer training and staff training 
programs and the provision of limited national and international technical assistance; 
introduction of a contracting system for provision of consultancy services for farmers and 
small and medium enterprises; implementation of an expanded cost recovery program; 
establishment of a cost-sharing agreement between Community Councils and the MOA 
for operations and staff contracts; and an increased outreach at the village level.  Project 
support would be provided for staff contracts and operating costs on a sliding scale; for a 
consultancy fund to contract specialists, including four key business areas (marketing, 
financial operations, accounting and legal know-how), and specialized technical subjects, 
including processing technologies; for in-country training programs; for some re-
equipping of the advisory system; and for comprehensive surveys to assess impact and 
improve quality of services.  
 
The technology assessment programs would be continued on a similar basis as in the 
ongoing ARSP, although the evaluation and dissemination of results will be emphasized.  
Around 100 TAPs averaging USD 1,500 will be conducted each year including around 
33% in the livestock sector, with beneficiaries expected to contribute 20 per cent of the 
costs either financially or in-kind.  The most successful and appropriate technologies will 
then be demonstrated on-farm.  Village outreach will be supported directly through 
refurbishment and furnishing of village information rooms and improved 
communications.  
 
Strengthening Seed and Sapling Production:  This sub-component aims to enhance the 
efficiency of Armenia?s small-scale seed and sapling businesses; to increase the 
availability of good quality certified seed and planting material; and to increase the 
efficiency and level of trust in the seed regulatory system.  Activities would include: (i) 
Page  5
support to private seed and sapling producers; (ii) strengthening the seed legal and 
regulatory framework and the seed regulatory agency; (iii) improving public sector high-
generation seed multiplication.  Support to private seed and sapling producers would be 
provided through training and information campaigns on seed production technology, 
marketing, business management and on the legal and regulatory framework governing 
the seed trade.  Seed and sapling producers would also be eligible to apply for financial 
services and small grants (component 1), and the advisory services would contribute 
through the assessment and demonstration of improved varieties and use of good quality 
seed.  Strengthening the legal and regulatory framework would consist of a phased 
approach comprising: (i) a comprehensive review of the seed legislation to bring the laws 
and regulations fully into compliance with recognized international standards; (ii) 
improving capacity of the Seed Regulatory Agency in management, financial planning 
and technical procedures; and (iii) upgrading facilities for implementing seed certification 
and variety testing activities based on the agreed restructuring plan.  Support would also 
be provided to selected public sector plant breeding institutions to multiply pre-basic seed 
of new high-yielding varieties of grain crops for sale to commercial seed producers.  
 
Component C - Community-Focused Economic Development  
 
Component Objective:  The objective of the component is to stimulate economic 
development at the community level in selected rural areas through increased capacity of 
the communities to plan and manage their resources, and prioritize, fund and maintain 
key infrastructure investments with clear market linkages.  
 
Issues Addressed:  The rural areas face a number of serious problems which need urgent 
attention: deterioration of the economic potential and food security problems, shrinking 
forest areas, soil degradation, limited access to drinking and irrigation water, 
unsustainable agricultural production and animal husbandry practices, low living 
standards, limited access to main trade routes and markets, inadequate access to 
information and mass media, unemployment, emigration, and lack of funds to address the 
above issues. All these problems are interlinked and need to be addressed in the 
framework of a comprehensive community economic development strategy.  Although 
many agencies have been working in the rural areas, most support has tended to focus on 
specific needs in geographically limited areas.  The full impact of interventions in the 
rural sector is often not achieved because: (i) other equally important constraints 
remained un-tackled; (ii) interventions were limited in scope and very selective; and (iii) 
interventions were often supply-driven and with little coordination between various 
interventions.  
 
Target Group:  Communities in selected rural areas who would benefit from an 
increased ability to develop, implement and monitor their Community Economic 
Development Plans; from an increased level of self-help and mutual responsibility; and 
from empowerment to take control of their own resources.  
 
Component Activities:  The component would consist of: (i) community mobilization 
and capacity-building; (ii) technical support; and (iii) implementation of investment 
Page  6
priorities.  Mobilization would comprise the development of Community Economic 
Development Plans (CEDPs).  Technical support would be provided to encourage 
effective participation in the planning process focusing on development and management 
of shared economic infrastructure, including market infrastructure and rural roads.  The 
project would then support selected sub-projects falling within the first three years of 
implementation of the CEDP, which would be the basis for delivery of project 
interventions to rural communities.  Since revitalization of the rural areas would require a 
range of activities, a CEDP would include activities in two broad categories: (a) 
improved resource management; and (b) rural market access infrastructure improvement.  
The project seeks to improve the access to markets and employment opportunities in the 
selected communities and would not support social infrastructure.  If these items were 
identified as a priority it would be passed on to other possible support programs such as 
the ASIF.  The component would be implemented in 20 selected communities in selected 
Marzes.  Communities and Marzes will be selected based on broadly agreed and 
transparent criteria.  Investments would be limited to US$ 50 per inhabitant or an average 
of US$ 68,000 for the participating community.  
 
Component D - Project Management  
 
The project would support the establishment and operation of a Project Management 
Unit (PMU) under the Ministry of Agriculture.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project Location.  With the exception of component C the project would work in all areas 
of Armenia.  Component C will be implemented in selected communities in around 5 
priority Marzes that will be selected on broadly agreed criteria.  Marzes with higher 
poverty and bad level of rural infrastructure will have a higher priority.   Rural finance 
activities can be expected to predominantly go to the main agricultural production areas 
in Armenia?s plains.  
 
Salient physical characteristics.  Armenia is a small landlocked country with few natural 
resources. It covers an area of 29 800 km2 in the Caucasus Region and borders Georgia, 
Azerbaijan, Iran and Turkey.  Most of the area consists of a series of mountain ranges of 
the South Caucasus range, with high, rolling plateau and often deeply incised river 
valleys, many of which contain a series of virtually flat, former river terraces that are 
locally important for farming.  The average elevation is 1 650 m, ranging from about 
400m at the northern border with Georgia to the highest point at Mt. Aragats (4 090m).  
The climate is continental with cold winters and hot summers.  Annual precipitation 
varies from 200 mm near the southern border with Iran, through 300 mm in the low-lying 
Ararat plains to about 700 mm elsewhere, although precipitation can rise to 1 000 mm on 
exposed mountain slopes.  Much of the precipitation falls as snow in the winter months.  
Vegetation is sparse, with forest areas limited to about 12% of the country?s surface. 
Indigenous pasture vegetation dominates at higher altitudes.  The country is divided into 
two major watersheds, the Araks basin to the south and west and the Kuri basin in the 
north-east.  The low-lying Ararat Valley has relatively rich, deep soils and is the principal 
Page  7
irrigated area. At higher elevations, soils tend to be shallower, often stony and with only 
more scattered areas well suited to irrigation.  The area is prone to earthquakes and in 
1988 large parts of the north of the country were damaged by a tremor that had its 
epicentre in Spitak (Lori marz). The earthquake resulted in heavy loss of life, totally 
dispossessed an estimated 400 000 people and caused widespread devastation of 
industrial capacity and infrastructure in Lori and Shirak and especially in Gyumri town 
(Shirak).  
 
Salient social characteristics.  Armenia has a population of 3.2 million.  An estimated 
64% live in urban areas of which around half is based in Yerevan.  For the one-third of 
the population that lives in rural areas, agriculture is the main source of livelihood.  With 
very few off-farm employment opportunities, rural inhabitants depend heavily on their 
small farms for survival. Migration within the country and abroad continues to be an 
important strategy to cope with poverty and lack of employment resulting in remittances 
being an important source of household income.  Around 5 million people constitute the 
Armenian diaspora, contributing substantially to investments for the rehabilitation of 
infrastructure and some commercial enterprises.  Armenians are almost universally 
literate (98%), infant mortality is relatively low (31 per thousand live births) and life 
expectancy is high (74) and has risen quite steadily since the early 1990s.  
 
Poverty.  Poverty remains widespread in rural areas.  An estimated 48% of the 
population lives below the poverty line, while 20% of the population lives in extreme 
poverty.  The latest poverty assessment (2002) suggests that overall poverty incidence 
has decreased by 12% and extreme poverty by 25% since 1998/99.  However, the rural 
areas dependent primarily on agriculture have not benefited from the rapid overall 
growth.  Labor market participation and unemployment rates have improved in Yerevan 
since 1998, but have worsened in rural areas.  The growth in construction, trade and light 
industry has not been enough to offset the labor shedding in the capital-intensive sectors.  
As a consequence, a very large share of the population continues to depend on 
agriculture, which, for the most part, has low productivity and returns to labor.  
Unemployment fell slightly in urban areas, but increased in rural areas.  Similarly, the 
decline in poverty rates since 1998 has been concentrated almost entirely among the 
urban population, while the situation in rural areas has not improved.  Poverty is 
particularly severe in remote, mountainous areas, with little infrastructure, poor soils, 
little irrigation, harsh climate, and few opportunities for off-farm employment.  
Nevertheless, the 2003 HBS data indicate a substantial fall of poverty rates for both rural 
and urban areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
Page  8
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental assessment focuses on four groups of activities: (i) small and medium 
sized farms; (ii) rural enterprises (agriculture and non-agriculture); (iii) community 
development needs; (iv) extension services.  
 
The overall environmental effect of the sub-projects resulting from the main 
development components and sub-components of the Project will be positive.  Farm, 
agri-business, and other rural business loans will result in improved agricultural 
production and marketing, and in general, improved socioeconomic conditions of the 
rural population.  Other aspects of the project including the community development 
component, extension services and others, will all contribute to an improved socio-
economic environment in the rural areas.  The Project will further contribute to the 
country?s food security, hopefully contribute to the generation of foreign exchange 
through increased agricultural exports, and mostly the Project, through the various 
financed activities, will significantly contribute to the alleviation of rural poverty.  
Although the project?s primary objective does not include a contribution to the 
enhancement of the environment.  In the past 15 years rates of chemical inputs in 
agriculture have been significantly reduced, resulting in cleaner watercourses, lower 
levels of soil contamination and relatively chemical free food, although residues in soil 
and water, and their effects, still remain.  The project could lead to an increase in the use 
of farm inputs but mitigation measures, extension services and training associated with 
the project should minimize any potential impacts associated with these inputs.  To some 
extent, it is presumed that some of the industries under the former Soviet regime which 
created significant environmental problems and which have since ceased operating, may 
be refurbished, or new replacement activities introduced that are expected to operate 
more efficiently and without the major environmental contamination of the past.  Current 
environmental regulations, particularly through the revised legislation on Environmental 
Expertise which will provide for the need for more comprehensive environmental 
assessments of projects, should prevent a return to the serious environmental issues of the 
past.   
Page  9
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The without project alternative would limit the positive environmental benefits identified.  
Continued depletion of pastoral and land resources would result in a continuation of 
negative effects that have been observed over the last decade.  The project will 
complement activities of the Natural resource and Poverty Reduction Project with regards 
to watershed management through its extension and community activities.  
 
A
social assessment focusing concretely on the project activities has been finalized and 
its findings have been integrated into the components' design.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Legislation and Enforcement.  The Law on Principles of Environmental Protection (1991) 
and the Law on Environmental Expertise (1995) are the main legislative framework for 
environmental management.  The former Law has a minimum normative value and has 
been used as an environmental policy document, while the latter is currently being 
revised to provide a more comprehensive environmental expertise law and to bring it in 
line with western environmental review laws.  Currently, (January 2005) the Law of the 
Republic of Armenia on Environmental Review (Environmental Expertise) is in its third 
draft.  This law establishes a framework to define impacts of intended activities on the 
environment, assess feasible alternatives, minimize negative consequences and ensure 
public involvement.  It contains a list of activities subjected to the review process.  There 
are no fewer than a dozen other relevant laws dealing with various aspects of the 
environment.  In addition, Armenia is signatory to 15 conventions relating to aspects of 
the environment.  Armenia also cooperates with its regional neighbors on a number of 
environmental issues and programs.  
 
Environmental management guidelines have been provided to ensure that World Bank 
requirements regarding the environmental aspects of the Project are met.  Environmental 
guidelines for loan officers of the PFIs and proposals for their training have also been 
prepared.  The PMU will hire a consultant with an environmental background to ensure 
that environmental mitigation is appropriately included in the operational manuals for the 
project activities.  
 
Mitigation of environmental effects will be the responsibility of the proponent of the 
activity and is detailed in the operational manual.  The Environmental Assessment 
includes tables describing potential impacts for each of the activities that could be 
financed, as well as best mitigation practices.  The lending agency and the Project 
Management Unit will be responsible for ensuring that mitigation is carried out 
successfully in compliance with the legislation.  This responsibility will be reflected in an 
Page  10
effective monitoring system.  With some basic training loan officers will be able to 
monitor their projects but may require assistance from the PMU.  If there are a large 
number of projects monitoring will be on a sample basis with projects with the potential 
for creating the most serious environmental problems given highest priority for sampling.  
For monitoring to be effective, results must be acted upon, and the monitoring results will 
be considered when loan applications are reviewed and conditions are placed on 
subsequent loans.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
An environmental assessment was carried out in January 2005 as part of the project 
preparation to ensure that the Project meets the requirements of the World Bank as set out 
in Operational Directives 4.01 for Category B projects.  
 
The environmental assessment was discussed with local stakeholders at a series of 
workshops in February 2005.  February 19, 2005 was the deadline for the reception of 
further comments following the local consultations.  No further comments have been 
received. Overall, public input to the environmental review was solicited in the process of 
preparing the environmental review:  
 
?
Discussions with farmers, both small and medium sized commercial farms and 
with commercial banks to inform them of the environmental review of the Project, and 
more importantly, to identify likely activities for which loans through the Project would 
be requested. As well, farmers were asked for opinions on important environmental 
issues in their communities;  
 
?
discussions with Ministry of Agriculture officials to determine the categories of 
likely farm and non-farm rural enterprises for which loans would be requested;  
 
?
a
half day NGO forum was held to solicit ideas on likely farm and non-farm rural 
activities to be funded and the probable environmental impacts that could be expected 
from these activities;  
 
?
the draft final environmental assessment was forwarded electronically to the 
NGOs that attended the NGO roundtable, as well as to relevant government departments, 
for further comments  
 
?
newspaper advertisements were placed in Yerevan newspapers and local 
newspapers in the marzes to invite the general public to examine the environmental 
review draft final document and to make further input to the review (open houses for 
discussion of the draft final report have been arranged for each of the marzes as well as in 
Yerevan).  
 
World Bank experience with similar projects in transition economies has been used to 
identify potential impacts for a wide range of rural activities has been used as a basis for 
the EA.  This has been supplemented with input from the NGOs and farmers in the field.  
The list of agricultural activities likely to be subject for loans in these other countries was 
used as a base for discussion for the Armenia project.  This list was then adapted to best 
fit the agricultural conditions and farmer/rural development needs in Armenia.  
 
Page  11
A
social assessment was completed in February 2005.  The assessment was conducted 
in 20 communities in four Marzes (Armavir, Lori, Shirak and Synik) and focused on a 
qualitative assessment, given the large availability of quantitative data on the agricultural 
sector.  The survey work was complemented by a literature and data review.  In-depth 
and focus group interviews were conducted.  In each community a series of 10 interviews 
with farmers of different socio-economic standing, agro-processors, non-farm businesses, 
key informants and community leadership was conducted, in addition to focus group 
interviews.  
 
The Project overall is expected to have a positive impact on the rural population.  It 
aims to develop trust between the different stakeholders, especially between processors 
and farmers.  Strengthening the management capacity of processors and training of 
farmers in legal/contractual issues will help reduce risks and allow farmers to step up 
commercial farming.  Community grants will help farmers expand commercial farming 
by improving infrastructure.  The Project takes into account weak community solidarity 
and seeks to best utilize existing community organizations and local governance 
structure.  The Project is not likely to trigger large scale land acquisition or resettlement 
of poor farmers.  
 
The final EA/EMP has been disclosed in Armenia and will be disclosed in the Infoshop 
prior to appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/10/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/19/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/08/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Page  12
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Frauke Jungbluth 
04/07/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Rita Klees 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Satoshi Ishihara 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
04/07/2005 
Comments:   
