Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  
30543
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  
November 11, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country:
 
Azerbaijan 
Project ID:
 
P040716 
Project Name:
 
Azerbaijan Highway Project 
Task Team Leader:
 
Olivier Le Ber 
GEF Focal Area:
 
n/a 
Global Supplemental ID:  
n/a
 
Estimated Appraisal Date:
 
March 15, 2001 
Estimated Board Date:
 
June 15, 2001 
Managing Unit:
 
ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  
Specific Investment 
Credit 
Sector:
 
Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:
 
Other public sector governance (P); 
State enterprise/ Bank restructuring and 
privatization (S); Other rural development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
 
Jane Ebinger, Satoshi Ishihara 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
40
Other financing amounts by source:   
($m) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                      
6.5
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY                                    
-
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED)                       
1.5
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The objectives of the Project are to: (i) promote trade and economic growth by improving access and 
lowering transport costs for goods and passenger traffic moving along the East-West Highway; (ii) 
improve the organization, management, efficiency, and maintenance practices of the Road 
Administration; and (iii) improve the quality of available transport services for the low income rural 
population served by the East-West Highway and the tertiary road network connected to it.  
 
C.
 
Project Description
 
The project will: 
 
1. 
Reconstruct and upgrade of the existing East-West Highway between the cities of Ganja and 
Gazakh (98km), including: 
 
(a) 
reconstruction, resurfacing and leveling of selected sections to achieve a high quality road; 
(b) 
widening the shoulders of the roadway; 
(c) 
replacement, widening or strengthening of bridges in need of repair; 
(d) 
improvement of drainage; and 
(e) 
installation of road markings and road signs. 
Page  2
2. 
Implement pilot programs for rural road maintenance. 
 
3. 
Provide technical assistance, training, audit services and goods to strengthen the institutional 
capacity and assist in the restructuring and modernization of the Road Administration, Road 
Transport Service Department (RTSD). 
 
The Government wishes to use savings from the implementation of the above works to construct a by-
pass around the city of Tovuz (population approx. 13,000), including the construction of a new bridge 
over the River Kura. The East-West Highway is currently routed through this small city.  The cost of the 
by-pass is estimated at less than US$12 million.  Construction of the by-pass would:  
 
·
Increase Network Redundancy
 
–
On the approach to the city of Tovuz, the East-West Highway 
crosses the Kura River. This crossing point is the only connection between the eastern and western 
parts of Azerbaijan, and the only reasonable access route to the region in Georgia that is inhabited by 
an Azeri minority.   The Tovuz bypass would provide an alternative route to cross the river and thus 
increase the redundancy in the road network.   
 
·
Improve Traffic Safety
 – the by-pass would reduce traffic on the eastern approach to Tovuz, a traffic 
safety black spot.  From the east, the Highway approaches the bridge over the River Kura at a steep 
descent gradient of 8 percent
1
thereafter there is an intersection with a collector road at a steep 8 
percent ascent in to Tovuz.  The by-pass would provide an alternate route for through traffic thus 
reducing the volume of traffic in this traffic black spot area and increasing traffic safety.  
 
·
Improve the Local Environment in Tovuz
 – the by pass would provide an alternate route for 
through traffic, reducing traffic congestion, increasing road and pedestrian safety, and improving 
local air quality in the city of Tovuz. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The town of Tovuz is located on the strategically important East-West Highway linking Azerbaijan to 
Georgia.  The proposed 12 to 14 km long by-pass would start a few kilometers east of the city of Tovuz 
and by-pass the town on the northern side.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Road Transport Service Department (RTSD) of the Azerbaijan Ministry of Transport
2
will be 
responsible for project implementation, including compliance with safeguard policies.  RTSD has 
demonstrated experience with the implementation of existing project components and has been receptive 
to the TA consultancy under this Credit.  The addition of the Tovuz by-pass to the overall project scope 
would serve to further improve RTSD’s capacity in environmental management, public consultation and 
highway design.   
 
1
the standard international maximum is 6 percent 
2
RTSD replaced the road administration, Azyol, in 2002 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The Tovuz by-pass sub-project has been classified as a Category A project for 
environmental assessment purposes under the Bank’s OP/ BP 4.01, 
Environmental 
Assessment
.
An Environmental Assessment (EA) Report and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
will be prepared by the Consultant engaged to conduct the feasibility study and analysis of 
alternatives. The Consultant will support the Borrower with consultation on the EA.   
Consultation with project affected parties will be held during the “scoping meeting” to 
discuss the TOR for the EA and to identify relevant and priority environmental issues that 
are of concern to affected parties. Consultation will be held on the draft Environmental 
Assessment Report. 
 
In addition, an independent environmental specialist will be engaged to review the design 
and associated EA Report and EMP to ensure compliance with the Bank’s Guidelines.  
The independent consultant will assess the effectiveness of integration of the EA/ EMP 
with the Feasibility Study and the selection of the preferred routing for the by-pass. 
 
[N] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
[N] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[Y] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12)  
 
The Consultant engaged to conduct the feasibility study will also be responsible for social 
screening to enable the design of alternative road alignments that will have minimum 
negative social impacts. Detailed design consultants will be hired after the feasibility 
study who will be responsible for preparing a draft Resettlement Action Plan or Land 
Acquisition Plan, as required. The by-pass is expected to involve land acquisition but is 
not expected to require the resettlement of houses or businesses or the removal of 
buildings 
 
The detailed design consultant will support the Borrower with consultation on the 
resettlement and/or land acquisition issues, including:   
 
·
A
“scoping meeting” to delineate the issues which are of concern to affected interests. 
·
Consultation with the affected population on the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or 
Land Acquisition Plan (LAP), if required, until the RAP/ LAP is considered ready for 
implementation. 
 
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[N] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36).   
[N] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
Page  4
[TBD] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
The EA will examine what is known about the cultural property aspects of the proposed 
site(s) for the by-pass, and if there is any question of cultural property in the area a brief 
reconnaissance survey will be undertaken to determine the appropriate way forward. 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory):  
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
The by-pass is proposed under an amendment to the existing Credit.  A QER is therefore not planned.  
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
An update to this ISDS will be prepared once the preliminary design has been prepared, around April 
2005.   
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
3
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.   
 
It is proposed to complete the draft EA, including social screening, by March 2005 and detailed design by 
June 2005.  Procurement is expected to commence in June 2005.  
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
3
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal:  (i) at the 
InfoShop; and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially 
affected persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Olivier Le Ber 
Date 11/06/04 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ron Hoffer 
Date 11/08/04 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Motoo Konishi 
Date 11/10/04 
Comments 
