Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1698 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/12/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Azerbaijan 
Project ID: P094220 
Project Name: Health Sector Reform 
Task Team Leader: Enis Baris 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: May 23, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed Health Sector Reform Project would be to improve 
the health status of the population by ensuring equitable access to, quality and use of essential 
health services in a fiscally responsible and financially sustainable manner.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project would be a second-generation project, building on experience and lessons 
learned under the Bank-supported Health Reform LIL which is closing in September 2005.  The 
Health Reform LIL was a pilot of US$5 million and supported relatively minor investments in 
primary health in Azerbaijan given its size, including minor civil works, some basic medical and 
training equipment, pharmaceuticals as well as the development and delivery of 28 basic training 
modules in primary health.  This project is due to close in September 2005 and one of its lessons 
for the proposed follow-on operation is that investments in primary healthcare need to be more 
extensive in order to have the necessary impact on health outcomes and that additional capacity 
building needs to be broader and should focus, among other things, on clinical management of 
non-communicable diseases, on health promotion and primary disease prevention.  
 
Page  2
The proposed project would be an investment operation financed by an IDA credit (US$50 
million), with an additional 10% contribution by the Government of Azerbaijan, for a total 
project cost of US$55 million. The project would be implemented over a six-year period and 
would have the following five components:  
 
Component 1: Building MOH Capacity for Stewardship (estimated total US$2.5 million). This 
component would assist the MOH to build its capacity in policy making, planning, and 
regulation by financing consultancy services, training, some office and computer equipment.  To 
this end, support would be provided to: (i) establish a Health Policy and Planning Unit in the 
MOH to strengthen MOH capacity with regards to health and healthcare policy design and 
development; (ii) review and reorganize MOH functional and administrative structures; (iii) 
assist in the drafting of necessary legal and regulatory documents; (iv) design and carry out a 
public awareness campaign; (v) strengthen MOH role in designing and implementing health 
promotion and disease prevention programs by establishing a Health Promotion Unit in the 
MOH for program design and by strengthening the SANEPID network for disease surveillance 
and program implementation; (vi) support the development of an accreditation and licensing 
system for both public and private health facilities and set up a mechanism for quality control 
and assurance of healthcare services; and (vii) support the MOH Pharmaceuticals and Medical 
Devices Unit to develop and monitor effective management of national drug policy, including 
the institutionalization of an essential drug list, standard treatment protocols, as well as the 
development of the necessary legislative and regulatory framework.  
 
Component 2: Improving Delivery of Healthcare Services (estimated total US$49 million). This 
component would aim to improve the appropriateness, quality and efficiency of health care 
services in select districts at the primary care level and in five district hospitals by supporting 
development of staff skills, introduction of new planning and management methods, as well as 
by essential upgrades of facilities through provision of goods, civil works, consultancy services 
and training.  This component would also improve coordination and strengthen system hierarchy 
between the primary and secondary levels of health care.  This would involve an improved 
referral system within each district and with the national level, with an aim to reduce the number 
of referrals to Baku.  Activities to be supported under this component would begin once a 
national mapping exercise is carried out that would identify key elements in the provision of 
care, including patterns of utilization, catchment areas, etc.  Following the mapping exercise, a 
plan to rationalize health facilities would be developed and adopted, based on which the project 
would finance investments in the particular facilities.  This component would also finance 
baseline, mid-term and final evaluations to assess the impact of investments under this 
component.  
 
Component 3: Ensuring Sustainable Health Financing and Resource Allocation (estimated total 
US$1 million).   This component would finance consultancy services to: (i) carry out a feasibility 
study to ascertain whether a mandatory health insurance scheme is the right mechanism for 
Azerbaijan, and (ii) to define a set of health services to be provided for free as well as 
reimbursement rates for each type of service.  In addition, a new formula for resource allocation 
would be developed and per capita allocations would also be adjusted, if possible, for various 
indicators representing health care resource needs. A pilot of the population-based formula 
would be implemented in the five districts which received support under the Health Reform 
(LIL).  
Page  3
Component 4: Human Resources Development  (estimated total US$2 million). This 
component would aim to address the long term human resource needs of the health sector and 
would finance consultancy services, training, goods and minor civil works.  Specifically, this 
component would help to develop a labor adjustment strategy for the health sector to identify the 
human resources needs, in terms of competence mix and equitable distribution, and to propose 
solutions regarding which areas of specialty would need to be emphasized and/or curtailed.  This 
strategy would also review early retirement and compensation provisions.  In addition, this 
component would support a review of the current medical reform initiatives with regard to the 
curriculum reform and the regulations pertaining to general practice and specialty training. 
Lastly, this component would support retraining for health professionals as well as developing a 
new licensing system for health professionals; in addition, a review and amendment of the 
regulatory and legal framework for strengthening the Physicians? Association would be 
undertaken to better respond to changing needs and preferences of the medical community.  
 
Component 5: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (estimated total US$1.5 
million).  This component would ensure effective administration and implementation of the 
project by supporting the operation of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) which would be 
responsible for all implementation activities on behalf of the MOH, the main executing agency 
for the project.  The PIU staff would be responsible for procurement, disbursement, financial 
management, coordination of training events, ensuring coordination for project activities with 
relevant stakeholders, and for ensuring effective monitoring and evaluation of the outcomes of 
the project. An Inter-Agency Working Group (IAWG) would provide oversight for the project 
and would meet regularly to review and monitoring implementation progress.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Five pilot districts with respect to hospitals. These will be the same five districts used as pilot for 
the Primary health care reform under the ongoing health reform LIL. In addition, there will be 
additional distrcits for the expansion of the PHC pilot which remain to be determined at this 
stage.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Limited.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 
X
There will be new construction or renovation of hospitals and health centers on government 
owned lands.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/27/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Currently under discussion.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Enis Baris 
07/04/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Armin H. Fidler 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
