Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1908 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/20/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P095965 
Project Name: Siddhirganj Peaking Power Project 
Task Team Leader: Alan F. Townsend 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 10, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Power (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The primary development objective is to support investments in peaking power supply capability 
in Bangladesh such that unmet demand for energy is reduced by 500-million kWh per year (375-
m. units/yr from Siddhirganj power plant investment, and 125-m. units/yr from transmission 
investments) [numbers cited here are conservative estimates subject to revision as technical work 
is done over the course of preparation and appraisal].  When measured at the very conservative 
value of current tariffs, which are below full cost recovery, this unmet demand has an economic 
cost of at least $20-million per year.  
 
A
secondary development objective is to build capacity in Bangladesh to manage effectively 
and efficiently complex power generation technology; this would be accomplished through 
capacity building of EGCB and introduction of an O&M contractor.  The EGCB corporatization 
model, complemented by an O&M contract, has the potential to be implemented across a range 
of BPDB-owned power stations in Bangladesh, all of which are under-performing at this time.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Siddhirganj, just outside the metro Dhaka area, is an existing power generation site in an 
industrial area.  The power generation component of the project involves construction of a 120-
megawatt, simple cycle, gas-fired turbine, complementing two other equivalently sized units on 
the same site, which have been approved for funding by the ADB.  This plant is designed to run 
at full capacity for about 9 hours of each day, covering the period of peak consumption from 
about 2 pm until 11 pm.  
 
The other component of the project seeks to address the shortage of reactive power in the 
network at this time; shortage of reactive power is often a symptom of system stress, as when 
capacity and energy are insufficient to meet load.  Reactive power deficits force the injection of 
real power into a network to be reduced, so the system stays in balance perversely, in a system 
short of energy already, a shortage of reactive power forces a reduction in generation.  One way 
to remedy the reactive power deficit is through installation of capacitors at key network 
substations this is known as shunt compensation, and it has the effect of allowing greater 
dispatch of real power.  Since the reactive power problem intensifies at peak times, this 
investment component is synergistic with the investment in generation, and is equivalent to a 
significant, and much more expensive, addition of peak power capacity.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The site for the power plant in located within a 88 acre property owned by the PDB. It is a 
completely enclosed property which houses a power complex consisting of a) an old 50 MW 
Steam Turbine (ST), b) a new 210 MW Steam Turbine (ST), c) two 132 KV Sub-stations, d) gas 
reducing main station, e) residential complex for almost 3000 people, f) school, g) mosque, h) 
hospital, i) shops, and most other common facilities that can be expected in a small township. 
There are plans to add 2 x 210 MW STs next to the existing 210 MW ST. The  ADB funded 2 x 
120 MW GTs are to come up in place of the old 50 MW ST near the river on the east side, which 
will be dismantled. The WB funded 1 x 120 MW GT will come up in the area adjacent to the 
main road on the west side. The distance between the ADB and WB funded sites is about 1 km.  
 
The whole property is located in an industrial area. On the east side across the river and within 
2-3 km radius, there are three more gas fired power plants (AES Haripur 360 MW, PDB 99 MW 
GTs going up to 400 MW soon - financed by JBIC, and NEPC barge mounted 1 x 110 MW).  
There is a wooden board making factory between AES Haripur and the PDB plant which is 
known for its high emission of fine particles that clogged the air intake filters of the PDB plant in 
the past. Immediately along the Siddhirganj property, on the south is a derelict jute mill (was the 
World largest) that is being converted to a Special Economic Zone, and on the north is a steel re-
rolling mill, and then a couple of brick kilns. There are numerous other industries abound in the 
Siddhirganj area. To the immediate west, along the boundary of the property, is the Demra-
Narainganj road constructed on the embankment of an irrigation canal. The whole Siddhirganj 
area is quite densely populated like any other peri-urban area around Dhaka. The Sitalakha river 
immediately to the east of the property is used as a major waterway. It is also the main source of 
water for all the industrial activity in the Siddhirganj area, including the power plants.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The EGCB is a newly created corporate entity that is still trying to establish itself. Hence it has 
no capacity for managing safeguard issues. However, the PDB, which is the parent entity to 
Page  3
EGCB, has undertaken projects funded by external donors that require management of safeguard 
issues. As a result the EGCB senior staff are aware of the requirements for managing safeguard 
issues.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sameer Akbar (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is a provisional categorization based on site visit by the Environmental Specialist. It will 
be confirmed after scoping for the Environmental Assessment (EA) is completed. Initial 
assessment suggests the airshed quality may be an issue which could affect design parameters of 
the power plant and necessitate special measures to address this in the EMP.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/28/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The on-going PSDTA will fund the EGCB to undertake the collection and collation of 
information /data from primary and secondary sources of key baseline environmental 
parameters in and around the site. This baseline study will serve as the basis for preparation 
of the ToR for the EA/EMP. 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
In keeping with the secondary objectives of the project, given that EGCB is a newly 
constituted company which is likely to manage many more power plants in the future, this 
project is a good opportunity to assist them with developing a framework for environment, 
health, and safety management. The capacity building of EGCB could be done through TA 
support. The TA could be delivered either through the O&M contractor (who is to be hired 
for 6 years) or a separate consultant. The ToR for the O&M contractor to be developed by the 
transaction consultant will need to include monitoring and supervision of environmental 
parameters. There are a number of IPPs operating in the area. They may already be having an 
environmental management / monitoring system in place. It would be good for the EGCB 
and Siddhirganj staff to learn about what they are doing.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alan F. Townsend 
11/01/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/07/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Penelope J. Brook 
11/01/2005 
Comments:   
