Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1981 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bangladesh 
Project ID: P098273 
Project Name: Bangladesh Community-Based Local Governance Support Project 
Task Team Leader: David T. J. Savage 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 9, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASES 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption 
(S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
130.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
130.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
To strengthen inclusive and accountable institutions of local governance, through empowering 
communities to make choices on their development priorities and basic local services needs, and 
empowering LGs to respond to community priorities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support an incremental strengthening of community-driven local governance 
through:  
 
a) 
Empowering elected LGs (UPs / Category C Pourashava’s) with the capacity necessary to 
respond to basic service delivery needs of communities;  
 
b)
Empowering communities to define, monitor and evaluate the performance of their 
elected LGs;  
 
c) 
Reorienting central monitoring systems to guarantee effective systems of local 
accountability  
 
Page  2
The project has the following components (estimated Bank financing of US$130.0 million):  
 
Component 1: Fiscal transfers: This will support the ongoing clarification of intergovernmental 
roles and relationships through strengthening transparent, rules-based fiscal transfers for basic 
local service delivery and providing incentives for good governance and service delivery 
performance. Significant incremental increases in the size of the block grant to eligible LGs are 
an essential, practical and simple step towards increasing local accountability 
–
without 
sufficient resources at the local level, there is little incentive for anyone to hold LGs accountable. 
Additional resources will provide momentum to efforts to clarify the functions of LGs relative to 
other tiers. The block grant will be allocated through a simple, transparent formula and disbursed 
in a predictable manner through existing government mechanisms directly to the bank accounts 
of eligible LGs – a system that is becoming increasingly well-known at community level. 
Eligibility will be earned / maintained through meeting a set of basic requirements on financial 
(e.g. having a bank account, receiving timely, unqualified audits) and community accountability 
(e.g., participatory planning, public reporting.) Resources will help fund a portion of the costs of 
services, based on an open menu of allowable expenditures within the functional domain of LGs. 
Project approvals will be decentralized to LGs. The risks of elite capture and the misuse or 
inappropriate use of resources will be addressed through effective, participatory local planning, 
budgeting, approval, auditing and environmental and social management processes, 
complemented by central oversight. Under Component 2, the project will provide support to 
build adequate fiduciary safeguards in the preparation of accounts and financial statements of 
expenditures and auditing of records relating to implementation of this component. Separate 
incentive grants will be provided to those LGs that demonstrate improvements in participatory 
governance and service delivery outcomes, and specifically for local revenue generation that 
entrenches community accountability. Over time this may be accompanied by an expanded 
functional competence.    
 
Component 2: Institutionalizing local accountability: The project will (i) support direct 
mobilization of communities to prioritize development needs, design activities, engage with 
elected officials and their staff, and collaborate with them to implement and sustain local 
development actions, through supporting forums (such as ward development committees) that 
institutionalize inclusive forms of participation and by providing communities directly with 
information on the roles, resources and performance of LGs; and (ii) support community and 
government monitoring, and institutionalize this within permanent systems. Community 
monitoring requires public, visible accounting of what had been discussed in meetings to decide 
on allocations, review accounts and evaluate outcomes, for examples through publicly posting 
basic project information.  Technical and financial support will be provided to central monitoring 
institutions to ensure adequate tracking of project inputs and outputs, and to introduce simple but 
comprehensive financial assurance procedures. Supervision will verify these processes on a 
sample basis.  
 
Component 3 - Supporting core LG capacity development: LGs require support to undertake 
participatory strategic planning, design and manage project implementation, and monitor and 
evaluate project outcomes. GoB will be assisted to develop both demand from LGs for and NGO 
/
private sector supply of capacity support in these areas, across topics such as financial and 
project management. Initially, basic information and training needs (such as the eligibility 
Page  3
requirements for the block grant) will be addressed through training programmes. GoB will be 
assisted to stimulate a market for capacity support services. In the medium term, LGs will be 
able to draw down resources to meet their identified support requirements. This will provide a 
framework for capacity building grants to emerge in the future.  
 
Component 4 
–
Support to ongoing policy evaluation and development capacity: GoB will be 
assisted to conduct regular, outcomes-based evaluations of the project in the context of the 
evolution of the local governance system. The measurement of the projects impacts will help to 
establish the link between project inputs and outputs and whether some of the main goals of the 
project were achieved. In this way, evaluation of the project links closely with ensuring 
accountability and inclusiveness in the project. Effective evaluation procedures will assist GoB 
to continue to take steps to incrementally strengthen local governance, based on empirical and 
comparative evidence of performance. Specific additional activities identified for this component 
include the clarification of fiscal and functional assignments to LGs, a performance review of 
mechanisms and tools for community accountability, a review of the performance of alternative 
service delivery mechanisms, and strengthening of the public financial management systems at 
local level. LGs will be selected on a random basis for impact evaluation purposes in order to set 
up a rigorous mechanism at entry to assess and track impacts. National civil society stakeholders 
will be invited to play an advisory role in project preparation and the oversight of 
implementation. Support will also be provided to different types of organizations to deepen their 
research and analysis on LGs and governance more broadly.  
 
The project will use a learning-by-doing approach, reflecting its incrementalist response to the 
evolving policy agenda. A modest increase in the block grant will provide a foundation on which 
LG capacity can be built, as well as momentum to address outstanding, contentious policy issues 
such as the roles of Upazillas and UPs. A phased roll-out of support to LGs is also planned, 
based on the varying speeds at which different LGs can meet minimum mandatory eligibility 
criteria for the block grant. This provides a transparent, self-selecting mechanism to encourage 
local capacity development. A Sector Investment Loan (SIL) is considered the most appropriate 
lending instrument as the timing and duration of project phases will relate to actual project 
performance. Other development partners will complement project components, within a 
common programme.  
 
Safeguards Policy Approach  
 
Relatively minor environmental concerns are expected to arise from the small scale community 
infrastructure works, e.g. rural roads, culverts, water and sanitation. The operational policy for 
Environmental Assessment will be triggered.  The triggering of other operational policies will be 
assessed during preparation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework. Although 
land acquisition and involuntary resettlement may not be triggered (as infrastructure will be built 
on public land) the framework will provide clear site screening, impact assessment and 
mitigation procedures, to ensure any gaps between Bank and borrower policies are adequately 
addressed.  
 
The Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) already has an Environment and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF). MoLG will assess its effectiveness, grievance redress and 
Page  4
decision-making processes through sample site visits and consultations with local government 
representatives, communities, NGOs and experts during December 2005 and revise the ESMF as 
needed.   ESMF revision will include environmental and social performance criteria for local 
governments to qualify and maintain their eligibility and the draft ESMF will be disclosed prior 
to appraisal.  
 
Partnerships  
 
Bank has been working closely with major Development Partners through the local consultative 
group of donors (LCG), and UNDP/UNCDF and EU will be co-financiers of the project. The 
team has been working closely with civil society groups and local government leaders which will 
continue during implementation phase. An advisory group of eminent national stakeholders in 
civil society will be constituted to assist in project preparation and play and oversight role in 
project implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The rural local governments, as well as category C municipalities that meet the minimum 
conditions will receive the block grants. However, all rural local governments and category C 
municipalities will receive assistance from other components e.g. capacity building, monitoring 
and evaluation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The local government institutions will provide small-scale rural infrastructure, therefore, the 
project will not have significant irreversible or long-term environmental impacts. Infrastructure 
will be built on public land, so land acquisition is not required. The implementing agency, 
Ministry of Local Government has been implementing infrastructure program financed by World 
Bank, and has developed environmental, land acquisition, social and resettlement guidelines and 
frameworks. These guidelines and frameworks will be discussed with LGIs, civil society and 
people during preparation and refined to meet the needs of this program.  
 
The Ministry of Local Government already has an Environment and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF), which was developed earlier to establish a set of steps and procedures for 
compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies.  MoLG will updatethe “Environmental 
Guidelines” which form part of its Operational Manual (OM), to identify, mitigate and monitor 
environmental impacts of projects under preparation and implementation.  In addition, MoLG 
has been implementing many World Bank financed projects, including the ongoing Municipal 
Services Development, Arsenic Mitigation, Water Supply, Rural Roads and Markets projects. 
Through these projects, MoLG has demonstrated adequate capacity to ensure compliance with 
safeguard policies.  The current Environmental Guidelines for environmental site screening and 
construction activities will be upgraded and expanded. This framework will address small 
infrastructure and services, construction and safety.  No involuntary resettlement is envisaged as 
there will not be any land acquisition, but the existing Resettlement Policy Framework will be 
revised for the needs of local government. Local Government Engineering Department (LGED), 
which is the implementing arm of MoLG, will provide appropriate training to local government 
institutes in dealing with any land acquisition and resettlement matters arising.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  5
Ms Nilufar Ahmad (SASES) 
Mr Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Small, local-level infrastructure improvements in communities may cause minor adverse 
environmental impacts, especially during construction.  An environmental and social 
management framework (ESMF) will help to deal with any such impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Evaluation of impact, if any, to be undertaken during assessment   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Evaluation of impact, if any, to be undertaken during assessment   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/24/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Initiated in December 2005, completed by 29 March 2006   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr David T. J. Savage 
12/16/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
12/19/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Junaid Kamal Ahmad 
 
Comments:   
