                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                   APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/13/2005                                     Report No.: 33835

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Belarus                               Project ID: P095115
Project Name: Post-Chernobyl Recovery Project
Task Team Leader: Maha J. Armaly
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 3, 2005      Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2005
Managing Unit: ECSIE                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (80%);Other social services
(20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Access to urban services and housing
(P);Natural disaster management (S);Pollution management and environmental health (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            50.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER                                                          12.36
                                                                          12.36
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)          Yes [ ]       No [X]

2. Project Objectives
The project aims to provide the population affected by the Chernobyl accident with
energy efficient and reliable heat and hot water services.

3. Project Description
The project investments will be implemented in three Oblasts of Belarus. Gomel and
Mogilev are the two Oblasts most affected by the Chernobyl Accident, and few
contaminated areas are found in Brest. The project has three components:

 Component 1. Energy Efficiency Improvements (Estimated Costs US$37.8 million).
This component includes different types of investments which aim to upgrade or replace
energy infrastructure in order to improve efficiencies, provide better services to the
population (comfort, and access to better fuel), ensure savings on fuel and other capital
and operational costs, and reduce emissions. Investments are expected to take place in
about 25-30 sites in each of Gomel and Mogilev Oblasts, and about 10 sites in Brest
Oblast consisting mainly of social public institutions in the education, health and social
protection areas to ensure that they receive adequate heat and hot water supply. This
component includes the following sub-components:

 a)     Energy efficiency improvements in heat generation including modernization of
boiler houses by replacing old and inefficient equipment with modern boilers or
cogeneration equipment.
 b)     Energy efficiency improvements in the heat distribution system including
replacement of old pipelines with high heat and hot water losses, with preinsulated
pipelines and modernization of building level heat substations with modern heat
exchangers, regulation equipment and heat meters.
 c)     Energy efficiency improvements in public buildings including replacement of
windows, replacement of leaking roofs and improvement of their thermal insulation, and
replacement of inadequate lighting in schools and hospitals with modern energy efficient
lighting systems.

 Component 2. Residential Gas Connections (Estimated Cost US$10.0 million). This
component aims to connect individual houses, which currently utilize wood in individual
heat stoves, to the gas pipeline in order to provide better heating services to the
population living in the contaminated areas. The project could also result in reduced
production of potentially contaminated ashes which are usually disposed in gardens
which increases the risk of radioactive intake. The Bank will provide financing for the
purchase of pipes, meters, and other equipment, including those to be installed inside the
houses. The government will provide the financing and undertake the civil works
component of the investments. It is expected that about 10,000 houses will be connected
in 20 towns in Gomel and Mogilev.

 Component 3. Technical Assistance (US$3.7 million). This component would ensure
effective implementation of the project and the delivery of additional benefits to the
population. This component includes:

 (a)    Design and supervision of the project investments.
 (b)    PMU training, equipment, support, public information, energy audits, and project
financial audits. The government will finance staffing costs of the PMU.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project will be implemented in the Gomel, Mogilev and Brest Oblasts which suffered
from the Chernobyl accident in 1986. During the project preparation, the IAEA
scrutinized the relevant data concerning the areas covered by the project, including the
soil and wood contamination data, reviewed national radiation protection regulations and
provided the recommendations on radiation safety. By virtue of the project definition and
delineation, most of project activities would not entail unusual measures for radiation
protection. The responsibility for radiation monitoring and protection in the Chernobyl
affected areas during the implementation of this project will lie with the Belarus
authorities. Belarus has well-established standards and procedures for identifying areas of
concern and for specifying appropriate measures to be taken. The laying of the gas
pipeline is ongoing in the Chernobyl Affected Areas of Belarus (CAAB) and there is the
experience in complying with the radiation protection requirements established by

national regulation. The IAEA has contributed the section for the Environmental
Management Plan that addresses the issue of radiation protection, as appropriate.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Inesis Kiskis (ECSSD)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                               X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                     X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Although the project will be implemented in the area affected by the 1986 Chernobyl
accident, no major safeguard issues are anticipated. In fact, project will have an overall
positive impact on environment due to increased energy efficiency and reduced emissions
into the atmosphere.

 The proposed works include improvement of thermal insulation in public buildings
(schools, hospitals, orphanages) and connection to gas of residential areas in selected
towns. The negative short term impacts arising during the civil works will be mitigated
by proper planning and adherence to good practice requirements. Practically all works
will take place in urbanized areas where no natural habitats exist. Project will not finance
laying the main pipelines - only the tertiary distribution pipes within the towns, thus
eliminating the threat of negatively impacting forests of wetlands.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The only potential long term impact may arise due to improper handling of ash from
wood boilers incinerating wood with radioactivity levels exceeding 200Bq/kg. Ash from
boilers using such wood for incineration shall be delivered to landfills and not used as
fertilizer in agriculture. Workers handling the ash must wear protective gear; however, no
specific requirements for general public.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental Management Plan for the project describes the potential threats and
the ways to avoid/mitigate them. These are routine measures (adherence to generally
accepted occupational safety rules, proper handling and disposal of waste, with special
attention to materials containing asbestos and/or glass wool; timely removal of
construction waste to designated landfills, proper landscaping of the construction site
after completion of civil works.) Borrower has a good capacity for compliance with the
safeguard policy requirements. In terms of radiation control, Belarus has a well-
established system of radiation control which will ensure that radiation levels in
incinerated wood are not exceeded, and that ash from boilers using the wood with
average levels >200 Bq/kg is delivered to landfills.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The major stakeholders are communities of the rayon centers in the Brest, Gomel and
Mogilev Oblast. Public meetings were held in July 2005 in Khoiniki and Bykhov.
Briefing documents were prepared for dissemination by the local executive committees
about one week before the meetings were held, in order to give the public time to arrange
attendance. These briefing documents were also referred to in local radio programs. No
major comments or complaints were received during these meetings. Additional
consultations regarding the contents of EMP were with participation of government
officials and NGO representatives were held in Minsk in the very beginning of October
2005.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08/26/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  10/05/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09/28/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
NA

  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA      No
  report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
  credit/loan?
  BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the            Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                  Ms Maha J. Armaly                            09/16/2005
Environmental Specialist:          Mr Inesis Kiskis                             09/17/2005
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Ronald N. Hoffer                          09/26/2005
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Mr Motoo Konishi                             10/07/2005
 Comments:

