Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1221 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 2, 2005 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
A.  Basic Project Data 
Country: Belarus 
Project ID: P078303 
Project Name: POST CHERNOBYL 
RECOVERY PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Jessica Mott 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P087667 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 22, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 21, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Forestry (50%);District heating and 
energy efficiency services (50%) 
Theme: Rural non-farm income generation 
(P);Rural services and infrastructure (P); Other 
environment and natural resources management 
(S); Pollution management and environmental 
health (S); Access to urban services and housing 
(S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 45 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
4 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed pr
oject objective would be “to revitalize selected districts most affected by the 
Chernobyl accident by improving local people’s incomes and living conditions.”  Project 
outcomes would include:  increased forest-based employment and household income and 
improved access to provision of heat in ways which are less at risk of radionuclide 
contamination.  The project will be supported by the World Bank, donor and Belarusian 
Government contributions.  It may include support from the Global Environment Facility as a 
blended operation with the above objective serving as the global environmental objective, 
consistent with the GEF Strategic Priority of “mainstreaming biodiversity in production 
landscapes and sectors”.  GEF support for the heat supply component will also be investigated 
during preparation. 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The five-year project could comprise selected activities from among the following categories:   
·
Forest Enterprise.  
Increasing the capacity for wood harvesting and processing in order to 
better utilize forest resources for employment and income generation in environmentally 
sound and safe ways, thus benefiting local people. 
Page  2
·
Optimizing Provision of Heat . 
Improving the heating conditions in houses and linking them 
to a gas-based heating system, thereby reducing the exposure to radionuclides.  This might 
also include reducing exposure by retrofitting existing wood burning boilers and increasing 
safe utilization of wood resources by converting large institutional boilers that need 
replacement to wood burning boilers.
 
Supporting Activities
.
In addition to these activities the project design would need to address 
various support activities, with collaborative support from the International Atomic Energy 
Agency in some cases.  These include the need for advice to the Government on how to 
harmonize its national radiation safety standards with the international ones because current 
inconsistencies, especially among Belarus’ neighbors, limit and complicate international trade, 
and furthermore because some national standards need updating to reflect current international 
knowledge and consistent logic about exposure risk from various radiation sources. It also 
includes the need for radiation monitoring and communication to increase the knowledge of and 
trust in clean forest production options and market opportunities.  It might also include support 
for analysis (e.g., financial accounts of forestry and utility enterprises) to better understand 
implications of existing policies, and advice on policy reform efforts (e.g. tariffs) that have been 
initiated.   
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project area would be selected districts in the areas affected by the explosion at the 
Chernobyl nuclear power plant in 1986, and the adjoining areas where evacuees resettled.   The 
explosion contaminated almost 23 percent of the territory of Belarus.  About 2,560 km
2
of 
agricultural land was removed from use and another 1,720 km
2
of forests were affected.  The 
most contaminated area, about 1,700 km
2
,
in the Bragin, Khoiniki and Narovlya districts of the 
Gomel oblast, was declared an exclusion zone from which all persons were evacuated and all 
land taken out of economic activity. Another 4,500 km
2
were declared a resettlement zone whose 
inhabitants were allowed to resettle in territories which were considered less contaminated by 
radionuclides.  This resulted in the resettlement of 137,000 people out of a population of 2.5 
million then living in the contaminated territories. As of January 1, 2001, 1.6 million people in 
Belarus live in the 21 districts (13 in Gomel, 5 in Mogilev, and 3 in Brest) where levels of 
radioactive contamination are well above natural pre-accident background levels.  Adjoining 
areas where people have resettled are subject to stresses from increased public utility 
requirements. The specific districts to receive project support will be determined during detailed 
project preparation.   
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The country has a positive track record in environmental assessment, and environmental 
management including forest management and natural habitat protection.  The Ministry of 
Nature Resources, responsible for environmental assessment, has a well qualified, capable staff 
and a sound regulatory framework.  From the environmental management point of view, the 
Government also has taken seriously the special issues associated with the areas affected by the 
Chernobyl accident, as demonstrated by the public expenditures program.  To the extent that the 
Government has a capacity limitation, it is in the area fiscal constraints affecting the availability 
of budget.  The proposed Post Chernobyl Recovery Project will directly address this shortcoming 
within the forestry and energy sectors, taking into account the highest priorities in terms of cost 
effectiveness.  The Bank’s past involvement in the forestry sector further demonstrated the 
Page  3
government’s commitment and capacity.  The Bank-financed forestry project was preceeded by a 
special environmental assessment focused on radiation contamination of wood, and implications 
for forest management, timber and other forest product harvesting, and associated processing.  
The Bank also provided a grant for pilot of independent forest certification to ensure that forests 
are harvested sustainably, and the government is now expanding this certification with its own 
funding to cover all its forests.  This certification enables the project to be consistent with the 
Bank Forest Policy (OP 4.36), which will be triggered because of Bank-financing of industrial-
scale commercial harvesting operations.  A PHRD grant is financing a study to align Belarus’s 
standards for biomass burning boilers with those of the EU.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[No] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[Yes] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[No] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[No] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[Yes] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[No] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[No] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[No] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
The project will have a positive environmental impact by increasing the country’s financial and 
institutional capacity to improve environmental management generally, as well as to reduce 
exposure of local people to harmful radiation.  No significant adverse environmental impacts are 
foreseen.  An environmental assessment undertaken during project preparation will include an 
outline of any precautionary and curative measures needed to mitigate, minimize and 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
compensate for special risks related to radiation contamination.  Close collaboration with the 
International Atomic Energy Agency during Bank missions and as a co-financier is supplying the 
Bank with the special technical oversight required to address the special issues associated with 
undertaking project activities in an area contaminated by radiation.   
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.  July 25, 2005 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  
Environmental assessment and if required a pest management plan as an annex to the EA.  
The environmental assessment would begin by September 1, 2005, with a complete draft 
report completed by October 31, 2005.   
IV.  APPROVALS 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jessica Mott 
February 1, 2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Ronald N. Hoffer 
February 1, 2005 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Benoit Paul Blarel
 
February 1, 2005 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
