Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/19/2005 
Report No.:  AC1538
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Benin 
Project ID:  P082725 
Project Name:  Second Decentralized City Management 
Task Team Leader:  Franck Bousquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 24, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (30%);Roads and highways (30%);Sub-national government 
administration (20%);Other social services (20%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access to urban services 
and housing (S);Decentralization (S);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
3.30 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
11.70
15.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective is to increase access to infrastructure and basic services for 
residents of Benin's primary cities (Cotonou, Porto-Novo and Parakou) and selected 
secondary cities (to be selected at appraisal among : Ouidah, Abomey, Abomey-Calavi, 
Bohicon, Nattitingou, Lokossa, Djougou, and Kandi).   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project is part of a two-phase APL. The proposed project represents the 
second phase, and is expected to last four years. The first phase included three main 
components: (a) municipal management strengthening; (b) basic urban infrastructure 
construction/rehabilitation; and (c) community participation and integration.  The second 
phase will continue to support these components, extended to the secondary cities, while 
adding a fourth one: (d) solid waste management in response to urban environmental 
degradation, which has emerged as an important priority for the Government.  
 
Component 1: Municipal Management Strengthening (est. cost US$ 5 million). The first 
phase of this component supported diagnoses, strategy development and capacity 
Page  2
building, particularly in municipal finance, for the three main cities of Cotonou, Porto-
Novo and Parakou; the second phase will focus on strengthening performance and on 
implementing actions identified by the diagnoses conducted for the three main cities and 
secondary cities. This component will also include a sub-component for capacity building 
in urban environmental protection and management.  In particular, it will help the 
municipalities develop capacity in integrated urban environmental planning.  This 
assistance will focus on the formulation of city-specific environmental management plans 
(i.e., identification of environmental problems, setting priorities, defining action plan, 
etc.).  It will also support the development of skills of municipal staff in environmental 
impact assessment, and environmental enforcement and compliance (e.g., basic area 
hygiene and sanitation regulations, land use regulations, etc.).  
 
Component 2: Basic Infrastructure (est. cost US$ 32 million), consisting of basic 
infrastructure construction and rehabilitation, focused in the first phase on priority works 
for which the 3 main cities had demonstrated their capacity to finance maintenance. Since 
the three main cities have increased their revenues and demonstrated greater capacity to 
program and implement maintenance, a larger number of infrastructure projects will be 
implemented during the second phase. The list of eligible infrastructure projects in the 
three larger cities was partly identified during first phase preparation, and is being 
reviewed by the team based on priority needs, socio-economic eligibility and other 
donor?s assistance programs. Counterpart levels will be established based on an estimate 
of real ability to pay and the required equity incentive.  
 
Component 3:  Community Participation and Integration (est. cost US$ 5 million).  Five 
low-income neighborhoods participated in the first phase, which established a 
?community liaison office? within the municipal government, and encouraged 
community participation in the development, implementation and maintenance of 
microprojects in their neighborhoods.  For the second phase, the project will consolidate 
investment from the first phase community-based financed activities and new low-
income neighborhoods will be identified in the three main cities and chosen for the 
secondary cities. Works identified include: (i) construction, rehabilitation and 
management of infrastructure to improve accessibility of these neighborhoods (roads and 
drainage) and facilitate their connection to urban services; (ii) rehabilitation and 
construction of neighborhood social and economic infrastructure (primary schools, 
community centers, basic health centers, small markets water kiosks and latrines).  
 
Component 4: Solid Waste Management (est. cost US$ 8 million). As a result of first-
phase studies, and client-identified priorities, this component was added for the second 
phase to address specific urban environmental problems, pertaining to solid waste 
management.  The first phase supported a solid waste management study for the cities of 
Porto-Novo and Parakou, whose recommendations for Porto-Novo will be implemented 
during the second phase. This component aims to increase the overall efficiency of Porto-
Novo?s solid waste management by (i) helping the city to develop a long-term vision for 
integrated solid waste management that deals with all the elements of waste management, 
including storage at source, primary and secondary collection, recycling and re-use, 
transfer and disposal, including the construction of a landfill, and (ii) assisting the city to 
Page  3
implement a priority action plan ? within the framework of this long-term vision ? aimed 
at achieving short and medium term improvement of the current system of solid waste 
management.  In addition to purely technical aspects of waste management, the long-term 
vision will identify and pursue specific objectives pertaining to the political, institutional, 
financial, economic, environmental aspects associated with an integrated and efficient 
system of municipal solid waste management. The first part of the project 
implementation will focus on creating the technical, institutional, and financial conditions 
for the successful operation of a sanitary landfill.  If these conditions are met at the mid-
term review of the project, the construction of the landfill will start during the second half 
of the project life.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover exclusively urban areas: Cotonou, Porto-Novo, Parakou (primary 
cities); and selected secondary cities (to be selected at appraisal among Ouidah, Abomey, 
Abomey-Calavi, Bohicon, Nattitingou, Lokossa, Djougou, and Kandi).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Remi Kini (AFTS3) 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The environmental and social safeguard issues of the proposed project are associated with 
the activities of the components 2 (Basic infrastructure), 3 (Community participation and 
integration) and 4 (Solid waste management).  
 
Although the definite investments and works in basic infrastructure (component 2) are 
not known yet, one can assume that they will be similar to those undertaken during the 
first phase of the project.  Based on the achievements of the first phase and the results of 
the preparation mission, the priority investments will include: construction of drainage 
Page  4
and sewage infrastructure (e.g., canal for storm water and waste water disposal), 
rehabilitation of urban roads, and construction of infrastructure for social services, such 
schools, clinics, and community centers.  These investments may cause damage to the 
human and natural environment at varying scales and types depending on their scale and 
design.  In particular, the rehabilitation of urban roads and the construction of drainage 
and sewage networks could result in direct and indirect adverse effects on:  
 
?
The human environment in the form of (i) disturbance to urban agricultural land 
(e.g., destruction of topography/physical features resulting in erosion and loss of 
productivity), (ii) disturbance to other economic activities, (iii) disturbance to human 
settlements (residence and workplace), (iv) impairment of aesthetic, cultural, or 
architectural assets, etc.;  
 
?
The non-living environment: (i) contamination of water bodies and soils, (ii) 
disruption to the system of surface water runoff ? leading to floods and property damage, 
(iii) spread of dust, debris and waste, etc;  
 
?
The natural living environment: (i) removal of vegetation, (ii) habitat intrusion, 
(iii) contamination of biota, (iv) impairment of biological quality and diversity in water 
streams and bodies, etc.  
 
These effects also apply to the construction of clinics, community centers, and schools 
depending on the environmental conditions and on the handling of construction 
equipment, work-site operations (wastes and debris production), and land acquisition.  
 
The management of solid waste is also a source of potentially sensitive environmental 
and social safeguard issues.  These issues range from the location, construction or 
provision of refuse storage infrastructure or equipment at collection points within the 
city, materials recovery and recycling, to final disposal.  In addition to the highly charged 
social safeguard issues involved (acquisition of land, effects on safety and human health 
on local communities, etc.), the handling and final disposal of solid waste might be 
associated with potentially serious environmental problems depending on the climatic, 
geotechnical, hydrological, and hydro-geological conditions.  Such problems may include 
(but are not limited to): pollution of surface water, pollution of the groundwater, air 
pollution (dust and methane), and health hazards posed by insects and rodents.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Most of the investments will not have any long-term impacts that would result from 
future activities in the project area.  However, the solid waste management component 
may help the city of Porto-Novo to build a sanitary landfill, if all the triggers for doing so 
are met at mid-term review.  The operation of this landfill will require sustained 
environmental monitoring in order to control for the potential environmental problems 
described above.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
No alternative was considered at this stage.  The proposed project is the second and final 
stage of an APL.  The design of this second phase drew from the lessons learned during 
Page  5
the implementation of the first phase for the selection of the cities and the planned 
investments, and for the mitigation of the adverse social and environmental impacts 
associated with these urban infrastructure investments.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Prior to appraisal, the Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management  
 
Framework (ESMF) for civil works and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The 
two reports have been reviewed and cleared by the Bank and final versions will be 
disclosed in the World Bank InfoShop and in the country, prior to appraisal. An 
assessment of the Borrower?s capacity is below:  
 
Institutions for environmental management have developed slowly but steadily in Benin 
since the creation of the Ministry of Environment in 1992.  The country adopted an 
overarching environmental law (?loi cadre sur l?environnement?) in 1999 that places 
environmental impact assessment at the core of the Government?s efforts towards 
achieving sustainable development.  Following the creation of the Benin Environmental 
Agency in 1995, the country benefited from the Bank support from 1996-2001 in the 
implementation of the Environmental Management Project that focused on the creation of 
the basic institutional and technical capacity for environmental management.  
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) was one of the key areas of emphasis of the 
capacity building activities.  
 
These capacity building efforts consisted of three main types of activities including (i) 
enacting a framework environmental law with specific requirements for EIA (and 
preparing and adopting implementation decrees for EIA law), (ii) developing sectoral 
guidelines for EIA, and (iii) holding several training workshops for the staff in line 
ministries, in consulting firms, and a few NGOs.  These training workshops started in 
2000 and have had several rounds with differing thematic focus and complexity.  The 
Environmental Agency also helped to establish municipal associations for environmental 
management (AMAE).  These associations (NGO status) also benefited from training in 
environmental assessment, and in local investment planning in the area of environmental 
management. Following the formal creation of the communes and the first municipal 
elections in 2002, the AMAE are collaborating with the municipalities in the area of local 
environmental management.  
 
The two implementing agencies (i.e., AGETUR for physical works and SERHAU for 
overall project coordination and community micro-projects) of the project were already 
in charge of implementing the first phase of the APL.  As a result, they have experience 
in dealing with the environmental and social impacts of the selected urban infrastructure 
investments described above. The environmental and social safeguard study will 
recommend measures aimed at ensuring that the investment options considered are 
environmentally sound.  The environmental/social management plan will ensure that (i) 
environmental and social safeguard issues are addressed in a timely and practical fashion, 
(ii) appropriate steps are taken to incorporate safeguard aspects into investment planning, 
and (iii) appropriate monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of mitigation are 
Page  6
included in the overall M&E framework.  The implementing agencies (AGETUR and 
SERHAU) will be responsible for (i) preparing the TORs for specific environmental 
assessment (EA) studies and resettlement action plans (RAPs), if needed, for each set of 
investment, and (ii) ensuring that the contractors comply with the recommendations of 
these studies during the construction phase.  The Bank will provide guidance on 
elaboration of the TORs and the Environmental Agency (ABE) will be responsible for 
providing overall quality control through the review and clearance (by the Ministry of 
Environment, Habitat and Urban Affairs - MEHU) of the EA studies and RAP?s, and 
validating the environmental audit reports to be prepared at the completion of works by 
the contractors.  ABE will also help in supervision mission on the safeguard compliance 
tasks.  ABE will also be responsible for the training of the municipal technical staff in 
environmental assessment (included in component 1 of the project).  All EA studies and 
RAPs will also be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank prior to the commitment of 
project funds to any set of investments subject to EA and RAP requirements.  
 
It should be stressed however that the environmental and social safeguard issues 
associated with the solid waste management component will be assessed and addressed 
separately during the first half of the implementation of the project.  The construction of a 
sanitary landfill, if and when it happens will comply with Bank safeguards regarding the 
selection of the site, the design, the construction and the operations this landfill.  Given 
the nature of this investment and potential environmental and social risks associated with 
it, the safeguard work involved will require a strong oversight from the Regional 
Safeguard Unit both in the design and the supervision of this work.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are:  
 
The primary beneficiaries of the project are urban residents of the three main cities (i.e., 
Cotonou , Parakou, and Porto Novo) and of several secondary cities (Ouidah, Abomey, 
Abomey-Calavi, Bohicon, Nattitingou, Lokossa, Djougou, and Kandi).  The governments 
of these cities, NGOs, Neighborhood Development Committees (NDCs), private sector, 
and line ministries (Ministry of Finance and Economy, Ministry of the Interior, Security 
and Decentralization, MEHU) will also benefit from capacity building activities 
supported by the proposed project.  During the preparation of the project, a consultant 
firm conducted a need assessment study in order to identify the priority areas where the 
targeted low-income neighborhoods will need support in social infrastructure investment 
as well as selected community and area-based development activities.  The project 
preparation activities conducted by the two implementing agencies (i.e., SERHAU, 
AGETUR) involved the local governments, NGOs, Community Initiative Support Unit 
(in the municipalities) and NDCs in the design of the project.  This involvement through 
a
consultation process included beneficiary assessment of the first phase of the project, 
and the identification of new areas of emphasis of the proposed project.  This 
consultation process also guided the selection of the priority infrastructure investments, 
and the identification of the required financial and administrative capacity building 
activities aimed at strengthening the municipalities.   
 
Page  7
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/19/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/20/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/10/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/20/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/20/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
No 
Page  8
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Franck Bousquet 
05/17/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Remi Kini 
05/17/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Abdoul-Wahab Seyni 
05/17/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Kristine M. Ivarsdotter 
05/19/2005 
Comments:  All comments have been incorporated.  This is the final version that was signed. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
05/19/2005 
Comments:  This is the final version that was signed. 
