Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC443 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 20, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID: P085112 
Project Name: WATER QUALITY 
PROTECT GEF 
Task Team Leader: Seema Manghee 
GEF Focal Area: I-International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 8, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: August 1, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (80%);Sanitation (20%) 
Theme: Pollution management and 
environmental health (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
Other financing amounts by source:  
($1.5m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
8.5 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The overall objective of the proposed project is reduction of ground-based pollution from municipal 
sources into the Neretva and Bosnia Rivers.  The sub-objectives are:  (a) development of a Wastewater 
Improvement Management Plan; (b) establishment of a Joint BiH/Croatian Commission, with 
coordination from Montenegro to implement the plan; and (c) development and implementation of high-
priority, low-cost water capital investments. 
 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The proposed project would have the following five components: 
 
Component 1:
 Wastewater Improvement Management Plan Preparation. 
 
• 
An Ecological Analysis and Protective Plan for the targeted areas; 
• 
A Review and Analysis of Existing Institutional Arrangements; 
• 
Preparation of a Proposal for Institutional Improvements; 
• 
Evaluation of Measures for Improving and Sustaining Basin Water Quality; 
• 
Identification and Evaluation of Alternative Scenarios for Improvement of Water Quality;  
• 
Design of a Long-Term Wastewater Quality Monitoring Program; 
Page  2
 
 
• 
Analysis of the Economic Benefits of Clean Water; 
• 
Development of a Nutrient Reduction Plan; 
• 
Development of a Financing Plan; and 
• 
Development and Implementation of a Public Awareness Plan.  
 
Component 2:
  Startup of the Wastewater Improvement Management Plan, including operating costs for 
24 months. 
 
Component 3:
  
Implementation of a High-Priority, Low-Cost Capital Investment, as recommended by the 
Wastewater Improvement Management Plan.
 
 
Component 4: 
 Project Management and Monitoring. 
 
This component would be conducted by existing personnel of the Public Water Management Enterprise, 
Vodoprivredas, with offices in Mostar and Sarajevo in coordination with relevant water utilities.  The 
Enterprise would work in close cooperation with the Croatia Public Water Management Enterprise, 
Hrvatska Vode, which would represent Croatia.  The work would also be done in cooperation with 
relevant authorities in Montenegro for the Neretva River Basin.  The Public Water Management 
Enterprise, Vodoprivredas, has long and successful experience in implementing and operating 
international projects, and would have a number of professionals who have managed water and sanitation 
projects, including predesign and procurement.  Project monitoring would include: (a) economic and 
financial assessment of the nutrient reduction operations; and (b) environmental monitoring.  The 
professionals would directly manage and coordinate the investment program, and would communicate 
continuously with the BiH Government.  That approach would simplify supervision and procurement and 
also coordination with the Bank.  Final arrangements would be determined by project appraisal. 
 
Component 5:
 Institutional Support and Replication. 
 
This component would provide financing for the dissemination of the project results within BiH and in 
other countries of the region. Details for this activity would be agreed upon before project appraisal.
 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The locations would include areas along the Neretva and Bosnia Rivers.  The Neretva River Basin drains 
the second largest area in BiH and is the only one of the four that discharges from BiH into the Adriatic 
Sea.  The Neretva River, which originates in BiH and flows through Croatia for 20 km before entering the 
Bay of Mali Ston and the Adriatic is of great economic importance to both countries.  For BiH, it is a 
source of hydropower, drinking water and water for irrigation.  For Croatia, the Bay of Mali Ston at its 
mouth is an important area for the production of oysters for local consumption and export.  The Neretva 
Delta is a Mediterranean wetland of international importance as evidenced by its designation as a Ramsar 
Wetlands site.  It is also a source of pollutants for the Adriatic and Mediterranean. 
 
The Bosnia River Basin covers the largest and the most developed area of the Federation part of BiH.  
The Bosnia River flow begins in the territory of BiH and is around 193 km long, including the area from 
Vrelo Bosne (source of the scenic Bosnia River) to the inter-entity boundary line at the mouth of the 
Usora River.  The Bosnia River Basin is the most populated region of BiH.  The most developed regions 
in the country, in industrial terms, are found along this river.  Wastewater from communities and 
industrial facilities – the concentrated polluters – discharges directly into the river, most of it without any 
treatment.  The Bosnia River, is a source of pollutants for the Danube where it eventually drains. 
Page  3
 
 
 
Site selection will be completed by January 5, 2004.
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Public Water Management Enterprise, Vodoprivredas, managed the first Urgent Works Project after 
the war, and has successful experience in implementing and operating international projects.  
Vodoprivredas professionals work closely to transfer knowledge to the utilities and related institutions on 
safeguard policies. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats (OP
/BP
 4.04) Will depend on treatment scheme selected 
(e.g. wetlands deposition etc.) under Component 3 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) Will depend on location  
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[Y] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
) The project will not involve 
any physical activities at or near known sites of cultural/historical/religious 
etc. significance. Nonetheless,  during routine activities artifacts of 
aforementioned significance may be found. For this possibility, chance find 
procedures will be specified in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[X] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.  January 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS.  January 2004. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Seema Manghee 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
