Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1692 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID: P096200 
Project Name: Land Registration 
Task Team Leader: Gavin P. Adlington 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Housing finance and real estate markets (50%);General public administration 
sector (40%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights 
(S);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The PDO is to facilitate orderly development of transparent land markets through the registration 
of real estate rights and complimentary policies that enable transactions to be made with security, 
but also quickly. The key target groups are those people and businesses that want security in 
their land or real property holdings in order to invest (either labor or money) and require 
premises or loans to do so. The Project will help to remove the current impediments to 
investment that occur in urban areas so that investment is not hampered and to provide clear title 
to people in rural areas so that they can develop their land or utilize it for investment with 
security.  
 
As a result of the project, there will be a reduction in the time it takes to register transactions 
and an increase in the number of registered transactions. The amount of money borrowed by 
mortgagors may increase if other factors in the banking sector and general economy continue 
progressing. Both registration and cadastre systems will be available ?on-line? to the 
Page  2
professional community and for general enquiries to the public. Customer satisfaction surveys 
will be used to confirm that systems operate transparently and efficiently.  
 
The basic requirements for the real property market required by the EU will be established, 
thereby fostering future investment. The project will include the development of a system for a 
municipal property tax and the regulatory framework to encourage property development. The 
legal framework enabling restitution of property rights and regularization or adjudication of 
property rights will also be established and the assessment of the extent of the problems relating 
to post-conflict land settlement in rural areas will be completed.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have three components: 1. Registration; 2. Cadastre; and 3. Policy and legal 
development.  
 
The Registration Component would assist the municipal courts to provide immediate 
information and rapid registration and protection of property rights for any parties wishing to 
deal (buy, sell, lease, mortgage) in real estate and is a fundamental requirement for economic 
development.  It would include assistance to refurbish premises and provide the necessary IT 
systems, training and public awareness to provide quality services to real estate professionals and 
the public.  
 
The Cadastre Component will provide detailed records of property (land and buildings) for both 
legal and fiscal purposes.  The record of boundaries will be used as a basis for registration in the 
land registration offices. Records of occupation would be used as a basis for: (i) dealing with 
restitution, (ii) regularizing illegal building construction or occupancy, (iii) property taxes, and 
(iv) developing better planning systems. A digital archive of maps would be developed and be 
available on-line for use by the users responsible for these activities.  
 
The Policy and Legal Development Component is designed to address those issues within the 
land administration activity that are essential to economic development but do not yet have a 
legal or regulatory basis. This would include items (i) to (iv) referred under the cadastre 
component and concerns over the registration of common areas in apartments, mortgage lending, 
building permits, dispute resolution, licensing professionals working in the real estate sector and 
related activities. In some cases the initial policy for these activities is yet to be developed. The 
Component will address these fundamental issues and help to establish the legal basis and 
strategy for addressing them.  The Project would not go beyond the policy and legislative 
development phase, although some small pilot work may be included.  
 
.
A
US$15 million Specific Investment Loan (SIL) over a period of four years is envisaged. The 
breakdown of costs by component is yet to be established but the total sum has been identified 
from experiences in similar countries of the region and GTZ?s preliminary cost estimates.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will operate across the country, in both Entities. This will involve 48 land registry 
offices for Component 1. For Component 2 and 3: the Geodetic Administration and all of their 
60 municipal offices in SR will be included as SR has a centralized structure; and the Geodetic 
Page  3
Administration in FBiH and a selection of municipalities in FBiH will be included (there is a 
decentralized cadastre in FBiH). It is not planned to include any forested areas, wetlands or areas 
of natural habitats in the project, nor to include any privatization of State lands or forest. There 
were a number of displaced persons and refugees following the conflict between 1992 and 1995, 
but a ?Commission for Real Property Claims of Displaced Persons and Refugees? established 
under the Dayton Agreement dealt with 250,000 claims and finalized their work by 2003. The 
project will only be involved with persons who already have legal rights who wish to be involved 
in the real estate market and there will be no resettlement (voluntary or involuntary) involved.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
It is not anticipated that safeguard issues will be required. If EA or cultural property issues do 
arise, the adequacy of government guidelines in these respects, and the capacity to follow such 
guidelines will be investigated.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer (ECSSD) 
Ms Mirjana Karahasanovic (ECSHD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Component 1 will involve some office refurbishment. This is expected to be minor, but if 
there are any new buildings to be constructed the locations will be identified during preparation.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Component 1 will involve some refurbishment in existing court houses. It is not thought that 
any of these qualify as cultural property but this will be investigated during project preparation.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/12/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The safeguard related studies will be completed during August and September 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gavin P. Adlington 
06/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
07/20/2005 
Comments:  To clarify; I am not on the project team. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
07/21/2005 
Comments:  Approved. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
