                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                       Report No.: AC384


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 24, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Bosnia-Herzegovina                         Project ID: P087094
Project Name: BIODIVERSITY                          Task Team Leader: Christian Albert Peter
CONSERVATION PROJECT
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 9,               Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2005
2004
Managing Unit: ECSSD                                Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                    Loan
Sector: Forestry (50%);Sub-national                 Theme: Biodiversity (P);Other
government administration (25%);Central             environment and natural resources
government administration (25%)                     management (P);Environmental policies
                                                    and institutions (S);Land management
                                                    (S);Participation and civic engagement (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
Social Specialist:
Environmental Specialist:
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 0
Other financing amounts by source:                                                       ($m)
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY                                                                 4
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED)                                                           2

B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]

The Global Environmental Objective is to preserve BiH's globally significant biodiversity and critical
forests and mountain ecosystems.

The Development Objective is to increase the area in forest and mountain ecosystems under formal
protection status, and to develop mechanisms in order to conserve these ecosystems in the long term.

Indicators would include: (i) area under formal protection, (ii) PAs managed according to sustainable
management plans, (iii) revenues generated from economic activities in PAs, (iv) sustainable land-use
practices applied in project areas, and (v) cross-border cooperation in PA management.

C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]

Project activities will be refined during project preparation, but are closely linked with the parallel
development of the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (funded by GEF and the FDCP),
which is scheduled to start in June 2004 and will take 18 months. The information already available at

present will be used and does not require the NBS being completed before moving forward with project
preparation.

Component 1: Biodiversity Conservation through Expanded Network of Sustainably Managed Protected
Areas

The objective of this component is to strengthen management planning, and improve facilities and
infrastructure, of existing National Parks (NPs) (Sutjeska and Kozara), while enhancing the overall
protected area network through creation of new PAs in the and the Una River watershed. Without pre-
empting results of NBS development and action plan, these areas are already recognized as high priority
and are expected to be identified as such in the NBS. Sutjeska and Kozara NPs, will be the first parks to
receive financial and technical assistance for plan implementation. This assistance would be expected to
include, inter alia, upgrading of visitor and park management facilities, creation of trail systems, training
and equipping of park management staff (rangers and administrative staff).

For the proposed new PAs, the project will support their creation, support the development and
implementation of management plans. It will drawing on up-to-date concepts for multiple-use landscape
planning, as well as new participatory approaches to include all relevant stakeholders. Implementation
support will be similar to that described for Sutjeska, tailored to each park's needs.


Component 2: Institutional Strengthening to Enhance Capacity for Successful Management of Protected
Areas and their buffer zones.

(a) Building capacity of national and local institutions and other stakeholders to manage protected
    areas and to preserve biodiversity within production landscapes. To achieve an overall PA density of
    even 5% implies a 10-fold increase compared to current formal protection levels, and therefore, it is
    likely that significant capacity will have to be developed, so that the PAs established in Component 1
    as well as their buffer zones are sustainably managed. Therefore, it is likely that considerable
    capacity will have to be developed, so that the PAs established in Component 1 as well as their buffer
    zones are sustainably managed. Preparation will focus on identification of critical management skill
    gaps for PAs and buffer zones, and develop targeted training programs, tailored to the needs of the
    specific PAs, for all stakeholders. Since the identification of optimal mechanisms for sustainable
    financing of PAs is expected to be a longer term process, the project will fund the introduction of and
    continuous experimentation with various financial and cost recovery mechanisms. The project would
    then fund the implementation of training in sustainable landscape and park management,
    administration, and sustainable financial management, as well as workshops and study tours.

(b) Supporting a community outreach program which would target land users and civil society to raise
    awareness of conservation issues in- and outside protected areas. To enable groups and individuals
    to carry out activities that contribute to sustainable use of natural resources in project areas, a small
    grants program will be established, modeled on the successful approaches in Croatia and Romania.
    The grants program would focus on assisting users to implement management plans which
    incorporate sustainable use and conservation concerns. Grant funding could also be provided for
    activities oriented towards sustainable approaches to tourism and leisure activities (including liaison
    with a pilot study on "Eco-tourism in BiH" funded by Japan). For agricultural land, a synergy can be
    sought in particular with the applied studies being conducted by FAO in three rural pilot areas in
    BiH, two of which are near or adjacent to PAs. For forest land, synergies should be sought with the
    FDCP, which will focus on the sustainable management of forests and will include the identification
    of "high conservation value forests"(HCVFs), and forest productive landscapes near established or
    future PAs. Project design will take into account models for sustainable management of productive
    agricultural and forest land in environmentally sensitive areas and ecological corridors.

This component will not only build capacity, but will enable the various sectors and stakeholders to come
closer to each other, communicate with one another, and establish common activities. Functioning
networks of people will thus be created not only within the same sector, but also across the three primary
stakeholder communities (government, civil society, and the private sector).


Component 3: Integration of BiH into transnational biodiversity conservation activities:

Through technical assistance, workshops, study tours, and local/regional travel, the project would develop
the framework required to implement trans-boundary cooperation activities with neighboring countries
(Serbia and Montenegro as well as Croatia). Opportunities for these initiatives are realistic for two areas:
(i) in the southeast between the already existing NPs Sutjeska (BiH) and Durmitor (Serbia and
Montenegro); and (ii) in the northwest, where proposals exist to establish a NP to protect the Una River,
which in parts represents the border between BiH and Croatia.


Component 4: Project management (implementation, monitoring & evaluation):

(a) Implementation. Implementation of the project will be undertaken by the existing PIUs devoted to the
     FDCP, which are subordinated to the two Entity MAWMFs. Close cooperation with the Ministries
     of Environment will be critical, considering that the GEF project involves multiple sectors. Taking
     into account that the FDCP will be completed in 2006, opportunities for mainstreaming the PIU
     functions will be developed during the first year of BCP implementation.

(b) Monitoring & evaluation. A detailed monitoring and evaluation (M&E) program will be developed
     during project preparation.


D. Project location (if known)

At this stage of preparation, four specific areas have been selected for direct investment support: (i)
Sutjeska National Park, in Republika Srpska, which already has National Park status, and a management
plan; (ii) Kozara Protected Area, also in RS; (iii) Igman-Bjelasnica, where a detailed Social Assessment
has been carried out, and a feasibility study has been completed, recommending National Park creation,
and (iv) Una River watershed, where the Government of the Federation has already taken a decision to
declare a PA. Construction of new roads in/approaching park areas is unlikely. Construction, if any,
would be limited to minor civil works and rehabilitation, requiring normal mitigation measures. As is
normal with protected area management planning, an assessment of land use and vegetation would be
carried out identifying critical ecosystems, and a management plan would be prepared (with local people)
whose objective would be to ensure that critical ecosystems are protected while ensuring that peoples'
livelihoods are also sustained. There would be no conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats.
The purpose of the management plan would be to preserve these and to permit recovery of threatened
ecosystems. In addition, the risks related land mines will be addressed through including measures for any
investment so as to avoid or clear landmines and plan for safety measures.

Other potential areas are to be determined during preparation, based on the priority setting exercise in the
IDA-financed Forest Development and Conservation Project. However, it is likely that the BCP will only
finance preparation of management plans, including environmental and social assessments which would
be required prior to `protected area' designation. Due to the limited funding, the project will likely not
finance direct investments to `operationalize' these management plans.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

As other Ex-Yugoslav countries, Bosnia and Herzegovina has for a long time lagged behind in developing
its capacity to address safeguard policies appropriately. Reasons for this, include economic difficulties,
political instability, and military conflict. Nevertheless, since two years BiH is receiving technical
assistance from the European Union to harmonize environmental legislation with EU directives as well as
to build up and strengthen institutional capacity.

The Entity Ministries of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry have demonstrated during the
implementation of the Forestry Project (1998-2003) that they have the capacity to carry out
environmental assessments (in the context of forest road construction) and elaborate and implement
environment management plans. In-country expertise for social assessments exist, capacity for
addressing social and environmental safeguards will be strengthened during implementation of the Forest
Development and Conservation Project (FDCP).

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Applicable?       Safeguard Policy
                  If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
     [Y]          Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                  See below under the Environmental Assessment Category.
     [N]          Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

     [N]          Pest Management (OP 4.09)
                  The project will promote (through component 3) the use of biological or environmental
                  control methods and is not expected to finance any pesticide. Integrated Pest
                  Management issues will be analyzed in the context of the project's environmental
                  assessment.
     [Y]          Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
                  Any establishment of new protected areas will need to involve local communities in
                  broad and sustained participatory processes. Thorough participation is critical because,
                  while there will probably be little or no actual resettlement, it is likely that there will be
                  some restrictions to traditional access as a result of PA formation. The project will assist
                  the government to undertake thorough social assessment exercises in any potential PA.
                  Where access restrictions are an issue, a Process Framework will be used to mitigate the
                  impact of these restrictions. If the social impacts of PA formation are too difficult for
                  mitigation, the PA would not be established.

                  A Process Framework will be prepared as part of project preparation for the Igman-
                  Bjelasnica Protected Area. This Process Framework will be prepared and disclosed as a
                  condition for appraisal. The Process Framework will describe the participatory process
                  by which project affected people will be consulted with in order to agree on the limits
                  and scope of activities in the protected areas, the criteria for eligibility, mitigation
                  measures to assist the affected population, potential conflict resolution mechanisms, etc.
                  It will also describe the arrangements for implementing and monitoring the process.

                  It should be noted that for the largest area proposed for PA status ­ the Igman-Bjelasnica
                  area ­ an initial detailed Social assessment has been carried out during preparation of the
                  FDCP (see Project Appraisal Document, Annex 11 for Summary). This assessment
                  indicated broad support for this PA, with the vast majority of respondents/participants
                  emphasizing the opportunities that the park could create, vs. the potential threats. This

area will also be the subject of the piloting of a new methodology for consultation
processes, to be established under the FDCP, prior to FMBCP approval.

      [N]          Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

      [Y]          Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
                   The project will (in a positive way) contribute to the improvement of livelihood of
                   stakeholders depending upon or interact with forests. Specifically, and consistent with
                   OP 4.36, the project aims to harness the potential of forest ecosystems to reduce poverty
                   in a sustainable way integrate forest conservation effectively into sustainable
                   development and protect vital local and global environmental services and values of
                   forests.
      [ ]          Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

      [ ]          Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)

      [ ]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*

    [TBD]          Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
                   The project is likely to establish a National Park to protect the Una River, which is an
                   international river. However, the activities to be supported are unlikely to trigger the
                   safeguard policy. This will be investigated further as the activities under the project are
                   refined.



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [X] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)

An initial categorization of B is appropriate. While certain project details are lacking, there may be
potential adverse environmental impacts to environmentally important areas in the implementation of the
physical improvement components of the project. It is projected that these impacts will be site-specific
and few if any will be irreversible. Given the nature of this biodiversity project, whereby important
ecosystem functions are identified in advance and management frameworks for protection established, it
is anticipated that mitigating measures will be integral to project design and implementation.
A detailed environmental assessment will be prepared (including evaluation of alternatives from
environmental considerations) in accordance with the format given in OP 4.01 Annex B and C.
Additionally, the EA will describe the procedures and arrangements for environmental screening and
assessment of the subprojects under the small grants component.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would
    be prepared. September 20, 2004

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS.
    Not applicable




*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
    specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

    The safeguard-related studies will be the Environmental and Social Assessments for the new areas
    and the Process Framework. The EA part of this work will begin after PDF-B resources are approved
    and obtained , likely in May 2004.

IV. APPROVALS

  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Christian Peter                                                03/24/2004
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Ronald Hoffer                                                  03/25/2004
    Comments
  Sector Manager:                                 Marjory-Anne Bromhead                                          03/25/2004
    Comments




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

