Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC472 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 4, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Bosnia-Herzegovina 
Project ID: P083353 
Project Name: URBAN INFRASTRUCTURE AND 
SERVICE DELIVERY PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Seema Manghee 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 15, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: July 13, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (100%) 
Theme: Urban Development; Water Supply and 
Sanitation 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
Bernard Baratz (Environment) 
Phillip Moeller (Social)
 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 14.0 
Other financing amounts by source:  Borrower 
($m) 1.0 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The objective of the proposed project would be to improve the quality and reliability of delivery of basic 
infrastructure services in urban areas thereby prompting significant improvements in the livelihood of the 
beneficiary population.  
 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
Component 1.  Urban Management Improvement Plans and Investments 
 
This component would finance: urban management plans for select areas based on an urban database and 
information system; strengthening institutional capacities and improving coordination, improving 
revenues to support service delivery; a strategic urban planning process based on more effective planning, 
implementation and management of municipal assets. The component would also finance investments in 
selected service sectors based on the conclusions of the strategic planning process.  
 
Page  2
 
 
Component 2.  Institutional Strengthening 
 
This component would finance: institutional strengthening and capacity-building programs for service 
delivery focusing on efficiency and cost recovery; involvement of local operators;  a national study of 
tariff-setting methodology and guidelines; a national study to quantify the extent of cross-debt among 
budget enterprises;  urban management plans; training of local government staff based on a needs 
assessment  (in coordination with the U. S. Agency for International Development); and other appropriate 
capacity building.  
 
Component 3.  Investments for Improved Efficiency  
 
This component would finance: least-cost priority investments based on system improvement, lowering 
energy and other operational costs for utilities.  First years investments would be identified at the time of 
project approval, and remaining investments would be selected during project implementation in strict 
accordance with a pre-established set of selection criteria and selection procedures. A priori it is difficult 
to say with certainty that no safeguard policies other than OP 4.01 would be triggered but it would be 
highly unlikely. 
 
Component 4.  Engineering Services 
 
This component would finance: planning and design; engineering for the preparation of final designs and 
bidding documents; and assistance with procurement and supervision of construction for investments.  
 
Component 5.  Project Implementation 
 
This component would finance: m
anagement and implementation of the project; Guidance and training to 
utilities and local government on project implementation; and a communication strategy to include 
capacity building.
 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
To be identified by March 5, 2004. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Borrowers’ capacity for effective implementation of Environmental Management Plans will be 
evaluated. Any necessary institutional strengthening (e.g. training) will be detailed and incorporated into 
the project design ensure all safeguard policies are followed. 
 
 
Page  3
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[
Y
] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01)
 
The project has been assigned a category 'B". 
It was agreed between the Task Team and ECSSD safeguards team that  investments 
proposed under the project are very likely to fall under category "B". However, since the 
actual size, location and nature of some of the investments would be known only after 
project implementation starts,  the type of environmental arrangements that need to be put 
in place and the project documentation required for project approval are similar to an "FI" 
category project. At the safeguards review meeting it was agreed to have an EMP that 
would cover the details (issues and mitigation measures) of those investments clearly 
identified prior to appraisal, and an  Environmental Management Process Framework 
(Environmental Guidelines) for those investments identified after the project starts. The 
Environmental Guidelines, which would be part of the PIP or the Operational Manual, 
would provide an overview of the country regulations and institutional responsibilities for 
environmental impact assessment and an evaluation of how adequate they are; it would 
define the procedures and institutional responsibility for environmental screening of the 
investment proposals, their approval and for monitoring the compliance of the investments 
with the guidelines. The guidelines would include check lists and/or sample EMPs that 
can be used for different type of investments in specific sectors. 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[Y] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12)  
A Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared 
as a condition of appraisal, and embedded in the project Operations Manual.  The Policy 
Framework would act as a screening mechanism for land acquisition and spell out the 
steps that must be taken to ensure compliance with the OP if there is land acquisition.  The 
Policy Framework would also describe standard procedures in the country when private 
land is expropriated for public use, and an assessment of the extent to which these 
procedures meet the requirements of the OP (particularly compensation at full 
replacement value--in all cases--and income restoration--if the loss is more than 10% of 
the holdings of the affected party).  For the land that was acquired prior to appraisal, the 
task team will document the basis of compensation already paid. If local procedures do 
not meet these criteria, the Policy Framework will outline what additional steps will be 
taken to ensure compliance.  The Policy Framework will be a condition of project 
appraisal.  
 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[Y] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
The project will not involve any physical 
activities at or near known sites of cultural/historical/religious etc. significance. 
Nonetheless,  during routine activities artifacts of aforementioned significance may be 
found. For this possibility, chance find procedures will be specified in the Operational 
Manual and construction contracts.
 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[Y] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
EMP and Environmental Guidelines would be available prior to appraisal and disclosed within the Bank 
(to Infoshop) and in-country (in English and local language) prior to appraisal.
 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.  
March, 2004. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS.  March 2004. 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Seema Manghee 
02/12/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald N. Hoffer 
02/13/2004 
This is cleared from both environmental and social aspects.
 
Sector Manager: 
Henk Busz 
02/17/2004 
Cleared. 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
