Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1294 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/21/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P082651 
Project Name: BR Para  Integrated Development 
Task Team Leader: Daniel R. Gross 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 14, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
60.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
40.00
40.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to reduce poverty and inequality in Para by facilitating 
opportunities for employment and income. The long-term goal is to reduce regional and 
urbanrural inequality in an economically and environmentally sustainable fashion. The project 
also aims to consolidate the growth paradigm in the State to avoid the unsustainable use of 
natural resources.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project has three components: (a) Territorial Development, (b) Zoning and Land 
Administration, and (c) Coordination, Monitoring, Communication and Learning. Project would 
be structured as Phase I of an Adaptable Program Loan 9APL) in two phases. The estimated cost 
at phase I is $100 million.  
 
A. Territorial Development  
 
The project would support productive activities based on the identification and strategic support 
of the comparative advantage of areas. The strategy aims at the local level through the provision 
of key inputs - technical assistance, investments in infrastructure - and training to facilitate  
Page  2
income generation. The project would prioritize activities based on community action but the 
focus of the project would be on municipalities or clusters of municipalities. The project would 
also contribute to the conservation and sustainable use of natural resources. Among the types of 
projects considered are community forest management, production and adding value to  
 
agricultural and natural products and production of specialized products for niche markets such 
as furniture, tourism, auto parts, etc. Financing could support minor infrastructure such as road 
improvements, potable water, training facilities, and electricity transmission provided they are 
necessary to facilitate a specific productive activity.  
 
Most project activities would target rural populations on a territorial basis with family incomes 
of less than a fixed ceiling although there is no restriction on financing activities in cities.  
 
Proponents (associations, cooperatives, unions or organizations) would be required to have a 
legal personality. Private businesses would not be eligible for project support but the project 
could support activities from which the private sector benefits. Public-private, ventures would 
also be possible.  
 
During project preparation, organizations able contribute to the goals of the project will be 
identified and their strengths and weaknesses assessed. These organizations would be  
 
strengthened to assist in the development process. At least two complete subprojects will be 
designed during preparation to begin implementation immediately after Effectiveness. During  
 
implementation about 15 additional subprojects would be designed and implemented in 
different regions of the State.  
 
All proposed subprojects would be subject to feasibility analysis and periodic review of the 
assumptions and of progress. Emphasis would be placed on identifying bottlenecks to income 
generation so that training and investments could be applied to resolving them.  The State is 
developing the capacity for feasibility studies and monitoring of community enterprise. As with 
all enterprises, some subprojects will succeed and some will fail. The PCU would monitor 
carefully to avoid continuing support to projects not delivering the expected results on a 
sustainable basis within a reasonable time frame.  
 
B. Zoning and Land Administration  
 
(1) Under the project, the State would detail its recently unveiled macrozoning plan prioritizing 
areas at-risk from road construction and on areas that would be set aside for conservation. The 
work would be carried out by State agencies but with significant participation of qualified private 
firms and civil society organizations. The State plans to use its zoning plan to achieve greater 
flexibility in the application of the Federal Forestry Code to allow forested areas to compensate 
for areas that have already undergone extensive deforestation. Existing protected areas would be 
strengthened and new ones would be created and managed according to the appropriate category.  
 
(2) Under this component, the state would build its capacity for administering protected areas 
including the development of the legal framework, preparation of management plans, boundary  
 
definition and protection, and direct administration of such areas including monitoring and 
enforcement of restrictions.  
 
(3) The project would also strengthen the state's capacity for land administration. The State 
Land Institute is limited by its organizational structure and procedures, lack of equipment and an 
outdated regulatory framework. The State's first priority is to ascertain the limits of State-owned 
vs. Federal land. Para encompasses vast areas, particularly in the Western and Northen parts of 
the State that have not been surveyed, registered or titled. These untitled lands would be 
surveyed and, where possible, brought under State administration, in part, to compensate for 
Page  3
lands in other parts of the state that have little or no natural vegetation left due to previous forms 
of exploitation.  
 
C. Project Coordination, Monitoring, Communication and Learning  
 
A
small PCU within the Borrower's Secretariat for Production would coordinate 
implementation of the project, including selection of subprojects, feasibility studies, 
environmental screening, procurement oversight, disbursement, accounting, monitoring and 
evaluation. Independent organizations would be recruited to assist with poverty monitoring and 
ongoing evaluation.  
 
The project team in Para has set up a communications team to ensure the flow of information to 
the wider society in project design, to promote understanding and learning. The purpose of 
project communications is not simply to "sell" it to the public but to assure full participation 
throughout preparation and implementation. In addition, the PCU would begin a process of 
strategic environmental assessment (SEA). The goal of this would be: (1) to begin a process of 
continuous learning from experiences in the State and others to develop a virtual "library" of 
development experience, and (2) to build consensus around environmental and social policies 
that would conciliate among different interests.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Brazil, State of Para   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has a state environmental agency (SECTAM) responsible for environment, 
protection and monitoring in the state. SECTAM carried out environmental licensing for all  
 
potentially contaminating and degrading enterprises in the state. It is also responsible for 
preparing the State's Economic Ecological Zoning Plan and for administering state protected 
areas.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment is currently being done.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
This  will be addressed in the EA.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
This will be addressed in the EA.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
This will be addressed in the EA and, if necessary, a pest management plan will be developed  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
An IPDP is currently under preparation.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
resettlement plan is currently under preparation.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/11/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Studies are underway and expected with drafts completed by the end of September 2005 and 
finalized prior to appraisal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Reidar Kvam 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
