Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1099 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 19, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P081436 
Project Name: Bahia Integrated Urban 
Development 
Task Team Leader: Ivo Imparato 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Lending (APL) 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (50%); Housing 
construction (25%); Other social services 
(25%) 
 
Theme: Access to urban services and 
housing (P); Municipal governance and 
institution building (S); Land 
administration and management (S); 
Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring 
(S); Other human development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Daniel R. Gross 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 96 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The projects’ development objective is to reduce urban poverty in a sustainable manner,  targeting the 
poorest and most vulnerable sections of Salvador and strategic cities of the state of Bahia with access to 
basic services and improved housing and social support services.  
 
Specific objectives are: (i) improved quality of life and asset base for the poor through the provision of 
basic infrastructure services, improvement of housing conditions and access to urban land, and 
regularization of land tenure and buildings in slums and unplanned settlements; (ii) improved access to 
social programs in the areas of income and employment generation, direct support to families’ survival 
strategies (e.g. through better and easier to access daycare facilities), health care, education and job 
training, and initiatives in the area of community security at the local settlement level; and (iii) enhanced 
state and local government capacity to plan, implement, monitor and evaluate integrated urban poverty 
reduction strategies involving several different departments, undertake urban upgrading and land delivery, 
coordinate social policy on the ground through participatory planning, and monitor and evaluate 
government programs through poverty and quality of life indicators. 
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description  
 
Based on existing research and preliminary studies, which will be expanded and consolidated during 
project preparation, the project would be an APL with  investments in the five key areas described below.  
Integration among the various investment lines will be ensured, as in the Ribeira Azul experience, by an 
area-based and participatory planning process based on local resident and local association involvement 
in information gathering and analysis and in every step of the planning and implementation process in 
each community. 
 
(a) Access to integrated basic infrastructure and services and access to housing and land
for the poor in 
slums and other poor areas through: (i) civil works for urban drainage, roads, water supply, sewerage, 
solid waste management, street paving, replacement housing as needed, stabilization of slopes and 
embankments and flood protection, recreational and community areas, etc.; (ii) improvements in physical 
access to plots and site layout; (iii) intra- and extra-settlement relocation when remaining in place is 
untenable;
1
(iv) improving the sustainability and management of basic services; (v) developing 
mechanisms for starting-up affordable formal land delivery to the poorest segments; (vi) supporting the 
home improvement and expansion efforts of low-income urban residents; and (vii) supporting 
regularization of land tenure and buildings in slums and other informal areas.
2
(b) Trunk infrastructure
:
This component will include trunk infrastructure (macro-level works) that may 
be necessary to integrate targeted informal areas into the fabric of the formal city, such as: (i) macro 
sewerage and drainage; (ii) access roads; (iii) water supply mains. 
 
(c) Integrated social development
:
this component will be driven by the participatory planning process in 
each area of intervention. According to the needs and demand of each area, it will seek to create 
conditions for sustainable urban poverty reduction through a subset or combination of the following: (i) 
income and employment generation, including job creation in depressed areas by wide use of labor-
intensive construction techniques and local labor in the public works to be financed by the project; (ii) 
direct support to families’ survival strategies (e.g. through increased day care facilities); (iii) primary 
health care, primary education and job training; and (iv) initiatives for enhanced security at local 
community level.  As in Ribeira Azul, this component will give priority to identifying, strengthening and 
partnering with existing public and non-governmental institutions and programs.   
 
(d) Community Organization and Development
.
This component will include: (i) identification of patterns 
and structures of community organization and leadership, and implementation of local participation 
strategies; (ii) participatory information gathering and analysis, leading to community diagnosis of 
constraints and opportunities; (iii) participatory planning, design and execution of physical interventions; 
(iv) identification, evaluation and strengthening of local organizations and facilities providing social 
services; (v) preparation and execution of a plan for social and technical support to local residents after 
implementation of each sub-project’s physical interventions, including health and environmental 
education and notions on appropriate use and maintenance of the new facilities provided by the project, as 
a
pre-condition for impact and sustainability. 
1
As in Ribeira Azul, every effort will be made in Viver Melhor II to minimize resettlement. When absolutely 
necessary due to situations of risk or other project imperatives, relocation will be to nearby areas. 
2
Regularization processes provide security of land tenure to existing occupants, while affordable land delivery 
mechanisms, which cater to new households entering the housing market, are necessary to prevent new slum 
formation.  
Page  3
(e) Institutional capacity-building for urban poverty reduction
will include: (i) development and 
implementation of urban planning and land development mechanisms and tools; (ii) development and 
implementation of tools to keep track of the development of informal settlements, and measure/monitor 
urban poverty indicators; (iii) development of sound subsidy structures and cost recovery strategies; (iv) 
support to the strengthening of the institutional framework for urban poverty reduction, including 
building the necessary relationships among state and municipal agencies and between state and local 
governments; (v) through a “Horizontal Component”, strengthening of the state government’s capacity to 
plan, monitor and evaluate its programs and strengthening of the state’s fiscal management; and (vi) 
provision of technical assistance and capacity-building, including in-service training and provision of the 
necessary equipment, to the state’s Departments and local governments, to enable them to use the 
instruments developed and disseminated by the project.
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The thirteen strategic cities that will be involved in Viver Melhor II are Salvador, Alagoinhas, Barreiras, 
Eunápolis, Feira de Santana, Ilhéus, Itabuna, Jequié, Juazeiro, Paulo Afonso, Serrinha, Teixeira de Freitas 
and Vitória da Conquista. They were chosen by the government according to the following criteria: (i) 
cities of the state’s Basic Urban Network (40 cities, representing 58 percent of Bahia’s urban population); 
(ii) out of the previous list, municipalities concentrating 80 percent of the state’s of economic activity (23 
municipalities, representing 53 percent of Bahia’s urban population); (iii) those with population higher 
than 80,000; and (iv) those located along one of the state’s main transport routes. The result was the 
above list of 13 municipalities, which concentrate 44 percent of Bahia’s urban population.  In all of these 
cities, studies undertaken by the borrower using 2000 Census data and GIS applications have led to the 
identification and preparation of socio-economic profiles of  poor and vulnerable sections, according to an 
adaptation of the “Map of Social Exclusion” methodology developed in São Paulo. Adjoining areas thus 
identified have been grouped together in so-called “macro-areas” for intervention. 
 
Such macro-areas for intervention, as in the case of the Ribeira Azul Program in Salvador, not only gather 
adjoining informal settlement areas with similar characteristics, but also conform a physical planning and 
intervention unit, which in the case of Viver Melhor II coincides with a river basin or sub-basin.  This 
makes it easier to plan the infrastructure components of the intervention, identifying and articulating trunk 
infrastructure needs and local-level infrastructure needs.  Using river basins or sub-basins as planning 
units will help the project to conform to, and support the implementation of, the state’s integrated water 
resources management plan and municipal and state government plans for water supply, sanitation and 
urban drainage.  In the case of Salvador, trunk infrastructure needs in the case of water and sanitation 
have been largely dealt with by the Bahia Azul program, but there are major deficiencies in the other 
cities.  Trunk infrastructure needs and linkages to water resources management, watsan and drainage are 
being identified for sample macro-areas in Salvador and Ilhéus as part of project preparation. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Government of Bahia has executed several Bank projects, including two in the urban development 
field, in the past, most recently PRODUR (Loan 4140 BR, closed on 30 September 2004).  In the process, 
it has established a set of steps and procedures for compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies, 
especially with regard to environment and resettlement.  The Novos Alagados Urban Upgrading Project, 
which was financed by the Bank through the PRODUR loan, involved significant involuntary 
resettlement, which led the implementing agency, CONDER, to develop the relevant capacity. The state 
Page  4
government has also established an environmental licensing and monitoring system, managed by a state 
institution, C.R.A., to appraise and monitor environmental impacts of projects under preparation and 
implementation.  The borrower also has experience in dealing with cultural property issues, acquired in 
the restoration of historic sites suc
h
as Salvador’s Pelourinho district, also executed by CONDER.  In 
view of the above, the government of Bahia, and especially the implementing agency CONDER, have 
demonstrated capacity to ensure compliance with safeguard policies.  The project’s potential 
environmental impacts are associated with provision of water supply and sanitation, urban drainage, street 
paving, solid waste collection and disposal, stabilization of slopes and embankments, parks and recreation 
areas and other basic amenities and services at the community level; and the construction activities for 
improved access of communities to such basic urban services, including disposal of construction waste.  
Environmental guidelines for construction activities and environmental site screening criteria will be 
developed during project preparation, by enhancing existing implementing agency guidelines as needed.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The project’s potential environmental impacts are associated with provision of water 
supply and sanitation, urban drainage, street paving, solid waste collection and disposal, 
stabilization of slopes and embankments, parks and recreation areas and other basic 
amenities and services at the community level. Construction activities linked to these 
activities are expected to cause minor environmental impacts. The impacts are associated 
with the dust and noise from construction activities; storage and disposal of construction 
debris; disruption to traffic and increased traffic, interruption of public utilities and safety 
of workers and road users. All these activities will be addressed by Environmental 
Guidelines to be developed from existing borrower guidelines for this project.
 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
The project intervention triggers OP 4.12, the Resettlement Policy. 
 Slum 
upgrading usually involves limited involuntary resettlement due to the need to relocate 
families occupying high-risk areas such as landslide-prone slopes and flood-prone, low 
lying areas.  Limited involuntary resettlement may also be needed to improve the road 
network or establish rights-of-way for infrastructure networks.  In the proposed project, 
individual sub-projects will be designed to minimize resettlement. The executing agency, 
CONDER, has experience in minimizing resettlement in slum upgrading projects and 
finding relocation solutions for displaced families in nearby areas, in line with Bank 
policy.  A Resettlement Plan will be developed for this project in observance of OP/BP 
4.12.
 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
Page  5
[
X] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
One of the macro-areas that have been identified for intervention, Ribeira Azul/Cobre in 
Salvador, includes the Cobre river 
basin and the Park of São Bartolomeu, an area of 
religious significance for African-Brazilian religions.  This will trigger the Cultural 
Property policy. 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [X] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared.  February 2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
3
,
which will include an Environmental Assessment and a 
Resettlement Plan, will be described in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ivo Imparato 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Abel Mejía 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
John Henry Stein 
Date 
Comments 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
3
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
