Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC524 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 27, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P087711 
Project Name: Additional Financing-BR Espirito 
Santo W 
Task Team Leader: Franz R. Drees 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 22, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2004 
Managing Unit: LCSFW 
Lending Instrument: Additional Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (75%);Water supply (25%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the poor (P); 
pollution management and environmental health (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Mr. Alexandre Fortes 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 36 
Other financing amounts by source: US$26 million (State Government of Espírito 
Santo + State Water Company (CESAN) 
 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The State Government of Espírito Santo has requested an additional Bank loan of US$36 million 
in support of the 
Espírito Santo Water and Coastal Pollution Management Project
 
(PRODESAN) which was partially financed by Bank loan 3767-BR between 19 December, 1994 
(effectiveness) and 30 June, 2003 (closing date). The State Government’s request stems from a 
desire to meet the project’s original water and sewerage coverage targets as well as institutional 
development objectives.  
 
Additional financing for the project would allow the State Government to (i) connect additional 
users to the still under-utilized trunk sewerage infra-structure constructed during the last 3 ½ 
years; (ii) improve the water quality, service continuity and service pressure of water supply 
systems, particularly in the poorer neighborhoods of Grande Vitória and Guarapari; and (iii) 
reach the 
institutional 
development objectives for the state environmental agency IEMA and the 
state water company CESAN. Initial estimates suggest that about 75% of the beneficiaries of 
additional water supply investments and 38% of the beneficiaries of additional sewerage 
investments would be poor (family incomes of less than 3 minimum salaries). Overall, about 1.4 
million people are expected to benefit from follow-on investments in improved water supply 
services (improved service continuity, pressure and water quality) and about 410,000 people are 
expected to receive sewerage connections. Proposed project activities are consistent both with 
the State Government’s 2004-2007 environmental sanitation agenda and the 
Millennium 
Development Goals
 (Goal 7: “Ensure Environmental Sustainability”, Target 10: “Halve, by 
2015, the number of people without sustainable access to safe drinking water”) and the 
Johannesburg Sustainable Development Summit target of halving those without adequate 
sanitation by 2015.  
 
Page  2
 
 
The additional loan would support activities consistent with the project’s three original 
development objectives 
(DO’s)
: 
 
1. 
to improve the efficiency of CESAN’s water supply and sewerage systems by supporting the company’s 
efforts to operate on a commercial basis with financial self-sufficiency;  
 
2. 
to increase the coverage level of CESAN’s water supply and basic sanitation services (i.e. sewage 
collection, treatment and disposal) in the urban areas of Grande Vitória, Guarapari…and other towns in the 
Santa Maria and Jucu river basins; and 
 
3. 
to provide appropriate water and sanitation infrastructure in low-income urban areas of Grande Vitória and 
Guarapari. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The additional loan would finance activities under the following four components: 
 
1. 
Sanitation
. Construction of  additional sewage collection networks that would connect to the trunk 
infrastructure built with financing from loan 3767-BR. In addition to allowing about 230,000 
additional people to enjoy the benefits of piped sewerage, the proposed investments are key to 
increasing CESAN’s revenues from sewage charges and fundamental to increasing capacity utilization 
of 4 large sewage treatment plants (STP’s) in Grande Vitória and Guarapari. In addition to the sewage 
investments that connect to existing infrastructure CESAN will construct sewage collection and 
treatment systems in other municipalities in the project area. 
 
2. 
Water Supply
.  Capacity expansions for raw water intakes and water treatment plants, construction of 
storage tanks and distribution mains to improve the quality and service continuity of water supply in 
the Grande Vitória and Guarapari metropolitan regions. The proposed investments would complement 
the water supply infrastructure constructed with financing from loan 3767-BR. 
 
3. 
Institutional Strengthening of SEAMA/IEMA. 
This component would strengthen the environmental 
management capacity of the State Secretariat of the Environment and Water Resources (
Secretaria de 
Estado do Meio Ambiente e Recursos Hídricos
 / SEAMA) which is charged with defining Espírito 
Santo’s environmental policies and its sister institution, the State Environmental Institute (
Instituto 
Estadual de Meio Ambiente e Recursos Hídricos
 / IEMA) which is responsible for carrying them out. 
Possible activities include (i) the design of an institutional strategy for SEAMA/IEMA; (ii) 
implementation of an integrated environmental information system; (iii) improvements to the 
environmental licensing process in Espírito Santo; (iv) implementation of a monitoring network for 
water resources; (v) construction of a water resource management system; (vi) environmental 
education. 
 
 
4.
 
Institutional, Financial and Operational Strengthening of CESAN. 
This component would
 
include 
activities designed to (i) improve CESAN’s financial and operational performance; and (ii) to hold 
CESAN accountable to its customers in terms of performance. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The additional loan would finance water supply and sewerage investments in the Grande Vitória and Guarapari 
metropolitan areas of the State of Espírito Santo, Brazil. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The Bank has previously provided the Borrower (the State Government of Espírito Santo) a 
US$112.5 million loan in support of the 
Espírito Santo Water and Coastal Pollution 
Page  3
 
 
Management Project
. Safeguard performance was satisfactory. The proposed additional loan in 
support of this existing project will allow the Borrower to achieve the environmental, social and 
financial objectives originally established for the project, mostly by allowing additional users to 
connect to existing sewerage systems, but also by strengthening the State’s environmental 
management capacity. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
Environmental Assessment (OD 4.01). The project is expected to have a very positive 
environmental impact overall, by connecting some 410,000 additional people to sewage collection 
and treatment systems in the Grande Vitória and Guarapari metropolitan areas, thereby cleaning up 
the estuarine and coastal water ways within and adjacent to these urban areas. Local construction 
impacts will be controlled through detailed environmental guidelines that will be incorporated into 
bidding documents. An environmental assessment will be prepared in February, 2004. 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
N.A. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
It is expected that the ISDS will be updated by March 1, 2004. 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
An environmental assessment will be prepared in February, 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 12/23/03 
Task Team Leader: 
Franz R. Drees 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name:  Juan David Quintero (LCSEN) 
Date  
22 Jan, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name:  Maria Emilia Freire (Acting for  
John Henry Stein, Sector Manager, LCSFW) 
Date 
 27 Jan, 2004 
Comments 
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
