Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/13/2005 
Report No.:  AC1194
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P089011 
Project Name:  Brazil Municipal Lending Program I - APL Uberaba 
Task Team Leader:  Dean A. Cira 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 8, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 3, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSFU 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Water resource 
management (P);Access to urban services and housing (S);Municipal governance and 
institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
17.27 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
11.51 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.20
11.71 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
To promote better living conditions for all residents of the municipality of Uberaba 
through the promotion of integrated urban sanitation, environmental preservation, and 
expanded parks, recreational and cultural opportunities.  
 
Overall indicators of success will include:  
 
?
Guarantee of adequate drinking water supply without compromising relevant 
environmental legislation (principally water flow of Uberaba river).  
 
?
Improvement in water quality of the Uberaba river and Conquistinha stream 
(water quality).  
 
?
Citizen satisfaction levels pre- and post project relevant to project objectives 
(survey).   
 
3. Project Description 
Background:  The Uberaba River Basin extends for approximately 150 km, passing 
though the municipalities of Uberaba, Ver?ssimo, Coceic?o das Alagoas and Planura.  It 
Page  2
is an important water source for agriculture, industry and consumption and is a tributary 
to the Rio Grande River.  Water quality varies, particularly once it passes through the 
urbanized portion of the municipality of Uberaba, where it fails to conform to Class 2 
quality levels.  This is due primarily to the direct dumping of untreated sewage into the 
river (downstream from the extraction source the city uses as its main sources of drinking 
water) by the municipality of Uberaba, impacting water quality downstream, including 
the Grande river.  
 
Changing land uses over the years has contributed substantially to the degradation of the 
river?s water quality.  In the 1960?s 41% of land in the basin was covered by native 
vegetation.  By the 1990s this was reduced to less than 20%, with most of that land 
converting to agricultural and grazing lands, and urbanization.  The changing land uses, 
deforestation and soil erosion have also contributed to the worsening water quality of the 
Uberaba river and loss of biodiversity resulting in the need to better manage the basin?s 
natural resources and land uses. Protection of the basin?s water resources, and other 
natural resources is a priority of the municipal government, for reasons of ensuring a 
viable, and sustainable water source for the community and to prevent the further general 
decline of the natural resources of the area, and ensure a sustainable mix of uses in the 
Environmental Protection Area (APA) within the basin corresponding the municipality of 
Uberaba, that will be supported under the project.  
 
Key to the municipality?s integrated water resources management/urban environmental 
sanitation strategy is to ensure a high-quality and reliable water supply and sanitation 
service (WS&S) for the residents of the municipality, now and into the future.  WS&S 
services are provide by the Centro Operacional de Desenvolvimento e Saneamento de 
Uberaba (CODAU), an autonomous, municipal agency. Coverage is high at 99%, with 
micro-metering approaching this same high percentage.   Water supply is provided 
through Uberaba reservoir, with supplemental supply through deep wells.  Treatment is 
conventional and the distribution systems adequate, but with problems of water losses, 
particularly in the older central city.  Following a severe water supply crisis in 2002 
induced by severe seasonal draught conditions CODAU began supplementing its water 
supply via the extraction of water from the Rio Claro, a stop gap measure, which has a 
legally binding termination date.  To prevent a future crisis (one that would be likely 
without increases in available supplies) there is a need to increase the security of the 
city?s water supply through more permanent means.   Making permanent the transfer of 
water from the Claro river to the Uberaba river is the most viable option economically, 
and the most environmentally sensitive.  The supplemental source is only necessary 
during severe dry conditions, occurring only about 4% of the time.  
 
Yet another leg of the municipality?s integrated strategy is to treat 100% of the collected 
sewage in the municipality.  Currently 95% of sewage is collected, but less than 10% of it 
is treated. About 90% of the collected sewage is discharged untreated into the Uberaba 
and Conquistinha rivers.  The Uberaba river is a major tributary to the Grande river, an 
important water source in Brazil. Upstream of the extraction point for the city?s water 
supply, the Uberaba river is of high quality at Class 2.  Further downstream beginning at 
the point of the discharge of raw sewage, the river quality deteriorates rapidly to class 4, 
Page  3
and improves only to class 3 by the time it reaches the Rio Grande.  Improving the river 
quality to class 2 (Uberaba) and class 3 (Conquistinha) will result from the construction 
of two waste water treatment plants that will treat 100% of the collected sewage.  
 
The deterioration of the water quality of the Uberaba River is exacerbated by the severe 
macro drainage problems of the city, in particular in the city center.  Moreover, the city?s 
macro-drainage problems lead to regular, severe flooding in much of the city center, 
resulting in high levels of property damage, lost commercial business, the snarling of 
traffic and occasional human injury. Flooding is so common and severe in the city center, 
that merchants, commercial establishments and other buildings there have devised 
?personal dikes? in an attempt to divert water from entering their establishments.  Retail 
goods are routinely kept elevated off the floor to prevent damage during periods of 
flooding.  The causes of the flooding are mostly man-made due to the covering of once 
open drainage canals.  The project will include investments in increasing macro-drainage 
capacity in order to reduce the incidence of flooding in the city center and to improve the 
water quality of the Uberaba River.  These investments will also provide health 
improvements by eliminating the mixing of wastewater with storm water.  
 
Rounding out the water resources/urban environmental sanitation strategy for the 
municipality is a comprehensive and integrated approach to planning and environmental 
management.  The municipality is finalizing a process of undertaking a participatory 
planning process to update the 1991 Urban Master Plan.  This process began in 2000 has 
been led by the Secretariat of Planning and the Municipal Council for Urban 
Development Planning and Environment, and has been overseen by the Municipal 
Council of Uberaba. The plan supports all the actions proposed in the Agua Viva project, 
and will serve as an instrument to provide for more sustainable long-term development of 
the city and the protection of the municipality?s most precious natural resources through 
support of an Environmental Protection Area (APA) to protect principally the water 
quality of the Uberaba River.  Related to this integrated approach to urban environmental 
sanitation, is the closing of the controlled land-fill and the opening and operation of the 
new sanitary land-fill.  While this new land fill is not financed under the project, it helps 
to complete the integrated package of WS&S, solid waste management, drainage, urban 
planning and environmental protection.  The use of Carbon Credits to fund operations of 
the sanitary landfill was discussed with the Bank representative in charge of the fund.  
However, it was determined that the use of such funds would not be feasible, in part 
because the aggressive recycling program of the municipality has already greatly reduced 
gas emissions.  
 
Finally, to further improve quality of life in the municipality, the project will include 
several parks and cultural components. This will address a critical lack of recreational 
space in the city while also serving an environmental function.  In addition, the support of 
the Llewellyn Ivor Price Paleontology Research Center will help to preserve a rich 
cultural asset and an important research center, and possibly create tourism in the area.  
Uberaba is home to one of the world?s richest deposits of pre-historic fossils, including 
some unique species of dinosaurs.  
 
Page  4
The specific project components include the following:  
 
Environmental Sanitation:  This component will include three subcomponents, and has a 
total cost (including contingencies) estimated at US$30.60 million.  It includes 
design/engineering and works costs.  
 
Waste Water Collection and Treatment:  This sub-component will include construction 
of interceptors in the central city, interceptor sewers for the Rio Uberaba and 
Conquistinha systems, the waste water treatment plants of Uberaba and Conquistinha, as 
well as the project and land acquisition costs for these works (US$ 13.80 million, 
approximately)  
 
Urban Drainage:  This sub-component will include macro drainage investments to 
reduce the incidence of flooding in the city center. The system will include the already 
constructed Leopolino retention basin, and the reinforcement of the actual system of 
canals and galleries, the urbanization of the are area around Leopoldino and a system of 
flood control in the Lajes basin. (US$11.75 million, approximately)  
 
Water Supply:  This sub-component will include making permanent the seasonal 
transfer of water from the river Claro to the Uberaba river in order to regularize the flow 
of the Uberaba River and secure the system?s main water supply.  It will also include a 
program to reduce water losses, including modernization of commercial operations 
program along the lines of PMSS, improvements and automation in the operations of the 
supply system and water treatment plant and the acquisition of land where needed for 
works. (US$5.00 million, approximately)  
 
Environmental and Cultural Preservation and Recovery:  This component will include 3 
actions aimed at improving quality of life by providing new recreational opportunities, 
preserving natural resources, in particular the city?s main drinking water source and 
expanding the research and tourist opportunities associated with the municipality?s rich 
fossil deposits and the research center that supports them.  The component includes the 
following sub-components:  
 
Environmental Recovery (APA):  This sub-component will support a group of activities 
aimed at improving collection of information regarding occupation and uses of the 
resources within the APA with the specific aim of better managing and protecting water 
resources.  Action will include, inter alia:  environmental management plan of the APA; a 
system of water resources management/monitoring, including environmental mapping, as 
well as environmental recovery actions.  (US$0.40 million)  
 
The Lajes Corridor Linear Park:  This will include a 25 acre linear park that will serve 
as an environmental enhancement of land acquired for the installation of part of the 
interceptor sewage network.  It will include re-forestation actions as well as installation 
of equipment to create an urban park for a population with few such opportunities. 
(US$0.50 million approximately)  
 
Fossil Vivo:  Areas within the administrative boundaries of the Municipality of Uberaba 
include some of the worlds richest deposits of fossils between 65-80 million years old.  It 
is a rich cultural asset of the municipality and one that warrants investment and 
protection.  This component would support the Llewellyn Ivor Price Paleontology 
Page  5
Research Center by: restructuring the rescue and salvage capacity; reforming and 
expanding the dinosaur museum;  reforming the research labs; reforming the Center for 
Tourism, Learning and Educational Extension; improve the grounds around the center; 
develop a new marketing and communication plan; purchase equipment for the thematic 
children?s park; improve the Paleontology Garden.  Use of these funds, however, would 
be conditioned on the development of a satisfactory business plan for the proposed 
project, including a plan to leverage private sector resources for implementation of the 
plan (US$0.50 million, approximately)  
 
Planning and Management:  This component will include actions aimed at improving 
the capacity of municipal government entities. These activities will support actions that 
are directly related to the project?s core components, and are therefore focused on the 
environment, planning and project management.  
 
Sanitation and Environmental Preservation:  The municipality has recently created an 
Environmental Secretariat.  This will be supported through strengthening of the 
Environmental Secretariat including, inter alia, development of the agency?s strategic 
plan. (US$0.37 million, approximately)  
 
Environmental Education and Social Communication:  This sub-component will support 
a
public education campaign aimed at creating an environmental culture in the 
municipality, with particular emphasis on water resources.  The social communication 
part will be used to make people aware of the program, and in particular serve as a public 
awareness campaign regarding the investments.  (US$0. 17million, approximately).  
 
Institutional Strengthening:  This sub-component is aimed at providing technical 
training for personnel in key areas, such as CODAU, the Planning Secretariat and the 
Environmental Secretariat.  It will also provide capacity building in planning and 
management, aimed at the agencies most involved with the project (US$0.22 million, 
approximately).  
 
Project Management:  This sub-component will cover the costs of a third party, 
specialized management firm to assist the municipality in the management and execution 
of this relatively large, multi-sector investment program.  It will also include works 
supervision.  (US$2.40 million, approximately)   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in the Uberaba River Basin, in the Municipality of Uberaba, State 
of Minas Gerais, Brazil.  The project intervention will by physically concentrated in the 
Uberba River Basin and the Conquistinha river basin.  Investments will be primarily in 
the urbanized area, except for the  transposition of the Claro River and the construction of 
the wastewater treatment plants..  The Uberaba River Basin environmental protection 
area will benefit under the Project, for better management and from improved river water 
quality.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Paula Dias Pini (LCSEN) 
Mr Jose Alexandre Monteiro Fortes (LCSFU) 
Page  6
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project was rated category A, pursuant to the environmental policies of the World 
Bank, and the following ?Safeguards? were considered: (i) Environmental Assessment 
(OP 4.01); (ii) Natural Habitats (OP 4.04); (iii) Cultural Property (OP 4.11.03); and (iv) 
Dams? Security.  Project preparation properly addressed the impacts related to these 
safeguard, including mitigating measures.  
 
OP 4.01  Environmental Assessment  
 
An Environmental Assessment Report was prepared in compliance with the 
environmental policies of the Bank, applicable to Category A projects. The Project 
comprises interventions related to the improvement of environmental sanitation systems 
(water supply and sanitary sewage), flood control in the city center, environmental 
recovery of the Uberaba river basin, which has been legally defined as an environmental 
protection area, measures to support the preservation of city?s cultural inheritance, 
construction of an urban park, as well as complementary actions in planning, outreach 
and management. The proposed mitigation measures of the project?s negative impacts 
have been included in an Environmental Management Plan, which is referenced in this 
summary.  
 
Public consultations were held during the environmental licensing of the Project?s 
components and during the preparation of the Project?s social assessment. They were 
complemented by an additional public consultation during Project preparation, which 
occurred on February 2nd, 2005, in which the Environmental Assessment Report was 
presented and discussed.  
 
OP 4.04 Natural Habitats  
 
The Safeguard Policy of Natural Habitat was triggered by the ?gua Viva Project because 
of the proposed interventions in the Uberaba river?s Environmental Protection Area. The 
APA is a maintenance unit of environmentally sustainable use and in permanent 
preservation (areas of 30 m of each side of the seasonal bed of watercourses) according to 
the Forest Code.  
Page  7
The APA was organized with the object of protecting the water resources of the basin as 
the main water supply source of the city of Uberaba.  Initially, the Project planned the 
construction of a dam in the Uberaba river within the APA proper. During the Project?s 
elaboration, the dam was eliminated due to technical and environmental reasons opting 
instead for a water supply alternative that would result in the consolidation of 
transposition of the River Claro waters. This option is the most environmentally 
sustainable of the alternatives considered, and has the least impacts on the APA?s natural 
habitats, and is consistent with the objectives of the APA.  
 
Regarding the intervention in the permanently protected areas,  they are limited to the 
interceptor of the left margin of Uberaba river, which has already been constructed, to the 
interceptors that shall be implemented for the Uberaba and Conquistinha?s systems 
which are out of the urban area, and to the implantation of the linear park along the 
Lajes? stream. The environmental law allows the undertaking of these kind of actions in 
the permanently protected areas. In addition, recovery measures have already been 
identified and are being undertaken in the area affected by the already constructed 
interceptor, including re-vegetation. In relation to the interceptors that will be constructed 
under the Project, the licensing process advised special procedures in order to limit the 
damage to the area?s vegetation and include measures to recover the vegetation that 
might be affected. The construction of the Linear Park of the Lajes? stream is deemed a 
compensatory measure.  
 
OP 4.11 Cultural Property  
 
The Cultural Property Safeguard was triggered by the ?gua Viva Project due to the fact 
that Uberaba is part of one of the largest and more important paleontology sites in Brazil, 
with fossil records dated from 65 to 80 million years. Although the interventions 
expected by the Project are located in areas of non-potential occurrence of fossiliferous 
deposits, the Project includes special procedures which shall be adopted during the 
construction phase with the support and supervision of the  Centro de Pesquisas 
Paleontol?gicas. These procedures comprised in the Environmental Manual of 
Construction foresee: (i) previous field inspection (before issuance of the notice to bid for 
the works) of all expected interventions by a team from the Centro Paleontol?gico to 
evaluate the possibility of sites? occurrences and the measures to be adopted; (ii) 
definition of the general procedures of a ?lucky safeguard? already defined in the manual, 
including training of the contractor?s team, provision of ?what to do in the case of? 
booklets, etc.  These are measures in addition to those already include for the 
strengthening of the management capacity of the Center.  
 
OP 4.37 Safety of Dams  
 
The original conception of the Project foresaw: (i) the construction of a regulatory dam 
as a generator source for the water supply system of the city; and (ii) dams forming 
retention basins for the macro drainage system (i.e. the Leopoldino de Oliveira dam, 
already constructed, and three other proposed dams).  
 
In compliance with the Bank?s policies and safeguards, a dam safety panel was formed 
during the development of the Project.  In relation to the regulatory dam of the Uberaba 
Page  8
river, the Panel?s studies evidenced its technical non-feasibility, considering geotechnical 
and hydrologic aspects (required regularization ability).  
 
In relation to the flood retention basins, the studies of the macro drainage alternatives 
evidenced its insufficiency as a solution for the reduction of floods in the city within a 
recurrence period greater than 5 years. As a result, the option to construct a series of 
flood retention basins has been eliminated. That notwithstanding, as one of the basins had 
already been built the Panel was charged with evaluating the safety of this basin.  
However, as the ?as built? drawings were unavailable, there was insufficient information 
to make a safe assessment of the existing basin.  The Panel suggested undertaking 
technical surveys, review of reference files and site inspection to make an assessment of 
the safety of the basin. These studies will be performed during the first year of project 
execution as part of the preparation of the working drawings of the macro drainage 
system in order to assess the possibility of permanence of the retention basin as part of 
the overall drainage system.  
 
It is important to emphasize that the studies of macro drainage alternatives, of the water 
supply alternatives, as well as the conclusions provided by the Dams Safety Panel itself, 
resulted in beneficial changes from a technical, economic and environmental perspective 
as regards the conceptual plan for the flood control and water supply systems, 
considering the elimination of the dams which were expected to be constructed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Environmental Assessment evaluated and interpreted the possible environmental 
impacts that may be caused by the implementation of the interventions proposed by the 
?gua Viva project in its planning, implementing and operational phases and proposed 
mitigating measures of the negative impacts and ways to maximize the positive impacts. 
There assessment also included impacts of alternatives, even the dismissed ones, as these 
analyses were useful in the selection process of the most viable solutions. The project 
will directly or indirectly benefit all residents of the Municipality of Uberaba.  
 
Positive Impacts  
 
During the Planning and the Works Execution Phases  
 
During the planning phase the main positive impacts are the convening powers of the 
project to bring together a number of municipal secretariats and agencies, including the 
Secretariats of Works, Planning, Finance, Environment and the municipal water company 
(CODAU).  In addition, the planning stage served as a means to consult and 
communicate with potential winners and losers of the project, and served to identify 
project benefits and negative impacts, including compensatory measures.  In order to 
reinforce these beneficial effects, the project includes social communication actions and a 
program of environmental education, community participation and social and 
environmental management measures. During the works execution phase, the main 
positive impact refers to an increase of employment opportunities to the city?s population 
and the possibility to give priority to the hiring of the local labor.  
 
During the Operation Phase  
 
The implementation of the Project is expected to yield the following positive benefits:  
 
Page  9
?
Improvement in water quality:  Lajes stream, Conquistinha stream and Uberaba 
river.  
 
?
Assurance of water supply to the city population even during critical dry seasons.  
 
?
Significant reduction of the flood events in the city, with the consequential 
economic benefits.  
 
?
Increase in public leisure areas to the population with the consequent social 
benefits.  
 
In addition, the interventions of the Project should yield the following positive impacts:  
 
Sanitary Sewage System: (i) improvement of the water quality of the Uberaba and 
Conquistinha rivers; (ii) improvement of the population?s health conditions. These 
impacts shall be reinforced with measures aimed at eliminating the crossed 
sewerage/drainage connections and monitoring of water quality. The simulations made 
with Qual 2E evidenced the following impacts in relation to dissolved oxygen, under 
minimum flow conditions (Q7,10) of the receiver bodies: (i) no treatment:  conditions 
consistent with class 4  (CONAMA Resolution 20/86), with the possibility of 
anaerobiosis along all of the Conquistinha river and along a length of 30 km of the 
Uberaba River; (ii) with a primary treatment, the same conditions as the previous ones 
noticed in the Conquistinha River and for a length of 10 Km of the Uberaba River; and 
(iii) treatment with a 90% reduction efficiency of the organic load resulting in class 2 
conditions in the Uberaba river and class 3 in Conquistinha river.  In relation to fecal 
coliforms, the class 2 conditions shall only occur with the implementation of wastewater 
treatment  periodic (3-5% of the time) disinfections.  
 
Water Supply System: (i) Assurance of water supply throughout the year, inclusively 
during the dry seasons; (ii) reduction of the water loss rate in the system, including 
recovery of part of the water treatment plant wash-water; (iii) environmental 
improvement due to the elimination of wastewater treatment plant?s residues discharge; 
(iv) reduction in the water supply system?s operational cost due to automation, which is 
likely to result in energy conservation. These impacts shall be reinforced by operational 
improvements and maintenance measures of the system?s operational units.  
 
Urban Drainage System:  Flood control in the central area of Uberaba is the significant 
impact obtained with the implementation of the drainage system proposed in the Project. 
The implementation of the drainage system assures the control for a recurrence period of 
25 years.  This will result in reduction in loss of property, productivity and possible loss 
of life.  Separation of wastewater from rainwater drainage in the city center, will result in 
less pollution in the Lajes stream.  Operational and maintenance measures shall reinforce 
these benefits.  
 
Environmental and Cultural Preservation/Recovery: The positive impacts of this 
component are: (i) the physical and environmental recovery and preservation of the 
Uberaba environmental protection area; (ii) consolidation of cultural values with an 
environmental focus; (iii) expansion of the green and leisure areas in the urbanized 
portion of the municipality; (iv) valorization of real estate near the proposed park; (v) 
increase of fossil preservation capacity; (vi) potential increased ?scientific tourism? 
resulting in the potential improvement of social and economic conditions of Peir?polis 
(site of the Paleontology Research Center). These impacts shall be reinforced by the 
Page  10
implementation of environmental education measures and the project?s social 
communication plan.  
 
Governing and Planning: The expected actions would result in positive impacts for the 
Project?s implementation adding to its sustainability in the long run.  
 
Negative Impacts  
 
During the Planning and Works Execution Phases  
 
During the planning phase the main impacts are related to the generation of expectations 
in that part of the population that resides within the Project?s intervention areas. The 
development of the expected measures of social communication, environmental 
education and community participation in order to explain project impacts and engage the 
population shall be the instruments used to ensure full acceptance by the population, 
considering the Project?s costs and benefits. In relation to the population?s expectations 
regarding potential problems with operation of the wastewater treatment plants in the 
future, the local government arranged a visit for community members to Brasilia to study 
existing plants there, which use the same system planned for Uberaba.  
 
During the works execution phases there are typical impacts expected in relation to the 
construction activities, especially in urban areas where the interface with the construction 
activity and the population is greater. The following impacts are those that might be 
expected during construction: (i) increase of noise, dust, motor gas; (ii) interdiction of 
paths, pavements and accesses; (iii) traffic deviations and traffic of heavy vehicles; (iv) 
transit of people strange to neighborhood; (v) damages to public equipment and houses; 
(vi) damages to local business; (vii) deterioration of the urban and streetscape conditions; 
(viii) risk to the water quality,; (ix) security of workers and passers-by, etc . These 
impacts are temporary and reversible and can be minimized through the adoption of 
proper preventive measures and constructive procedures which are detailed in the 
Environmental Manual of Construction that is an integrated part of the Environmental 
Report.  
 
The need to discharge materials, especially those deriving from the construction of drain 
galleries, requires specific measures for the selection and protection of the areas that shall 
be used and for the transportation of these materials. There will be defined specific routes 
and  security conditions for these purposes which are foreseen in the Environmental 
Manual of Construction.  
 
The sanitary sewerage works will further require land dispossession and may cause 
vegetation suppression and destruction as well as the disturbance of the fauna, on a 
smaller scale. Some mitigating measures have been proposed in order to assure fair 
conditions for the compensation of the real estate owners and recovery of the vegetation 
affected.  
 
Uberaba?s Municipal District has one of the largest and most important Paleontology 
sites in Brazil. During the implantation of the interventions, the soil excavation may 
expose a great amount of sedimentary rocks from the cretaceous period, which may 
present fossils. The implementation of joint specific procedures with the Centro de 
Pesquisas Paleontol?gicas and those listed in the Environmental Manual of Construction 
is the proper measure to avoid damages to this cultural inheritance. In addition, these 
procedures guarantee the recovery, rescuing and maintenance of this material.  
 
During the Operational Phase  
Page  11
Sanitary Sewage System: The negative impacts of this system during the operational 
phase would be limited to: the possibility of obstruction and rupture of the collection 
networks, odor emissions in the treatment plants, eventual overflow of effluents to the 
watercourses and increase of the sewage fees collected from the attended population. 
Measures for the system?s operational improvement and maintenance, creation of a green 
belt around the treatment plants, social communication and creation of a social tariff have 
been suggested in order to mitigate the impacts considered herein.  
 
Water Supply System:  The negative impact of this system that is deemed significant is 
related to the flow alterations in the river Claro (downstream from the water taking) and 
the Saudade channel (downstream from the point where it receives the reverted flow of 
Claro river). The hydraulic/hydrological monitoring of these water courses is suggested 
in order to implement eventual control and repair measures, if necessary.  
 
Urban Drainage System: The system causes impacts primarily during the works 
execution phase, as it has already been described. During the operation phase the 
transference peak flows downstream is the main negative impact of the proposed system. 
The system shall include the implementation of energy dissipaters.  
 
Uberaba?s Cultural and Environmental Preservation /Recovery: Valorization of real 
property changes regarding soil use, environmental degradation, increase in water and 
energy consumption, vandalism and sound pollution are foreseeable consequences from 
an increase of the number of visitors to a place that is, presently, typically rural. The new 
direction of the economic activities requires qualification of the local labor, such as 
training to work in hotels, restaurant, execution of handcrafts and tourism guides. These 
are impacts that are manageable, and would need to be addressed in the proposed Fossil 
Vivo business plan.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Wastewater Treatment Alternatives considered.  Originally, it was proposed to construct 
three new wastewater treatment plants: Uberaba, Conquistinha and Agua Santana.  
However, given the difficulties the Agua Santana posed regarding the technical options, 
and the possible contamination to the water supply should an accident occur in the site 
proposed, it was necessary to search for other alternatives.  According to the Conceptual 
Study for the Wastewater System in Uberaba, treatment should depend on two 
wastewater treatment plants:  Rio Uberaba and Rio Conquistinha.  As part of the 
preliminary studies, four alternative systems were analyzed for both the Conquistinha and 
Uberaba systems, considering seven possible treatment alternatives:  
 
1. 
Conventional waste stabilization ponds (WSP);  
 
2.
High rate WSP plus polishing pond;  
 
3.
?Samambaia? WSP:  
 
4.
Up flow Aerator Sludge Blanket (UASB) reactor plus a series of series of aerated 
lagoons ;  
 
5.
UASB plus aerated bio-filters;  
 
6.
UASB plus biological filters;  
 
7.
UASB plus ?Unitank? system  
 
Page  12
After analyzing the alternatives, it was determined that the best option for both 
wastewater treatment plants would be a UASB reactor with a series of aerated lagoons.  
The waste water treatment plants will be a key factor in improving the water quality and 
class rating on the Uberaba river and Conquistinha stream.  
 
Uraba Drainage Alternatives: Previously, the municipality developed a  Plan for the 
Control of Urban Floods whose hydrological and hydraulic studies recommended the 
implantation of 4 retention basins to dampen peak flows so as to reduce them to a level 
consistent with the discharge capacity of the existing macro drainage system. One of 
these basins, the largest one (Leopoldino de Oliveira), has been implemented previously 
to Bank involvement in the project. However, during the Project?s preparatory phase new 
hydrological and hydraulic studies were prepared by Funda??o Cristiano Ottoni  of 
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais ? UFMG (Federal University of Minas Gerais), in 
order to: (i) assess the rain water discharge conditions in the main channels and aisles 
under a variety or urban development sceneries; (ii) asses current and future risks and 
their consequences; (iii) identify flood control and risk reduction alternatives; and (iv) 
propose a more advantageous solution considering environmental, technical and 
economic criteria. The study proposed several alternatives: construction of retention 
basins; and the implementation of additional canals or tunnels in order to increase the 
discharge capacity of the flood flows. These alternatives were assessed individually and 
jointly in order to determine the best solution from a technical, economic and 
environmental perspective.  
 
The results of the revised hydrological and hydraulic studies show that keeping the 
system with the originally proposed configuration of four retention basins would mean 
subjecting the population to losses and damages with a non-acceptable recurrence (every 
2
years), also involving the risk of losing human lives. The initial proposal of 
complementing the existent system with retention basins in the drainage sub-basins of the 
Lajes stream also showed itself insufficient to guarantee the flood control with a 
recurrence period superior to 5 years. The solution was simply unacceptable.  
 
Other alternatives were proposed and analyzed in order to guarantee flood control with a 
25-year-recurrence. A total of seven alternatives were analyzed, including the current 
system. A comparison of the six alternatives to the status quo are indicated below:  
 
Alternative 
  Estimated 
Cost 
 
 
R$  
 
Three rain water retention pools and two tunnels (1) 
21,200,000  
 
Two rain water retention pools and two tunnels (2) 17,100,000  
 
Transference of the Grande River Basin (3) 20,300,000  
 
Tunnels Connecting GF with SD (4) 
18,900,000  
 
Tunnels Connecting GF and FR (5) 19,400,000  
 
Reinforcement of Traditional Galleries (6)  20,600,000  
 
Given its technical feasibility, understood risk levels and economic rate of return, the 
current option remains the reinforcement of the current system.  
 
Page  13
Water Supply Alternatives:  New studies were developed during the Project?s 
preparatory phase and several additional or substitutive supply sources were analyzed, 
namely: (i) regularization of the Uberaba river?s flow with other dam possibilities; (ii) 
use of Claro river, either through the making permanent the current reversion or through 
a
direct adduction to the water intake point; (iii) supply option using the Grande river; 
(iv) water supply capture in Araguari river, and (v) an increase of the number of artesian 
wells.  
 
Figure 4-4:  Cost comparisons of alternatives  
 
The studies concluded that the best solution, under the technical, economic and 
environmental aspects, would be the permanent implementation of the currently 
temporary solution of transposition of the Claro river waters to the Uberaba river basin. 
This alternative, which shall be detailed during project execution, shall be submitted to 
IGAM in order to obtain the definitive grant for the right of use.  It is worth reiterating 
that the transposition of the river Claro is the most economically and environmentally 
viable of options for augmenting the city?s water supply and is a solution that is only 
necessary during severe dry periods (less than 5% of the time).   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN  
 
The Environmental Assessment Report comprises several mitigating, compensatory and 
reinforcement measures to ensure the reduction of negative impacts and the optimization 
of the positive ones. These measures, as well as their costs, schedules and responsible 
parties constitute the Environmental Management Plan.  Most components of the 
Environmental Management Plan are  included in the engineering projects themselves 
and do not require a separate document.  
 
Environmental Management System: The ?gua Viva Project shall have as Borrower, the 
Municipality of Uberaba and as the general coordinating body the Centro Operacional de 
Desenvolvimento e Saneamento de Uberaba ? CODAU. One Program Management Unit- 
UGP ? shall be implemented under the municipality?s coordination and will include the 
Page  14
Technical Units.  The Environmental and Social Management System ? SGSA ? shall be 
an integral part of the project  Management System and will be liable for: (i) coordinating 
the social and environmental measures of the Project; (ii) inspecting, following-up and 
directing the execution of the mitigating measures required in the environmental licenses 
and the recommendations of the Environmental Manual of Construction; (iii) 
implementing the subcomponents of environmental education and institutional 
strengthening. The costs of this activity are included in the Project?s Management and 
Administration.  
 
Social Communication Program:  The objective of this program is to promote  
participation of the population which will be directly or indirectly affected by the 
interventions, as well as the entire population. The most active segments of the public and 
private community shall be notified about the Project?s main activities and 
implementation phases and shall be encouraged to participate actively during the 
planning and works phases. The Planning Municipal Secretariat shall be in charge of this 
activity.  
 
Sanitary and Environmental Education Program:  An environmental and sanitary 
education program will be implemented, both broadly and locally. The broad approach 
aims at educating the general population on environmental values, concepts and 
information in order to increase the perception of the importance of the natural 
environment, water quality, biodiversity, the public health and, in short, overall health 
quality. This is expected to motivate the community to take active participation in 
environmental protection and preservation measures. The local approach shall be more 
directly focused on the population most impacted by the physical interventions and aims 
at increasing awareness of the value of the investments to take place, and their impact on 
the environment and human health.   The program will also include a Social and 
Environmental Monitoring program for monitoring people?s perceptions towards the 
project and values towards environmental protection and health  The Environmental and 
Sanitary Education program shall be carried-out during the Project?s implementation 
period and the Municipal Environment Secretariat ? SEMEA ? shall be in charge of it, 
under the coordination of a Project Management Unit in coordination with the Social 
Communication Advising Department, the Municipal Education Secretariat.  
 
Program for the Elimination of Crossed Connections:  The implementation of this 
program is essential to guarantee that the benefits arising from the improvement of the 
water quality comprised in the Project are accomplished. The city?s sewage and 
rainwater networks have been constructed along a number of years, often resulting in 
sewage discharge into drain pipes and vice-versa.  This program would be implemented 
by CODAU, simultaneously with the interceptors works of each basin, and it shall be 
concluded six months after conclusion of the last interceptor.  
 
Operation and Security Program of Leopoldino de Oliveira Retention Basin:  In 
compliance with the recommendations of the Dam Safety Panel, a plan for the operation 
and security of the Leopoldino de Oliveira dam will be implemented, in order to ensure: 
(i) the correct operation of the equipment in relation to its specific function of preventing 
floods; (ii) the security of the solid pieces of stonework of the dam against rupture risk 
and downstream damages; (iii) an alert system for all contingencies that may involve 
risks for the population; (iv) an assessment of the feasibility and security to use the area 
Page  15
with leisure activities during the dry seasons. The program was initiated in 2004 with the 
Dam Safety Panel will be terminated in mid 2005.  
 
Monitoring of the Water Quality of the Uberaba River and Conquistinha Stream: A 
monitoring plan of the waters of the Uberaba river basin and of the Conquistinha stream 
will be implemented.  The main objective of this plan shall be the verification of the 
efficiency of the measures implemented in the Project for the improvement of the water 
quality of these basins. It will also allow identification and repair of eventual problems 
concerning the water quality of the basins. Its results may be integrated to the Brazilian 
System of Information of water resources. The Environment Municipal Secretariat ? 
SEMEA - shall be liable for the implementation of the program. Other institutions shall 
take part in the production of information, diagnosis and monitoring of the waters within 
this Project scope, namely: FEAM, IGAM and CODAU.  
 
Hydrologic Monitoring:  The proposed hydrologic monitoring shall provide information 
in order to assess Uberaba?s urban drainage system, improve the consistency of the 
hydrologic studies, allow the use of standards of hydrologic simulation which are more 
reliable and implement preventive and corrective measures regarding urban drainage 
problems (i.e., to improve the urban drainage management system of the Municipal 
District).  Its execution term is estimated in 5 years.  
 
Construction Environmental Manual: This Manual was developed to be used as a tool 
for establishing proper environmental practices which will guide the companies to be 
contracted for the execution of the project works. It will be incorporated into the bidding 
process so that the companies may be previously instructed about the requirements. The 
Project Management Unit and the construction companies are liable for its 
implementation.  
 
Institutional Strengthening:  From the characterization and analysis of the institutional 
environment of the ?gua Viva Project, an harmonic set of measures was defined 
considering the improvement of the legal, technical and management abilities of the 
municipal organizations involved in the execution of the Project and in the operation of 
the systems resulting from the investments foreseen therein. This set of measures is the 
vehicle for ensuring the execution of the environmental and social programs of the ?gua 
Viva Project. As such the Institutional Strengthening Plan shall include actions to build 
capacity of those entities directly in charge of provision of public services related to 
environmental, urban infrastructure and sanitation management.  This will include 
measures in order to equip the organizations, train personnel and develop technical and 
operational manuals   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The social impact report was designed in consultation with the mayor?s office, relevant 
specialists within Uberaba?s municipal government and through a public forum. It 
presents an analysis of the relevant socio-economic data about the municipality, including 
a
description of economic trends and descriptions of the provision and quality of public 
utilities and public services.  
 
This socio-economic description of the municipality is supplemented by the mapping of 
those areas that will be directly influenced by the major public works under the Agua 
Page  16
Viva project. Areas were defined as being areas of ?direct social impact? through a 
process combining the mapping of the areas physical distance from a public works 
project with a visit to the areas to determine how they were populated.  
 
Those areas that were populated and directly impacted by public works projects were 
then studied through ?social diagnosis?. Social diagnosis aims to describe the dynamic of 
the community before the intervention that will be brought through the public works 
project. This includes field study of the relevant areas by the research team and a sampled 
survey of community residents and businesspeople. Because many residents/business 
people were unaware of the Agua Viva program the survey included a description of the 
program, including those parts of the program that will directly impact them, and asked 
survey participants about their reactions to the program as it was described.  
 
The social impact research team made predictions about project impact. The team 
analyzed the type and extent of impacts through the study of the proposed project, 
bibliographic research, and meetings with the client and the broader research team. 
Armed with knowledge of the needs and interests of the community, and based on their 
research and professional experience, the team was able to identify and describe the 
scope and magnitude of the positive and negative social impacts project implementation 
is likely to bring.  
 
Based on research and analysis the social impact report presents two types of 
conclusions: First, the report compares expected socio-economic outcomes if the Agua-
Viva program is implemented versus expected outcomes if it is not implemented. Second, 
the report makes a series of recommendations to mitigate the negative effects of program 
implementation and accentuate positive effects.    
 
RESULTS  
 
Uberaba is relatively well off and well serviced by public utilities when compared to 
other Brazilian municipalities. Uberaba is located in a strategic position about 500 km. 
from S?o Paulo, Bras?lia, and its state capital, Belo Horizonte. It is well connected to 
these cities by road, train and air. The municipality of Uberaba has an area of 4501 km?, 
of which 256 km? makes up the city. Of the municipalities 251,159 residents, 243,406 
live within city limits.  
 
Uberaba?s gross domestic product per capita was around R$6,200 in 1998, 20% above 
the national average. The economy is growing quickly. The average monthly income per 
capita in 1991 was R$279.30 (R$ of 2000) and grew to R$400.40 by 2000. Over the same 
period the percentage of the population in poverty (defined as those living in households 
where income per capita is less than half of the minimum wage) dropped from 19.2% to 
12.1% of the population, despite continued high rates of income inequality.  
 
The Index of Human Development (IDH) measured in Uberaba showed similar 
improvements over the 1990s. The overall IDH index increased from 0.763 in 1991 to 
0.834 in 2000, showing improvements in each of the areas that make it up: education 
levels, longevity and income. This measure is the 95th highest among Brazil?s 5,507 
municipalities and 4th highest among Minas Gerais? 853 municipalities. Infant mortality 
Page  17
in the city has improved from 26.9 per 1000 live births in 1991 to 18.0 per 1000 in 2000. 
Fecundity levels have dropped from 2.0 to 1.8 children per women in the same time 
period.  
 
Uberaba?s employment base is also relatively diversified with a relatively high 23.38% 
of the population working in the city?s industries, which include several large companies. 
The service sector employs 47.94% of the working population, while the commercial 
sector employs 21.50% and the agricultural sector 7.18%. The city is a regional higher 
education center.  
 
Public services in Uberaba reach almost all of the municipality?s population. Electrical 
supply run by has a capacity far above effective demand and reaches 99.97% of 
households in the urban area and 98.75% of households in the rural area. Trash collection 
is also spread throughout the municipality and 55% of the trash collected is recycled. 
However, the city does have trouble regularly collecting trash near streams that are 
blocked off by precarious housing.  
 
Publicly supplied water reaches 99% of Uberaba?s residents and 99.4% of water 
connections are micro metered. Water use is charged at rates between R$ 0.84 and 
R$1.55 per cubic meter for residential, commercial and industrial use, with rates moving 
toward the higher end of the range for larger amounts of water used. Sewage is available 
to about 95% of urban residents. Sewage rates are charged at half the rate of water, and 
included on the same bill.  
 
The whole city is affected by problems related to sewage treatment and management. 
Principal among these are:  
 
?
Almost all sewage is dumped into the river. The level of pollution of this sewage 
is much greater than the ability of the Rio Uberaba to purify itself;  
 
?
Lack of adequate treatment in valleys where sewage flows, leading to water-borne 
illnesses for those living nearby;  
 
?
An absence of environmental education programs leading to the misuse of public 
services related to sewage treatment and the lack of participation by the community in 
environmentally beneficial programs;  
 
?
Improper dumping of solid waste, despite municipal efforts to contain it.  
 
There are also water supply problems. A large part of the Rio Uberaba?s flow is used 
for public consumption and irrigation, and there can be water shortages during droughts.  
 
The three Agua Viva construction projects that will have the most dramatic social 
impacts on their neighboring communities are: 1) The construction of one of the two 
wastewater treatment plants (ETE Uberaba); 2) the construction of macro drainage works 
to reduce flooding near the city center; and, 3) the urbanization/creation of a park around 
the Leopoldino retention pool and the Lajes corridor. The other wastewater treatment 
plant (Conquistinha) will be located in a location surrounded by pasture, and will not 
have a significant social impact.  
 
Page  18
A
corner of the residential neighborhood ?Conjunto Alfredo Freire? is located within a 
kilometer of one of the two wastewater treatment plants, ETE Uberaba. There is 
particular concern that the plant might devalue the neighborhood or augment an already 
existing stigmatization of the neighborhood as foul smelling. At the same time, as this 
neighborhood is near the river, the sewage treatment plants will benefit the neighborhood 
by making the river less polluted. The rest of the land around ETE Uberaba, besides the 
river and an electrical transmission line, is pasture.  
 
The Conjunto Alfredo Freire was has been developing since 1981 along side an 
industrial district and has an estimated population of 9,010 inhabitants. The area located 
within a one kilometer circumference of ETE Uberaba is composed of 344 dwellings, of 
mostly precarious construction. While there is a neighborhood association and other 
community groups they do not work closely together.  
 
The social impact research team held community meetings about the Agua Viva project 
and conducted a sampled survey of 58 individuals with equal representation of genders 
and age groups. Responses revealed that area residents were poorer on average than those 
in the city as a whole. Respondents described the biggest problems with public services 
in the area are a lack of public transport, a lack of recreational areas and a lack of urban 
sanitation. Social problems described by respondents included drugs, violence/lack of 
security and unemployment.  
 
A
full 89% of those interviewed were not aware of plans to build a wastewater treatment 
plant. Because of the general lack of knowledge and the initial disapproval of a project 
which would presumably smell bad, the social impact consultants urged the mayor to 
organize a trip to neighborhoods near other water treatment plants. The trip eventually 
visited similar plants in Bras?lia and included 40 social actors from Conjunto Alfredo 
Freire. The trip had a markedly positive effect on its participants in relation to their 
expectations of the water treatment facility. Information about the water treatment plants 
was also made available to the public through public meetings.  
 
The construction of drainage works near the city center is another project with a large 
social impact that will be felt in a specific community. The ad hoc construction of many 
sections of the drainage system over the years, the geographic characteristics of the water 
basin in which the most of the city of Uberaba lies, and the closing off of some drainage 
channels, has created a situation of frequent flooding in the area. This affects the 
following groups:  
 
?
Commercial establishments in the city center. One interviewee described how 
shoppers avoid the city center on rainy days;  
 
?
Those who need to transit through the city center on foot, by bus or by car to go to 
school, work or the Hospital Santa L?cia;  
 
?
Students who attend schools in the area;  
 
?
Firefighters/Civil Defense members who suffer increased workloads during 
flooding.  
 
Page  19
The qualitative part of the social impact study, which included meetings with social 
actors and the community as a whole, noted that there were a large number of community 
services, but that these were not coordinated under a collective action plan. The region 
has about 6,000 thousand residential units and 4,000 commercial units. A survey of 197 
people who live or work in the area was conducted. The survey revealed a more educated 
population with higher average incomes than the city as a whole.  
 
Flooding was cited by 56.3% of the respondents as one the three major physical 
problems in the city center. The next most common problems cited by residents were lack 
of leisure areas (35.0%), inadequate health care services (33.5%), problems with 
sanitation (32.5%) and insufficient public transport (32%).  
 
Central city residents are unhappy about flooding but are not well informed about what 
to do about it. Almost half of survey respondents evaluated the municipal government?s 
actions to control flooding negatively and another third evaluated the actions as 
mediocre. The construction of a rainwater retention pool was the most well known 
possible intervention, cited by 18.8% of respondents, but 44.2% of respondents stated 
that they did not know a solution or did not respond to the question.  
 
Over 80% of survey respondents were unfamiliar with the plan to construct drainage 
works near the city center in the Agua Viva program. Nonetheless, ? of respondents 
evaluated interceptors as a positive solution, preferring tunnels to open interceptors 
(despite a general lack of knowledge of the subject). For the most part, residents claimed 
that building drainage works would not affect their daily lives (64%). Those who saw 
problems were concerned about traffic congestion, difficulty of access for pedestrians and 
a
decline in business during construction. The survey population was divided on whether 
they preferred to trade off of greater inconvenience for quicker completion of works 
(48%) or moderate inconvenience for a moderate time period for work completion (42%).  
 
The final aspect of the project with a major direct social impact is the construction of the 
Parque dos Lagos around the wastewater retention pool Piscin?o Leopoldino. There are 
398 residences that would be directly influence by the proposed park. On one side of the 
retention pool is Condominio Flamboyant (sector 1), a gated community of well-built 
residences (sector 1). On the other side are 64 mostly precarious buildings in areas known 
as Conjunto Frei Eug?nio and Conjunto Guanabara (sector 2). One hundred people who 
will be impacted by construction were surveyed, 50 from sector 1 and 50 from sector 2.  
 
The principal public service problem described by residents was a need for 
improvement of trash collection services (30%), followed by improvements in public 
transportation (22%), public health improvements (17%), the need to improve the 
environment (17%) and the need for leisure/sports facilities (15%). Sector 2 respondents 
were more likely to be concerned about transportation and health issues, while Sector 1 
respondents were more likely to be concerned about the environment. Drugs, violence 
and unemployment were signaled as the major social problems.  
 
Page  20
The support for park construction/urbanization of the area around the drainage pool was 
striking. Nearly 90% of respondents evaluated this aspect of the Agua Viva plan as 
having a positive impact and nearly 95% of respondents said that it would not interfere 
with their daily lives.  
 
The complex of public works in the Agua Viva project will have a significant impact on 
the directly affected communities and the city as a whole over the course of project 
planning, implementation and completion. Analysis of the type and severity of impacts 
was based on the consulting team?s professional experience in similar projects, along 
with the results of the social impact study in preparation of this report. Impacts were then 
characterized as being positive or negative, direct or indirect, temporary or permanent, 
among other vectors. This summary discusses major impacts in the planning and 
implementation stages, and in the long term. The pattern that emerges from impact 
analysis is one of short-term negative impacts during project implementation that are 
more than offset by long term improvements.  
 
The major impact of the planning stage was uneasiness about the Uberaba sewage 
treatment center in the Conjunto Alfredo Freire even though they understood the plant?s 
importance. The uneasiness was somewhat mitigated by the trip to visit similar plants. 
Residents noted that construction hiring could be done locally to address a community 
need during community meetings.  
 
The implementation stage will concentrate the most negative impacts but also have 
some positive impacts. Impacts during project implementation will be augmented 
because work will be done in heavily trafficked commercial areas, local community 
organization is fragile and not coordinated, municipal authorities do not have established 
modes of communicating with the public and because of the socio-economic conditions 
of some of the effected neighborhoods.  
 
The contracting of employees for the project will generate a number of significant 
impacts. Large public works project such as this one tend to generate a mass of short-
term migrants who, employed with the project or not, bring increases in criminality, 
prostitution etc. as people mill around the area searching for opportunities. The mass of 
short-term migrants will also increase demand for public services. Public authorities 
should be aware of take measures to mitigate these negative effects. Positive effects 
include increases in employment and commerce.  
 
Completion of the project will also mark a tense period as work/commercial patterns 
established during construction will be disrupted. The tensions produced could increase 
community frustration and compromise public security. However, the infrastructure 
improvements will have a long-term, positive, indirect influence of public security.  
 
The noise/dust/traffic associated with construction will also negatively affect residents 
in all areas where construction will take place.  
 
Page  21
The central city will suffer negative impacts while interceptors and canals are being 
installed. These impacts will be significant, prejudicing central city businesses and even 
the way business is done in the city. Negative effects will also be localized and 
temporary, however, and the long term effect will improve transportation, not to mention 
reduce flooding, in the city and the central city?s commercial climate.  
 
As noted, the Agua Viva program will increase monthly sewage bills. Where sewage is 
currently billed at half the cost of water, it will rise to equal the cost of water once 
wastewater is treated. The study recommends consideration of subsidies in certain areas 
to mitigate this increase for low-income residents. Currently, 40% of the population uses 
less than 10 m? per month, thus paying the lowest rate.  
 
A
long-term impact of the Agua Viva program will be an improvement in the health 
conditions of city residents related to water-borne illnesses.. It is recommended that the 
water company (CODAU) coordinate with the public health service to track the incidence 
of water-borne illness.  
 
The urbanization of the area around retention pool Leopoldino, the cleaning of the 
streams, and the implantation of the Parque das Lajes will also have a long-term positive 
impact on the well-being of the community.  
 
Public meetings, before, during and at the end of project implementation will have the 
effect of strengthening civil society. This is due to the contact that public meetings will 
generate between members of currently uncoordinated civil society groups. The project 
should also strengthen linkages between the municipality and civil society.  
 
RECOMMENDATIONS  
 
The social impact analysis demonstrates that Agua Viva should continue its social 
communication, social mobilization and education programs throughout project 
implementation. The social communication program has already impacted the community 
given that the components of the Agua Viva program were not well known to the 
population. Social communication programs such as public information campaigns and 
community meetings need to be continued to keep the public informed and mitigate 
public hostility to temporary negative impacts.  
 
It is also recommended that social communication programs be wedded with 
environmental education programs to generate further benefits for the community. By 
keeping in touch with the public, the municipality increases public involvement and co-
responsibility for improvements. This produces a range of improvements, from 
improving the sustainability of infrastructure projects because of the greater interest and 
involvement of civil society, to improving the interaction and cohesion within civil 
society and between civil society and government.  
 
In conjunction with the social communication program, it is recommended that steps are 
taken to control local transit patterns by delimiting appropriate routes and hours for heavy 
Page  22
trucks. Signs should be posted. The public should be given prior warning about route 
changes for private and public transportation.  
 
It is recommended that Municipality orient companies that win contracts under the 
program to hire local workers as this would mitigate the negative impacts and costs 
associated with an influx of temporary laborers to the city. It is recognized that the 
municipality cannot compel companies to hire local workers, as opposed to other 
Brazilian workers, under the Brazilian constitution.    
 
Project implementation will entail an expansion of demand for water, sewage, public 
cleaning, energy, telephone and public transportation services. It is recommended that the 
municipality make provisions with the public service companies to attend to the elevated 
demand.  
 
Contract employees need to have an estimate of when they will be laid off. As most 
contracts will be for a defined time period, training programs should include topics that 
prepare employees for the time they will be separated from the contracting company. 
This measure will help to reduce tensions near the end of project implementation and 
could be done at little extra cost because the contracting companies will already be 
running training courses. An additional possibility is to work with the Associa??o 
Comercial e Industrial de Uberaba (Uberaba Commercial and Industrial Association) to 
elaborate work training programs to coincide with the end of the project.  
 
?Social tariffs? might be introduced to offset the increased cost of wastewater services 
for certain sectors of the population, although experience suggests these are often 
regressive.  
 
Residents of Conjunto Alfredo Freire are very unhappy with public transportation in the 
area. The need to bring workers to the plant construction site provides an opportunity to 
improve this situation and could be extended after construction is complete.  
 
Land appropriations where the wastewater treatment plants will be built are in process 
and should continue to be executed. No people are resident in the areas to be 
appropriated.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/26/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/16/2005  
Page  23
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  24
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Dean A. Cira 
06/13/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
04/07/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
04/07/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
04/07/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
04/07/2005 
Comments:   
