Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/18/2005 
Report No.:  AC1246
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P089440 
Project Name:  Brasilia Environmentally Sustainable Project 
Task Team Leader:  Paula Dias Pini 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 7, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSEN 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Other social development 
(S);Other urban development (S);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Water 
resource management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
57.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
101.40
101.40 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project#s Development Objective is to reduce regional inequalities and ensure 
quality water resources to meet the  
 
growing needs of the Federal District and the Bras?lia Metropolitan Region, through 
environmental planning and  
 
management activities, integrated with poverty reduction interventions and 
environmental rehabilitation in the most  
 
critical river basins.  
 
Specifically, the expected outcomes of the project are: (a) improved water quality of the 
Vicente Pires and Descoberto  
 
Rivers; (b) improved living conditions in targeted low-income settlements by providing 
integrated urban  
 
environmental services; and (c) strengthened technical and institutional capacity, 
contributing to development of the  
 
Bras?lia metropolitan region.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project is comprised of the following components:  
Page  2
Component 1: Policy and Institutional Development, which will support institutional 
streghtening and technical  
 
assistance for enhancing metropolitan development policies, regulation and planning, in 
four key areas: (a) territorial  
 
development and land management; (b) water resources management; (c) environmental 
management; and (d)  
 
environmental sanitation management.  
 
Component 2: Social Inclusion and Environmental Protection, which will (a) improve 
living conditions in the  
 
low-income neighborhood of Vila Estrutural through an Integrated Development 
Project, (b) incorporate the Vila  
 
Estrutural community into regular city planning and services; and (c) mitigate 
environmental degradation in  
 
surrounding areas, including abating pollution loads discharged into the creeks and 
rivers, reversing damage within  
 
the National Park and restoring connection to the Cerrado biome.  
 
Component 3: Water Resources Protection, which will finance (a) civil works to 
improve environmental sanitation  
 
and abate pollution loads, thus improving the quality of life in Aguas Lindas and 
Vincente Pires, including activities  
 
the solid waste landfill to replace the dumpsite currently used in the DF, and (b) 
rehabilitation of environmentally  
 
degraded areas.  
 
Component 4: Project Management, which will establish a Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU) responsible for  
 
managing and monitoring the project implementation activities and for coordinating the 
supervision of civil works and  
 
project auditing.  
 
Table 1: Project Components and Financing Sources (in US$M)  
 
Components Indicative  
 
Costs  
 
(US$M)  
 
%of  
 
Total  
 
Bankfinancing  
 
(US$M)  
 
%
Bank  
 
financin  
 
g
1. Policy and Institutional  
 
Development  
 
2.
Social Inclusion and  
 
Environmental Protection  
 
3.
Water Resources Management  
 
and Protection  
Page  3
4. Project Management  
 
12.0
28.1  
 
110.3
2.2  
 
7
18  
 
69
1
12.0  
 
28.1
15.1  
 
2.2
100  
 
100
13  
 
100
Total Project Costs 158.1 57.0  
 
Front-end Fee 0.5 0.5  
 
Total Financing Required 159.6 57.5 36   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project#s area of influence - Bras?lia#s metropolitan region # holds significant 
environmental importance due to its  
 
location at the headwaters of three river basins of national and regional importance (the 
Paran?, Tocantins/Araguaya  
 
and S?o Francisco basins), and its position as a biodiversity reserve in the Cerrado 
ecosystem. In addition, 43% of the  
 
DF territory consists of environmental conservation units. The key salient characteristics 
are:  
 
Lake Parano?, an artificial lake and a major urban landmark, with substantial economic 
and environmental value for  
 
the population of Bras?lia. In addition to being a feature of outstanding natural beauty, 
the lake provides a range of  
 
benefits, from leisure activities to electricity generation. Significant public investments 
have been made over the years  
 
to remove the pollution load discharged into the lake, with most of the investment 
directed to the collection and  
 
treatment of wastewater. At present, the entire formally occupied area draining into the 
lake has its wastewater  
 
collected and treated at tertiary level. The main source of pollution comes from two 
irregular settlements: Vila  
 
Estrutural and Vicente Pires.  
 
The Bras?lia National Park, an important urban environmental conservation unit 
classified as an area of #strict  
Page  4
protection#, outlawing any type of use except biological conservation, is located within 
the metropolitan area of  
 
Bras?lia. Its main objective is to protect the Cerrado biome and the water bodies that 
supply water to the city. The city  
 
dumpsite and the Vila Estrutural#s poorly built low-income settlement adjacent to the 
National Park produces a series  
 
of
negative impacts on the flora and fauna of the park.  
 
The Vila Estrutural, with a population of about 6,500 families (approximately 30,000 
people), is it the largest and  
 
most critical slum in the DF from a social and environmental standpoint. The DF urban 
and environmental councils,  
 
together with the official environmental agencies, recognize that the best alternative is 
to upgrade the urban  
 
infrastructure of the Vila Estrutural, mitigating its environmental impacts and at the 
same time improving the quality  
 
of
life of the inhabitants.  
 
Vicente Pires, an irregular settlement with a high population density (around 3,000 
families). While many residents  
 
have evolved their own #individual solutions# for water supply and sanitation, Lake 
Parano? water quality studies point  
 
to the need to formally bring the settlement into the regular city water and sanitation 
network.  
 
The Descoberto Reservoir, which provides 60% of the water supply for the 2,000,000 
inhabitants of Bras?lia. With the  
 
exception of the wastewater produced in Aguas Lindas, all wastewater produced in the 
Descoberto Basin is properly  
 
collected and treated, and rural activities regulated through a land-use management plan. 
The GDF regards abatement  
 
of
the pollution loads from Aguas Lindas as a top priority, given that the Descoberto 
reservoir is a strategic water  
 
supply source for the city. To ensure protection of the water resources, the 
Environmental Protection Area (APA) of  
 
the Rio Descoberto was introduced in 1986 as a sustainable conservation unit 
administered by the Brazilian  
 
Environmental Agency (IBAMA).  
 
Aguas Lindas, a sizeable low-income settlement located in the neighboring State of 
Goi?s. Although it is located  
 
outside the boundaries of the DF, the GDF decided to invest in improving W&S 
services for its 130,000 inhabitants to  
 
eliminate the discharge of raw wastewater in the Descoberto Reservoir.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The EA found that there are some potential positive and negative environmental impacts 
associated with  
 
the Project, related primarily to water quality, water resources management, biodiversity 
rehabilitation,  
 
environmental management, and strategic metropolitan development planning.  
 
The Project is expected to have a highly positive impact from an environmental as well 
as social  
 
perspective, given that its objectives include environmental improvements, particularly 
related to the  
 
quality and quantity of water resources, as well as policy improvements and institutional 
strengthening over  
 
a
broad range of environmental management issues.  
 
No large scale or irreversible impacts are expected. The Project will finance a series of 
infrastructural  
 
improvements, including the upgrading the urban environment of the Vila Estrutural and 
providing water  
 
and sanitation in Aguas Lindas and Vicente Pires, which could result in certain limited 
environmental  
 
impacts. Nonetheless, these impacts can be lessened through the implementation of 
mitigation measures  
 
covered by the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) developed for the Project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The Project is of itself an environmental protection initiative that promotes sustainable 
metropolitan  
 
development. By addressing the major environmental issues in the Parano? and 
Descoberto Watersheds,  
Page  6
the quality of life in specific low-income settlements, and strengthening the DF 
environmental agencies, it  
 
is expected that the Project will have long-term positive impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The Environmental Assessment carried out by the Borrower considered different 
environmental and social  
 
alternatives within the realm of the project - including those related to resettlement 
alternatives - in close  
 
consultation with stakeholders.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The following measures have been taken to comply with Bank safeguard policies:  
 
(i) The Borrower has prepared a full Environmental Assessment, including 
Environmental Management  
 
Plan, in accordance with OP 4.01.  
 
(ii) The Borrower has prepared A Resettlement Framework, with the Resettlement 
Action Plan to be  
 
developed in the first year of project implementation, based on a fully participatory and 
consultative  
 
process.  
 
(iii) Mitigation measures to enhance the positive impacts on natural habitat areas are 
included in the  
 
Environmental Management Plan, in accordance with OP 4.04.  
 
(iv) An Expert Panel will evaluate the designs for expansion of the Descoberto 
Reservoir, following  
 
guidelines for compliance with OP 4.37 on Safety of Dams;  
 
Guidelines on #Chance Finding Procedures# of any Physical Cultural Property will be 
included in all  
 
nstruction contracts, in accordance with OPN 11.3.  
 
The GDF has proven strong capacity to plan and implement all safeguard measures 
required for the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders include the communities of Vila Estrutural and Vicente Pires, the 
scavengers of  
 
recyclable material of the Joquei dumpsite, as well as the national and Federal District 
agencies involved in  
 
the project, such as the National Environmental Agency (IBAMA), Federal District 
Water and Sanitation  
 
Company (CAESB), and Federal District Water Agency (ADASA).  
 
As part of Project preparation, a well-attended Public Consultation Meeting was held on 
11 February, 2005,  
Page  7
to discuss the final EA, which was also made available for public review at the GDF#s 
Secretariat of  
 
Environment and Water Resources. The key issues raised at the meeting are 
summarized in the EA. The  
 
documents also include the list of participants, key issues and recommendations. In 
regards to the  
 
Resettlement Policy, extensive dialogues were carried out between the GDF and Vila 
Estrutural  
 
community, as well as the Joquei dumpsite scavenger cooperatives and the national 
#Solid Waste and  
 
Citizenship Forum# of which they form part, in which agreements were reached 
regarding the most  
 
appropriate alternatives.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/17/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/23/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Page  8
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Paula Dias Pini 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Juan D. Quintero 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
