Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/18/2005 
Report No.:  
32399
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Brazil 
Project ID:  P081436 
Project Name:  Bahia Integrated Urban Development 
Task Team Leader:  Ivo G.P. Imparato 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 28, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 23, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSFU 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Housing construction 
(25%);Other social services (25%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S);Land administration and management (S);Poverty strategy, analysis and 
monitoring (S);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
49.30 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
32.90
32.90 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to reduce urban poverty in a sustainable manner, 
targeting the poorest and most vulnerable sections of Salvador and strategic cities of the 
state of Bahia with access to basic services and improved housing and social support 
services. Specific objectives are: (i) improved quality of life and asset base for the poor 
through the provision of basic infrastructure services, improvement of housing conditions 
and access to urban land, and regularization of land tenure and buildings in slums and 
unplanned settlements; (ii) improved access to social programs in the areas of income and 
employment generation, direct support to families survival strategies (e.g. through better 
and easier to access daycare facilities), health care, education and job training, and 
initiatives in the area of community security at the local settlement level; and (iii) 
enhanced state and local government capacity to plan, implement, monitor and evaluate 
integrated urban poverty reduction strategies involving several different departments, 
undertake urban upgrading and land delivery, coordinate social policy on the ground 
through participatory planning, and monitor and evaluate government programs through 
poverty and quality of life indicators.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Brazil Country Assistance Strategy?CAS 2004-2007, which was discussed by the 
Board on 9 December 2003, highlights the increasing poverty trends in metropolitan 
areas, expressed in urban violence and high unemployment. It suggests a stronger focus 
on metropolitan poverty reduction, and calls for ?an integrated approach in support of 
multisectoral, rural and urban development strategies at the sub-national level.? The 
strategic goals of ?a more equitable, sustainable, and competitive Brazil? include as long-
term development outcomes ?reducing extreme poverty, vulnerability, and social 
exclusion,? ?more equitable access to local services? and under strategic goal #4 ?good 
governance.?  The proposed operation is in line with these challenges.  The Program fits 
into at least two of the four building blocks for assistance within the Bank?s urban 
strategy: (iii) scaling up programs to provide services to the poor; and (iv) expanding 
assistance for capacity building, particularly at the municipal level. The Bahia Integrated 
Urban Development Project is explicitly envisaged in the CAS.  
 
Of all Brazilian states, Bahia is perhaps the one whose partnership with the Bank is 
strongest and most consolidated.  A long history of successful projects in various sectors 
has led to a constant and fruitful policy dialogue.In addition, the state?s investment 
capacity, restored by a rigorous fiscal adjustment in the early 1990?s, makes it possible 
for the policy dialogue to translate into specific Bank-financed projects.  Bahia?s 
comprehensive poverty reduction  strategy will thus be  supported by Bank-financed 
projects in health, education, income generation, protection of vulnerable groups, slum 
upgrading, urban poverty reduction, transport and logistics infrastructure, water resources 
management, rural poverty reduction, public sector management and institutional 
strengthening at the local and state government levels.  In addition, Bank support to this 
Project will add to the expertise in urban upgrading and municipal development that has 
already been provided to Bahia through the recently closed Bahia Municipal 
Development Project (PRODUR ? Loan 4140 BR) and the Bank?s supervision of the 
Cities Alliance-funded TA to the Ribeira Azul Program. 
 
The State of Bahia?s Government has set the long-term goal of raising the state?s 
Human Development Index (HDI) from the current 0. 688 to 0.766, the median for 
Brazil, by 2020.  To achieve this, it has prepared a long-term strategic development 
program (Plano Estrat?gico da Bahia, PEB 2003-2020) and a medium-term public 
investment plan (Plano Plurianual, PPA, 2004-07).  These plans seek a Bahia that is (i) 
socially just and cohesive, (ii) environmentally sustainable, (iii) spatially integrated and 
(iv) economically diversified and competitive. The 2004-2007 CAS calls for 
?transformation of the cooperation with state governments into integrated state strategies 
and projects, including public expenditure and policy analysis, covering both the rural 
space and urban centers.? Within this framework, the Bank has developed a Bank 
assistance program (Bahia State Program) which is complementary to the assistance from 
other donors and which aims to support the State?s strategy by expanding economic 
opportunities, conserving natural resources, building human capital, promoting good 
governance and spatial integration, and improving transport infrastructure.  The proposed 
Project is thus part of a comprehensive poverty reduction strategy to be supported by the 
Bank in Bahia. 
Page  3
The myriad problems of Bahia?s informal urban settlements and the weakness of the 
State?s urban network pose serious obstacles to the achievement of the PEB objectives. 
Accordingly, PEB proposes a comprehensive urban strategy that will focus on poverty 
reduction and the strengthening of the State?s strategic cities or ?cidades-p?lo?, 
materialized in the Viver Melhor Program. The proposed Project in support of Viver 
Melhor is an important element of the Bank?s emerging Bahia state strategy. In October 
2004, the State of Bahia, in its document, ?A Participa??o do BIRD no Projeto Bahia 
2020: Construindo Estrat?gias de Desenvolvimento Integradas?, specified the proposed 
Project  among six current and prospective Bank operations which are strategic for the 
State. These six operations, which are made possible by Bahia?s creditworthiness, 
directly address 10 and indirectly another nine of the 37 programmatic areas 
contemplated in the State?s PPA.  The Bank?s role in the State?s investment program is 
substantial. Those Bank projects included in the State?s CY04 budget account for some 
R$224 million, or about 7% of investments (10% if counterpart funds are included).  
 
The proposed Project will actively explore synergies with other Bank operations in 
Bahia.  It is envisaged, for example, that the Project will be complemented by the 
Produzir rural poverty reduction project, which will finance activities in the rural areas of 
the selected municipalities. The integrated and community-driven approach to slum 
upgrading and urban poverty reduction of Viver Melhor is based on the same premises 
that have led to the development of the approach to rural poverty reduction that is being 
implemented with similar local arrangements by the Produzir rural poverty reduction 
project series. It is expected that the combined action of the two projects will have a 
significant poverty reduction and capacity-building impact on the Project?s 
municipalities. The combined poverty reduction and infrastructure investments of the two 
projects are also expected to enhance these municipalities? prospects for economic 
development. 
 
With regard to the Health and Education operations, by agreement with the relevant 
sector Secretariats the various Bank operations will seek to concentrate their actions, 
where possible, in or near Viver Melhor intervention areas, taking advantage of the 
geographic targeting mechanism that has been set in place for the Project.  The Health 
and Education Secretariats will take part in the planning process for each subproject, 
which will lead to specific and detailed agreements with SEDUR regarding Project 
actions in these sectors.  Such cross-sectoral integration is reflected in the Project?s 
proposed expenditures.  25% of the Bank loan and its correspondent counterpart funding 
are slated for social investments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The eight strategic cities that would be involved in the proposed Project, out of  40 
strategic municipalities in the State of Bahia, to be covered by this Project, are Salvador, 
Barreiras, Brumado, Feira de Santana, Ilheus, Itabuna, Juazeiro and Teixeira de Freitas.  
They were chosen from among the 40 according to their importance as urban centers, 
population, economic significance and strategic location on transport routes.  In these 
cities, studies using census data and GIS applications led to the identification and 
Page  4
preparation of socio-economic profiles of poor and vulnerable sections.  Adjoining areas 
thus identified have been grouped together in physical intervention areas (PIF) and social 
intervention areas (PIS).  Such intervention areas not only gather adjoining informal 
settlement areas with similar characteristics, but also comprise physical planning and 
intervention units.  This makes it easier to plan the infrastructure components of the 
intervention, identifying and articulating trunk infrastructure needs and local-level 
infrastructure needs, which is done by relating the intervention areas to river basins or 
sub-basins. This will help the project to conform to, and support the implementation of, 
the states integrated water resources management plan and municipal and state 
government plans for water supply, sanitation and urban drainage.  In the case of 
Salvador, trunk infrastructure needs in the case of water and sanitation have been largely 
dealt with by the Bahia Azul sanitation program, but there are major deficiencies in the 
other cities.  Trunk infrastructure needs and linkages to water resources management, 
sewage and drainage were identified for sample areas in Salvador and Ilheus as part of 
project preparation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Daniel R. Gross (LCSFT) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The potential environmental impacts are associated with provision of water supply and 
sanitation, urban drainage, street paving, solid waste collection and disposal, stabilization 
of slopes and embankments, parks and recreation areas and other basic amenities and 
services at the community level.  Most of the impacts identified are positive in nature 
such as reduced risk from landslides and cave-ins, better water quality, reduced exposure 
to sewage, reduction in dust, better solid waste disposal, etc.  The few adverse impacts 
identified relate mainly to the implementation phase such as dust, noise and vibration 
from construction activities, disposal of debris, temporary disruptions in traffic and 
service delivery and possible safety risks.  All these risks are addressed by the 
Environmental Guidelines that have been developed from existing borrower guidelines 
Page  5
for this Project.  No long-term adverse environmental impacts are likely. As indicated in 
the Environmental Assessment Report, the Bahia State Environmental Agency (CAR) 
requires that CONDER form an environmental group within the agency to oversee 
environmental issues. This unit is called CGTA (Technical Working Group on 
Environment).  This institutional innovation will provide an ideal device for screening 
subprojects and supervising their implementation from the environmental and social 
perspectives.  CAR also has a commitment to train members of the CGTA in 
environmental analysis. The Project intervention triggers OP 4.12, the Resettlement 
Policy.  Slum upgrading involves limited involuntary resettlement due to the need to 
relocate families occupying high-risk areas such as unstable slopes and flood-prone areas.  
Limited involuntary resettlement may also be needed to improve the road network or 
establish rights-of-way for infrastructure networks, waste collection, etc.  In the proposed 
Project, individual subprojects will be designed to minimize resettlement.  The executing 
agency, CONDER, has experience in minimizing resettlement in slum upgrading projects 
and finding relocation solutions for displaced families in nearby areas, in line with Bank 
policy.  A Resettlement Framework for yet unplanned subprojects was prepared for this 
Project in accordance with OP/BP 4.12.  A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared for 
the Alagados VI subproject in Salvador and a few other smaller interventions that are 
planned for Year I of the Project.  The Resettlement Framework is based on the 
minimization of resettlement and, where absolutely unavoidable, offering choices to 
persons subject to relocation.  The framework adopted involves offering either new 
housing or cash compensation to families facing relocation.  Cash compensation would 
be based on a table of values corresponding to the estimated replacement value of the 
assets lost plus an additional compensation  inversely related to total estimated asset 
value per family.  This provides an additional boost to the poorest families, offsetting to 
some extent the vulnerability of families facing relocation. There is also a minimum 
compensation value for families with very low assets that would allow them to minimally 
acquire a new home in a legal neighborhood.  The other major alternative would be 
relocation to housing projects located very close to the neighborhoods from which people 
are relocated (usually less than 1000 meters) and equipped with all basic urban services.  
The quality of the planned new housing is very good, and far better than most of the 
housing it replaces, but not extravagantly so. Social support before, during and after 
resettlement will be offered to help people adjust to new conditions and to maintain and 
even expand their dwellings.  The Project may also trigger OPN 11.3 (Cultural Property) 
with regard to certain sites that are considered sacred by one or more of Bahias many 
religious groups, especially the Candomble (Afro-Brazilian) religion which holds sacred 
the Sao Bartolomeu Park in Salvador, Bahia where several Orixas (Gods) reside.  The 
Project would involve close consultation with community members and Candomble 
leaders to assure that sites considered sacred are not disturbed in such a way as to offend 
members of the religion.  At the same time, the Park would receive physical 
improvements and security enhancements to make it more user friendly. However, a 
lengthy process of public consultation and environmental licensing is envisaged before 
the Management Plan can be approved, and thus the implementation of the proposed 
improvements will take place at a later date and will not be financed by the Project.The 
Project will also trigger OP/BP 4.04 (Conservation of Natural Habitats) in some limited 
cases, in which interventions will take place in settlements located in slopes or along 
Page  6
water courses, which in many cases are protected areas under the law. Project 
interventions will generate positive environmental impacts in such areas. The EMP sets 
forth procedures for such cases.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No such impacts have been identified other than the likely requirement that residents will 
be expected to pay water and other tariffs for services provided.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives to the Project design could include significant displacement of populations 
to distant locations to completely rebuild neighborhoods.  These alternatives were not 
considered viable for social, economic and financial reasons.  The Project was designed 
to preserve the social cohesion of existing communities and to assure access to urban 
services, transport and employment by the affected people.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In addition to a thorough environmental analysis, the first-year subprojects have been 
carefully prepared with extensive participation by community groups including 
discussion of the Project design.  All subprojects will be licensed by the Bahia State 
Environmental Agency (CRA) and will be subject to post-licensing inspection.  CRA also 
requires public hearings to be held for all subprojects prior to licensing.  The 
implementing agency, CONDER, will build environmental management requirements 
into all contracts under the project and will enforce such contracts rigorously.  The 
Project will help strengthen the capacity of CONDERs internal CTGA, or Technical 
Environmental Management Center, which will be delegated some environmental 
licensing responsibilities by CRA under the latters supervision. The highly participatory 
approach and the inclusion of significant social investments in such activities as day-care, 
housing improvements, community health activities, job training, etc. provide additional 
assurance that there will be ongoing involvement of the affected communities which is, 
perhaps, the best assurance that environmental issues will be managed carefully, since 
communities will exercise social control over the outcomes.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders can be categorized as follows:  
 
.
Direct Beneficiaries: local residents in physical intervention areas (PIF) or social 
intervention areas (PIS) subject to Project intervention;  
 
.
Indirect Beneficiaries: residents outside Project areas who benefit from trunk 
infrastructure;  
 
.
Implementing Agency and State and Local Agencies;  
 
.
Contractors;  
 
.
Social Service Providers and Community Leaders CONDER has developed a 
methodology for interventions in poor urban neighborhoods that involves close 
Page  7
communication with local residents over long periods of time during preparation, 
implementation and post-implementation periods;  
 
.
CONDER may be unique among Brazilian urban development agencies for its 
linking of social development activities with infrastructure development;  
 
.
As mentioned above, in addition to the intensive periods of participatory design and 
preparation, the State Environmental agency also requires public hearings prior to 
licensing any public work of the sort supported by this project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
04/20/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/20/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Page  8
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ivo G.P. Imparato 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Daniel R. Gross 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jose Luis Irigoyen 
 
Comments:   
