Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  32551 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/10/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P094715 
Project Name: National Biodiversity Mainstreaming and Institutional Consolidation 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Adriana Moreira 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 20, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (30%);Central 
government administration (20%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Environmental policies and institutions (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
94.00
94.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the proposed project is to promote the mainstreaming of 
biodiversity and institutional consolidation at the national level.  The project aims to mainstream 
the conservation, management, monitoring, and sustainable use of biodiversity at the Federal and 
State Government levels, and to support the consolidation of Brazilian institutions working on 
the development and implementation of biodiversity policy, in order to bolster Brazil?s 
contribution to the 2010 Targets of the CBD Strategic Plan.  The project will focus on 
mainstream biodiversity in sectors which are users of, and/or impact, biodiversity, including 
agriculture, health, energy, transport and science & technology.  This will be primarily achieved 
by: a) increasing the coordination among, and capacity of, Brazilian institutions working on 
biodiversity policy; b) tracking and assessing Brazilian biodiversity to provide critical 
information to policymakers and monitor the implementation of the CBD 2010 Target, and c) 
supporting the creation of a virtual Brazilian Institute for Biodiversity.  Rather than duplicating 
previous efforts, this nation-wide project will complement the current portfolio of GEF projects 
Page  2
in Brazil by emphasizing national policy and providing follow-up and consolidation to the 
initiatives implemented by the National Biodiversity Project, the National Biodiversity Strategy 
project, and other relevant projects.  
 
Major project outcomes are expected to include:  
 
?
Mainstreaming of the conservation, management, monitoring, and sustainable use of 
biodiversity into select economic sectors at Federal and State Government levels;  
 
?
Mainstreaming of the conservation, management, monitoring, and sustainable use of 
biodiversity in the private sector.  
 
?
Support for the consolidation and strengthening of Brazilian institutions working on the 
development and implementation of biodiversity policy;  
 
?
Provision of critical biodiversity information for policymaking through the monitoring of 
trends in biodiversity components and the assessment of the sustainability of production and 
consumption of biodiversity goods and services.  
 
Principal anticipated project outputs include:  
 
?
Increased coordination among, and capacity of, Brazilian institutions in selected 
economic sectors to incorporate biodiversity issues in a sustainable manner;  
 
?
Strategies for conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity incorporated into policies, 
programs, projects and development plans throughout federal and state governments;  
 
?
Technical and organizational capacity for developing and implementing biodiversity 
policy in Brazil consolidated and strengthened;  
 
?
Brazilian Virtual Institute for Biodiversity created and functional;  
 
?
Brazilian biodiversity tracked and assessed to provide critical information to 
policymakers and to monitor the achievement of the CBD 2010 Target;  
 
?
Brazilian Center for Biodiversity Monitoring and Forecasting created and functional;  
 
?
Integrated productive landscapes subprojects knowledge base created and functional, and 
toolkit of instruments for subproject implementation developed;  
 
?
Working integrated biodiversity subprojects targeted at large scale productive landscapes 
for sustainable use and conservation with the private sector;  
 
?
Constitution and management of the Biodiversity Mainstreaming Private Opportunity 
Fund for large scale productive landscapes.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project will build on the past achievements of the National Biodiversity Strategy PROBIO 
and FUNBIO projects, and seek to achieve an advanced consolidation and mainstreaming of 
biodiversity in Brazil within the next five years. A primary objective of the project is the creation 
of a virtual Brazilian Institute for Biodiversity, which would support training and capacity 
building in the biodiversity sector in Brazil while ensuring that biodiversity conservation is 
included in the work of other Ministries, NGOs, and private sector institutions. While a primary 
focus of the project will be on strengthening organizations working on national biodiversity 
policy, such as the Ministry of the Environment, the Rio de Janeiro Botanical Garden, and the 
IBAMA Specialized Conservation Centers, subprojects will be designed to generate specific 
information in the field, which will be part of the process of selecting and implementing 
integrated large scale production landscapes. This project will also concentrate on stimulating 
information flows among Brazilian and international biodiversity actors, in order to ensure that 
Page  3
policy makers have the relevant information needed to make decisions and track progress 
towards international commitments. Primary stakeholders in the project would include national, 
regional, and local biodiversity-related institutions, both public and private; academic centers; 
national and local NGOs; family agriculture communities; and other producer groups.  
 
The proposed project would be funded through a GEF grant. The project duration is expected to 
be 5 years. The total cost of the project is projected to be US$124 million, of which US$30 
million would be financed by the GEF. Cofinancing is expected to be drawn from the existing 
cofinancing budget within the National Biodiversity Program, existing budgets for federal 
government projects within the Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Compensation 
Private Funds managed by IBAMA, and existing budgets for federal government projects within 
other Ministries. Cofinancing will also be sought from other international and bilateral donors. 
For the mainstreaming biodiversity in the private sector FUNBIO will be committing its 
resources as well as coordinating fund raising efforts with the private sector, particularly those 
institutions involved in the design and implementation of Integrated Sustainable Use 
Subprojects. The project would be executed by Ministry of the Environment (MMA) and by the 
Brazilian Biodiversity Fund (FUNBIO).  
 
The proposed project design includes four preliminary components:  
 
Component 1: Mainstreaming biodiversity into selected government and economic sectors.  
 
The objective of this component is to successfully implement the National Biodiversity Policy 
and promote the mainstreaming of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use into government 
activities in different economic sectors which offer greater opportunities for mainstreaming. 
Each mainstreaming effort would be conducted in consultation with the relevant stakeholders 
and would build on the existing portfolio of tested local pilot experiences, many of which were 
funded by previous GEF projects in Brazil. Each mainstreaming initiative would follow four 
main steps: 1) consolidation of existing information (assessment of the problems and bottlenecks 
and of the alternative solutions); 2) consensus building with stakeholders (what are the problems 
and what are the best solutions); 3) development of the chosen solutions (methods and 
procedures); 4) implementation of the chosen solutions in selected areas. Such approach is based 
on the experience of PROBIO and the World Bank?s Global Overlays Program in consolidating 
information and consensus building.  
 
These mainstreaming initiatives would be conducted through the Brazilian Institute for 
Biodiversity, to be created under this project, as well as directly with government Ministries and 
State Secretariats. The project will support the elaboration of sectoral plans incorporating 
biodiversity management, and will provide the training necessary to support this activity. It will 
seek strategies for incorporating the objective of biodiversity conservation and sustainable use 
into policies, programs, projects and development plans throughout the federal, state, and 
municipal governments.  
 
Component 2: Mainstream biodiversity into the private sector  
 
The objective of this component is to mainstream conservation, management, monitoring and 
sustainable use of biodiversity in the private sector. FUNBIO will establish and operate the 
Biodiversity Opportunity Program directed at the financing of integrated large scale productive 
Page  4
landscape subprojects. This program will be initially funded by the GEF grant and leverages with 
the private sector. In the long run, however, the program will grow on the returns from supported 
subprojects, guaranteeing replication of new subprojects in new productive landscapes and 
economic sectors.   Based on a thorough territorial biodiversity assessment, subprojects should 
develop and implement a conservation agenda focusing on the creation, consolidation and 
strengthening of Protected Areas. This will be associated with an economic development agenda 
centered on the generation of jobs and income for buffer zone communities, and of business 
opportunities for local entrepreneurs, in a manner compatible with the local environmental 
potential and the natural resources available. This component will be coordinated by FUNBIO, 
which shall provide technical assistance for subprojects, the results of which will be subject of 
periodic monitoring and evaluation.  
 
Component 3: Institutional Consolidation and Strengthening  
 
The objectives of this component are to promote the technical, institutional, and organizational 
capacity of the institutions responsible for developing and implementing biodiversity policy in 
Brazil, and establish mechanisms for coordination among these institutions. This will allow the 
effective mainstreaming of biodiversity conservation into other areas of the Brazilian economy 
and society. One of the primary tasks will be to create a Brazilian Virtual Institute for 
Biodiversity, based on innovative structure of the ?Institute Fran?ais de la Biodiversit?.? model 
(It should be clarified that the Brazilian Institute would not restrict itself to research, but rather 
provide support to all kinds of activities proposed under the different components of this 
proposal.) This Institute will mobilize capacities among the various organizations involved in 
conservation, sustainable use and benefits sharing of biodiversity and facilitate the coordination 
of policies and actions. It is expected that the Institute will play a considerable role in supporting 
the consolidation of the complex and diverse biodiversity sector in Brazil. It is also expected that 
this Institute will become self-sufficient by providing biodiversity services (assessments of 
impacts on ecosystem health, reviews of technological packages for biodiversity management, 
etc.) for projects and programs being implemented in other sectors in Brazil. As no institution 
with this capability or responsibility currently exists, the Brazilian Virtual Institute for 
Biodiversity should play an important role in mainstreaming biodiversity into all sectors. The 
Brazilian Virtual Institute for Biodiversity will be formed as consortia of existing and newly 
created institutions from different sectors, building up from the network established by the 
PROBIO Project. The institutions will be organized in thematic nuclei, such as environmental 
health, agrobiodiversity, biodiversity conservation and others. As an important part of this 
Institute, the project will support the creation of the Brazilian Center for Biodiversity Monitoring 
and Forecasting as part of the MMA?s structure.  
 
This component will also strengthen the parts of the Ministry of the Environment and IBAMA 
that are responsible for species conservation and management, especially through technical and 
administrative training. It will support the formation of a support Advisory Groups, which are 
responsible for the formulation and implementation of conservation activities and for advising 
the government on protected areas and endangered species. Finally, this component will support 
universities and research centers in the creation and strengthening of biodiversity centers which 
promote the creation of new technologies and knowledge related to biodiversity. In order to 
implement existing policies, the project will support the conservation of threatened Brazilian 
biodiversity, restoration of genetic diversity and landraces, and conservation and restoration of 
Page  5
rare and endangered ecosystems. The project will also implement activities addressing policy 
concerns in the areas of agrobiodiversity, genetic diversity, local varieties of species, extractive 
species, and medicinal plants.  
 
Component 4: Biodiversity Information for Policymaking  
 
This component is intended to promote the production and exchange of biodiversity 
information, which will inform policy decisions and project design in all sectors, support the 
mainstreaming activities in selected economic sectors, and facilitate the tracking of progress 
towards international commitments like the CBD 2010 targets, in accordance with COP Decision 
VII/30. Its activities will seek to coordinate with, rather than duplicate, existing national and 
international networks in order to complete information flow and feedback systems. With 
regards to the mainstreaming of biodiversity in the private sector, the nature and quality of the 
information to be gathered and of the analyses to be produced should be directed at supporting 
two objectives: a) the identification and selection of productive landscapes with potential to 
become scenarios for integrated biodiversity conservation and sustainable use experiences; b) the 
development and test of conceptual and practical economic, legal, fiscal, productive and 
managerial models and instruments for stimulating and putting into practice the mainstreaming 
of biodiversity.  
 
These activities will build on partnerships established under the National Biodiversity Project 
(PROBIO), as well as other existing government and private information centers, field stations, 
and international monitoring centers.  The network and the Brazilian Center for Biodiversity 
Monitoring and Forecasting will operate under the CBD 2010 Targets and Indicators Framework 
and will standardize indicators, procedures, and reporting. This Center will also provide services 
such as biome-level Strategic Environmental Assessments, socioeconomic valuations of 
biodiversity and ecosystems, and environmental, social, and economic modeling and analysis to 
governmental institutions, donor-funded projects, NGOs, research institutions, and other actors. 
Specifically for mainstreaming biodiversity in the private sector, FUNBIO shall coordinate a 
distinct network, by means of which it shall conceive structure and promote exercises of 
production cluster and biodiversity conservation.  
 
In coordination with the above institutions, the project will also promote the monitoring of 
trends in biodiversity components, major causes of biodiversity loss, sustainability of production 
and consumption, endangered species, and conservation effectiveness in order to provide critical 
information to decision-makers at all levels and in all sectors. The information generated by the 
project will be available as data-bases, books, diagnostic studies, and training materials to 
support rational decisions on factors affecting Brazilian biodiversity.  
 
Component 5: Project Coordination  
 
This component will support the other activities of the project by ensuring efficient 
implementation, supervision, coordination and administration. Included in this component are all 
financial management, procurement, and audit activities, and well as the Mid-Term Review and 
project closing activities. This component will also support workshops, conferences, and special 
events held under the project, and will coordinate the publication and dissemination of 
information generated by project activities (as books, videos, studies, policy recommendations, 
databases, training material, etc.). Coordination of project activities and scopes with other 
Page  6
national and binational initiatives will be also being an important responsibility that falls under 
this component. The whole project will be coordinated by the Ministry of the Environment 
(MMA), through its Secretariat for Biodiversity and Forests and the National Biodiversity 
Commission (CONABIO), and will be executed through contracts with MMA and FUNBIO. 
Other Ministries and Government Organizations will also participate in the cofunding and 
execution of this project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Brazil -- nationwide.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agencies have extensive experience in applying and monitoring safeguard 
policies and are judged to be highly capable.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Effects of the project on the environment are likely to be overwhelmingly positive, stemming 
from better conceptualization and implementation of conservation strategies, increased capacity 
for protection, a shift to more sustainable land use, improved biodiversity conservation and a 
more sustainable use of natural resources. Possible negative inputs stemming from the 
construction of minor infrastructure for reserve facilities and trails, as well as potential income-
generating activities promoted by Component D, will be addressed in an environmental 
management plan. As these activities are designed to be sustainable, take the conservation of 
biodiversity and natural resources into account, and have the smallest possible footprint, impact 
on the environment is expected to be minimal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
This project will work in areas where a significant number of original plant and animal 
species remain. As the aim of the project is to conserve these areas, the potential for triggering 
OP 4.04 is minimal. However, there is a slight possibility that research and activities supported 
under Component 2 of the project might cause unintentional degradation of natural habitats. In 
order to mitigate this risk, the environmental monitoring plans prepared for these activities will 
closely monitor habitat conversion or degradation.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
This project is expected to have an overall positive effect on forests though policy and 
information-based work. There is a small possibility that pilot initiatives will be carried out in 
forest areas; should this be the case care will be taken during preparation, implementation, and 
monitoring to ensure there are no negative impacts on the forest areas.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
The project is not expected to have any negative impact cultural property, including movable 
or immovable objects, sites, structures, groups of structures, natural features or landscapes with 
archeological, paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural 
significance. However, as it has been rated a Category B project, OP 4.11 is automatically 
triggered. The initial studies done for activities and research sponsored under this project will 
examine whether any cultural property will be negatively impacted; should it be determined that 
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
this is possible, the activity will not go forward until it has been redesigned to eliminate any 
potential impact.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
It is considered extremely unlikely that any resettlement will occur under this project, and 
only slightly probable that there might be economic displacement under pilot initiatives. This 
matter will be carefully studied during project preparation and included in the Environmental 
Assessment. Should there be determined to be any potential for involuntary resettlement or 
economic displacement, a resettlement framework will be drawn up.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/11/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Target start date for safeguard assessments is July 2005. Safeguard assessments should be 
completed by December 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Adriana Moreira 
03/21/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
03/25/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
03/28/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
