Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1616 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/06/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P089793 
Project Name: State Pension Reform II TAL 
Task Team Leader: Chris Parel 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSPS 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Non-compulsory pensions, insurance and contractual savings (100%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
PARSEP II's development objective is to promote Brazilian states' fiscal stability and sustainable 
economic growth.  This is to be done by addressing what is arguably the states' most pressing 
macroeconomic issue pension reform. Stability and economic growth will be achieved by 
generating revenues through better pension management, developing strategies for addressing 
pensions' onerous costs, and building reform constituencies. PARSEP II targets are to reach at 
least 20 of the participating 27 states in critical systems and organizational strengthening 
activities.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The loan has 6 components described below.  Note that each of these components figured in the 
first PARSEP operation hence this operation will consolidate and advance those initiatives.  
 
1. 
Upgrade Cadastres and Information Technology ($4.8m).  The reformed legislative 
framework that has emerged over the last seven years, including two Constitutional amendments 
and a battery of new laws, subject the hitherto independent and autonomous state RPPS to 
rigorous new controls.  Of especial importance is Law No. 18.887 approved in 2004 requiring 
Page  2
each sub-national government with a RPPS system to create a single unified administrative entity 
(Gestor Unico) and develop an integrated pension data base for the hitherto autonomous agencies 
that managed different parts of the states' RPPS.   This coupled with the fiscal benefits resulting 
from cadastre upgrades and eliminating unwarranted payments have created a huge demand and 
need for this sort of work. MPS believes that savings generated from this component will pay for 
PARSEP II costs many times over.  
 
-
Complete the Executive branch cadastre upgrade (27/$1.8m).  This work was begun in 
PARSEP and produced huge benefits for participating states.  The sub-component will extend 
cadastre upgrade to the entire Executive branch complement of pensioners, inactive and current 
employees and include states that did not participate in the first loan.  Follow-up will be done to 
verify that benefits identified under PARSEP are being realized and savings from this work will 
be systematically identified and reported.   
 
-
Create a functional state RPPS cadastre (27/$1.5m).  PARSEP targeted only pension 
cadastres.  PARSEP II will upgrade and integrate the states' 'functional cadastres' which contain 
employee career and profile related information.  This will support the general cleansing effort 
underway for pension cadastres and permit effective cross-referencing of information.  
 
-
Upgrade the Legislative & Judicial branches and other cadastres (27/$1.5m).  PARSEP 
was unable to introduce states' cadastre upgrade to the autonomous legislative and judicial 
branches including Ministerio Publico, Tribunal de Contas, public enterprises, foundations and 
various other state organs.  However, new legislations now requires merging of states' 
independent audit agencies under a Unified Administration and the regularization of cadastres.  
Hence, this component will extend cadastre upgrade to these state pensions.  
 
2. 
Upgrade/Implement the Integrated Pension Information System (SIPREV) ($1.1m).  The 
SIPREV system was developed under PARSEP by the Ministry based in part upon the Bank's 
PROST software.  It is considered 'best case' by Bank specialists.  Building upon Law No.  
18.887 a subsequent decree detailed integrated data base requirements which conforms closely to 
the SIPREV software being offered free of charge by the Ministry to all sub-national 
governments.  SIPREV has been implemented in some states but there is considerably more 
work to be done to make it universal and functional.  SIPREV also offers an actuarial module 
that runs off the upgraded cadastres inputted into the system.  Additional modules including 
benefits management and payroll are being developed and should be of particular interest to 
smaller states and municipalities.  
 
-
Refine and implement SIPREV and Modules ($650,000).  This will complete 
implementation of SIPREV in those States that request it and also develop and implement the 
new modules over the course of the loan.  
 
-
Integrate SIPREV with other extant data bases ($330,000).  One of the huge benefits of 
having SIPREV and cleansed cadastres is that they can now be cross-referenced with extant data 
bases including nationwide systems that capture obits, benefits, contributions, and work 
experience.  Crossing SIPREV and SISOBI (obits) potentially will results in tens of millions of 
dollars of savings from elimination of unwarranted claims.  The general upgrading of pension 
data base information will also be important for actuarial and financial diagnoses and the 
development of solutions to address RPPS fiscal burdens.  
 
-
Transform SIPREV into a management tool ($160,000).  To date, SIPREV and its 
modules have been developed as a technicians tool with relatively narrow specifications for 
capturing and processing data.  The addition of software will transform the systems into much 
Page  3
more user-friendly pension management tools and enhance the attractiveness of the systems to 
sub-national governments.  
 
3. 
Implement the Unified Administration Model ($840,000).  Law 18.887 effectively ended 
the autonomy of legislative, judicial and related pension agencies and required that all RPPS 
pension management be centralized under one state agency.  Previously, the executive branch 
which implemented PARSEP had no right nor accessibility to other branches' RPPS data.  Huge 
benefits are projected from cadastre cleansing and data base integration.  However, now that the 
legislative requirement to merge systems exists, there is a need for technical assistance to 
determine how this should be carried out.  
 
-
Prepare a Unified Administration Model ($210,000).  A normative model that can be 
adapted by States must be developed within the legislative framework.  This sub-component will 
pay for the requisite studies followed by publications and workshops to assist state efforts to 
comply with the new law.  
 
-
Strengthen IT capacity (27/$630,000).  Following successful practice in PARSEP and 
PREV-MUN, IT equipment packages will be defined for each state's new Unified Pension 
Administrator unit comprising servers, computers, printers, scanners and software. Minimally, 
sufficient capacity is required to input cadastre information and implement and use SIPREV and 
its modules.  
 
4. 
Strengthen State Institutions Through Training and Dissemination ($600,000).  An 
extensive program of workshops and training is required for states to comply with new legal and 
technical requirements associated with pension administration merger under a Unified Pension 
Administrator.  
 
-
Training states' pension managers and technical staff (27 states/$90,000).  A PARSEP II 
launch is planned to acquaint state officials with (i) the legislative requirements for the Unified 
Pension Administrator, cadastre and data base merger and upgrade, and (ii) how the MPS will 
assist states, supported by the loan components:  SIPREV, cadastre cleansing, actuarial analysis, 
training.  This sub-component is a 5 day workshop in Brasilia for states' pension officials at 
which these matters will be addressed.  
 
-
Dissemination Work Shops (27/$360,000).  Following the PARSEP model, state 
sponsored stakeholder workshops are planned to disseminate legislative requirements, the results 
of cadastre work and institutional strengthening reforms to be implemented under PARSEP II.  
 
-
Training states' Legislative, Judicial and other branches (27/$150,000).  One of the 
biggest changes in sub-national RPPS management has been the interjection of Federal laws and 
regulations, and especially for the legislative, judicial and related branches which ran their own 
pension systems and maintained autonomy from executive branches.  The imposition of a 
Unified Pension Administrator under the executive branch requires a concerted dissemination 
and preparation effort, especially in light of the power wielded by these branches.  This sub-
component is a 5 day workshop for state officials.  
 
5. 
Strengthen the Ministry's Secretary of Social Protection -SPS ($2m).  SPS was created 
and supported through PARSEP and the legislation that evolved consolidating the Federal 
Government's increasing role in RPPS pension oversight was made possible as a result of these 
innovations.  The structuring and strengthening of the Government's capacity, through SPS, to 
Page  4
monitor, evaluate and provide technical assistance through public and loan finance requires 
continuing PARSEP's support for SPS.  
 
-
Study states' complementary pension management needs ($200,000).  The 
complementary pension system and how it must be integrated into the Unified Pension 
Administrator must be clarified.  This sub-component is for a consultant study to be followed by 
dissemination of results and five workshops.  
 
-
Strengthening of the National Council of RPPS Directors--CONAPREV (27/$200,000).  
Each of the major ministries convokes and support organizations of state and municipal officials 
on a regular basis to disseminate and debate relevant sector issues.  Prior to PARSEP this did not 
exist for pension officials, in part because the states' RPPS systems were completely autonomous 
under the Constitution.  This was changed by Constitutional amendments and subsequent 
legislation.  MPS then created CONAPREV, supported by PARSEP and it has assumed an 
increasingly important role in pension matters including approval of PARSEP II's design.  This 
funding is for bi-monthly workshops for a period of two years.  
 
-
Actuarial analyses of states' pension systems (16/$360,000).  Annual actuarial analyses 
are now required under law.  Sub-national government compliance is posted on a website similar 
to what is done for their legislative frameworks (CRP website' sponsored under PARSEP).  
Actuarial analyses accompanied by the development of financial scenarios was undertaken under 
PARSEP.  With new laws, SIPREV and the actuarial module plus cadastre improvements it is 
necessary to finance one more audit to consolidate this legal requirement and set standards for 
compliance.  
 
-
Preparation of states' health and security legislation linked to RPPS ($200,000).  
Numerous sub-national governments commingled public servant pension and health issues prior 
to reform legislation being passed.  As mentioned above, the MPS monitors and evaluates sub-
national compliance with legislative framework standards and publishes the results on the CRP 
website.  However, the issue of public servant health security continues.  This sub-component 
will finance a study, dissemination, workshops, and the development of draft legislation.  
 
-
Project Implementation Unit ($1.2m).  The management of systems development, 
monitoring and evaluation, and provision of technical assistance by SPS, a relatively new 
organization with an expanding and increasingly demanding mandate, is a significant cost item.  
The need to retain consultants required for short and medium term assignments and support 
travel costs and related expenses associated with the SPS mandate was recognized in PARSEP 
and will play a significant role in PARSEP II. This sub-component will finance these activities 
over a four year period.  It will also fund a variety of MPS publications ($130,000).  At the time 
PARSEP was launched there were almost no pension publications available regarding Federal 
and state pension systems, legal compliance, best practice, or relevant experiences.  PARSEP 
supported the development of such publications, including a series of soft back technical books 
called Colecao Previdencia Social (Social Security Collection) that has come to play an 
important role in disseminating pension information.   Support for publications will continue 
under PARSEP II.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Brazil, Brasilia   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
Page  5
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/15/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
n/a   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Chris Parel 
09/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
09/29/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Ronald E. Myers 
10/06/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
