Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1266 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 10, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P093787 
Project Name: Bahia State Integrated 
Project: Rural Poverty   
Task Team Leader: Luis O. Coirolo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 14, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL) 
Sector: General Ag (100%) 
Theme:  Participation and civic 
engagement; rural services and 
infrastructure; municipal governance and 
institution building. 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Carlos Alberto Dominoni (Consultant, 
Environment);  
João Saturino da Silva (Consultant, Social) 
Loan amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 54.35 
B.  Project Objectives 
The proposed project would increase social and economic opportunities for the rural poor in 
Bahia by improving their access to basic socioeconomic infrastructure, thus contributing to the 
Borrower’s objective of increasing the HDI
.
While building on the CDD approach proven 
successful under the first phase of 
Produzir
,
the proposed second phase would improve on this 
experience by:  (a) integrating with and/or complementing activities of other Bank loans for the 
State (under the Bahia State Program), particularly the Bahia Water Resources Management 
Project (PGRH) and 
Viver Melhor Urbano II
;
(b) strengthening the cross-sectoral integration and 
providing significantly more emphasis on education, health, culture, natural resources 
management and environmental sustainability; and (c) scaling up the impact on poverty by using 
the skills, social capital and experience of the Municipal Councils and community associations to 
improve the relevance, efficiency, sustainability, targeting and outcomes of non-project State and 
Federal investments in rural Bahia. 
 
C.  Project Description 
Total project cost is estimated at US$75 million. A Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of US$54.35 
million would finance: 
Page  2
2
Component 1 
–
Community Subprojects
to support community matching grants for about 
2,500 small-scale socio-economic infrastructure, education, health, cultural, environmental and 
other productive investments aimed at raising the HDI.  Community associations will identify 
investments, in line with an information campaign conducted by the State to raise awareness of 
the HDI and its constituent components.  Some 407 municipalities in Bahia will be covered, with 
40% of project resources concentrated in the 100 poorest municipalities, in terms of HDI.   
Component 2 – Institutional Development
,
executed by the State Company for Development 
and Regional Action 
–
CAR (the State Technical Unit-STU), will finance (a) technical assistance 
and training to support the mobilization and strengthening of community associations in their role 
of identifying, preparing, operating and maintaining subproject investments; (b) capacity-building 
for Municipal Councils on responsibilities outlined in the Project Operational Manual, including 
assessment and supervision of community associations, participatory planning and the financial 
management of community subprojects, environmental management of small community 
subprojects; (c)  training and technical assistance for the Regional Offices of CAR; (d) workshops 
and seminars for Municipal Councils and Community Associations in order to exchange 
experiences concerning project implementation, and to facilitate integration of other Federal and 
State programs for poverty reduction.  
This Component under the current phase one of 
Produzir is
 being executed in a satisfactory 
manner, carrying out the activities envisaged at appraisal.  Some 147 training events/courses 
involving about 4,800 participants have been organized for the project Municipal Councils and 
community associations. A total of 16,820 subproject supervision visits have been conducted by 
CAR, an average of five per subproject financed.  CAR technicians conduct community 
organization and mobilization activities and participate regularly in FUMAC Council meetings.  
CAR's Annual Operating Plans (POA) are submitted and reviewed annually by the Bank.  
Standard subproject designs (e.g., small-scale dams, solar energy, manioc mill) were prepared 
and distributed to the Councils, as planned. The information transmission campaign has 
proceeded as envisaged. The Project Operational Manual was revised and approved by the Bank 
and is routinely used as the Project "handbook", with its rules and standards for the associations, 
Councils and CAR itself, adhered to in a satisfactory manner.  Councils are evolving as a result of 
their experiences under the Project, discussing and establishing priorities for local investments 
from programs/sources of funding outside the Project. 
Component 3 - Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation
will finance 
costs (excluding salaries) of project administration, monitoring and impact evaluation. 
 
D.  Project location  
The project will cover 407 municipalities within the State of Bahia (i.e., all municipalities except 
for 10 located in metropolitan Salvador), with resources concentrated in the 100 poorest 
municipalities, as measured by the Human Development Index (HDI). 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The 
Companhia de Desenvolvimen
to e Ação Regional
 (CAR), linked to the State Secretariat of 
Planning, administers the Project. CAR has 21 years of experience administering and 
coordinating both rural and urban poverty reduction projects. CAR has some 291 staff, of which 
156 are higher level professionals specialized in diverse disciplines and with substantial field 
Page  3
3
experience.  CAR is responsible, in addition to Loan 4623-BR, for the Bank-supported PRODUR 
(
Programa de Desenvolvimento Urbano
)
and 
Crédito Fundiário
 Projects, and for 
Projeto 
Gavião
,
financed by FIDA.
 
CAR’s staff consists of high-caliber professionals, specializing in the 
preparation, analysis, evaluation and supervision of subprojects, including an environmental 
specialist.  Enforcement of environmental criteria would be ensured via subproject supervision by 
the CAR, Municipal Councils, the State Secretariat for Environment and Water Resources-
SEMARH and the Technical Environmental Guarantee Committee-CTGA (see also 
Environmental Assessment under Section II below for details). 
 
As noted in the most recent PSR for the first phase of 
Produzir
,
CAR's legal status enables it to 
operate with simple, flexible procedures, speeding up Project execution.  Each of its 17 Regional 
Offices oversees an average 18 municipalities, has 4 technical staff and is connected on-line to 
CAR headquarters.  Coordination of the Project absorbs about 80% of CAR's technical and 
operational capacity.  Due to the size of Bahia (564,000 km
2
,
exceeding the combined area of the 
States of Sergipe, Pernambuco, Paraíba, Rio Grande do Norte and Ceará), its Regional Offices are 
essential to the successful execution of 
Produzir
.
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01)    
 
As noted in the December 2004 PSR for the first phase of 
Produzir 
(which is 
classified as Category B)
,
subprojects are typically small-scale with little or no 
environmental impact.  Even so, 
Produzir
 applies several environmental 
"screens" to ensure zero/lowest impact, which are consistent with the 
recommendations of the 2002 QAT Thematic Review.  
 
·
Compliance with Bank safeguards policy is monitored throughout the 
subproject cycle.  
·
Standard subproject designs incorporate environmental analysis and 
mitigation features.   
·
A
checklist of environmental elements is used during the subproject design 
and approval phase, and in obtaining (mandatory) subproject environmental 
licenses (see Annex 7 of PAD and Project Operational Manual, available 
separately).   
·
CAR has created its own Technical Environmental Guarantee Committee 
(CTGA), comprised of specific types of environmental expertise, to analyze 
subproject proposals and execution from an environmental and conservation 
standpoint.   
·
A
new subproject category - the environmental subproject -- was recently 
added to support community initiatives which preserve or sustainably exploit 
natural resources. 
 
Furthermore, under its first phase, 
Produzir
 has progressed from environmental 
oversight to the direct support of environmental education and conservation 
through specific forms of investment.  In 2003, The State of Bahia centralized all 
environmental issues into a single Secretariat of Environment and Water 
Page  4
4
Resources (SEMARH).  Also, the state environmental law of 2001 determined 
that public and private institutions would create CTGAs (as defined above) 
which coordinate, execute, monitor, evaluate and otherwise comment on plans, 
projects, programs and potentially environmentally degrading activities which 
may arise from their activities. 
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared in cooperation with 
CAR and with input from the principal State environmental agencies. Both the 
ISDS and EMP were reviewed by the LCSES Quality Assurance Team prior to 
appraisal.  The EMP describes the legal, institutional and operational context, 
requirements and procedures for ensuring that environmental issues are 
addressed throughout project implementation.  These represent a continuation of 
procedures applied systematically and routinely under the first phase of 
Produzir
,
with the addition of new developments and activities required under more recent 
environmental legislation in the State of Bahia, and lessons learned from the 
earlier project. The EMP also addresses issues identified by the Bank report 
“Thematic Review – Rural Infrastructure Projects in Brazil” (QAT Thematic 
Review, 2002).  The EMP is outlined in Annex 7 of the PAD and available in 
both the Bank’s Infoshop and the offices of CAR (www.car.ba.gov.br). 
 
Specifically, the EMP will: (a) ensure that the Project is fully compliant with 
relevant State and Federal environmental legislation and Bank Safeguards; (b) 
further consolidate the integration of environmental standards in subprojects 
financed under the Project; (c) foster a convergence between rural poverty 
reduction and the conservation and adequate valuation of the environment; and 
(d) link environmental conservation and protection activities with investments 
that increase the HDI, consistent with the Bahia Strategic Development Program 
(2003-2020) and the Bank’s Bahia State Program. 
 
Project Cycle and Environmental Requirements 
 
Subproject preparation
by community associations is initiated following an 
extensive, inclusive information transmission campaign, including indigenous 
communities and covering project objectives, rules, eligibility, operational 
mechanisms and environmental aspects.  CAR provides, where appropriate, 
standardized subproject designs to facilitate preparation and ensure the inclusion 
inter alia
,
of
key technical and environmental parameters and standards.  
 
The
 
analysis of proposals
is handled by project Municipal Councils trained to 
advise the community associations on environmental themes (including Federal 
and State laws and Bank Safeguards).  Environmental checklists, which 
incorporate Bank Safeguards, are fundamental at this stage and used by all 
involved parties for all subprojects.
1
Subprojects approved and prioritized by 
the participatory Municipal Councils are analyzed by CAR and its Regional 
Offices.  Depending on subproject type - but especially for those involving water 
resources - and its technical and financial viability, the proposal is subjected to an 
environmental analysis, and where required, enters the licensing phase which 
includes detailed analysis of potential cumulative effects/impact.  No agreement 
is signed or funding transferred until environmental viability is determined.
1
Examples of checklists are held in the project file.
 
Page  5
5
Furthermore, no subprojects that (i) harm natural habitats or (ii) include the use 
of pesticides will be approved for funding. Agreements between CAR and 
beneficiary communities contain specific clauses concerning compliance with 
environmental guidelines at the implementation and operational stages.   
 
The Operation and maintenance
phase determines whether supplementary 
training is needed on environmental aspects, based on community performance.  
Evaluation
involves CAR’s maintenance and use of the Management Information 
System (MIS) and its studies of physical performance and impact, including 
environmental.  The legal requirements for the operational stage of selected 
subprojects are presented below: 
 
Small Dams:
 
Small dam subprojects have five distinct screening stages: 
location, topographic study, geological sounding, project preparation and 
construction.    Extensive technical criteria are applied to guarantee the stability 
and retention capacity of the dam. The entire construction process must be 
supervised by a skilled professional and by a small dam specialist with 
experience in techniques used by CAR. The dam must be enclosed/fenced and 
access controlled, to guarantee water quality. 
 
Aggregate impact
 is analyzed by Superintendency for Water Resources (SRH)
.
All CAR-approved subprojects involving the use of water resources, before 
signature of the agreement with the association, must be examined by SRH, in 
terms which include the level of water demand, and supply capacity of the 
watershed involved.  This process explicitly includes an analysis/estimate of 
aggregate impacts at the watershed level. 
 
Small Water Supply Systems
:
Water supply subprojects are conceived in two 
steps:  (1) water capture through perforation of a well or construction of a dam 
and (2) the system itself based on available water resource data, standardized 
procedures of CAR for such investments and preparation of the subproject by a 
civil engineer or similar.  The subproject is then submitted by CAR to SRH for 
licensing purposes.  Should land clearing be required, CAR supplies SRH with a 
Vegetation Suppression License.  Should the system be located in an 
Environmental Protection Area (APA), an Environmental License may be 
required, depending on characteristics of the system. 
 
Subprojects in Environmentally Protected Areas (APAs)
:
Following Council 
approval, subprojects are analyzed and approved by CAR at the regional and 
state levels in technical and environmental terms.  Their location in a National 
Park for example, legally and immediately disqualifies them.  If located in an 
APA, they need approval by the APA manager or an Environmental License, 
depending on their characteristics.  All subprojects on archaeological sites 
require an Environmental License.   
 
Exemption from licensing
 does not eliminate certain screening procedures: field 
verification of possible impact and mitigating measures is still standard practice.  
Implementation of mitigation measures, where appropriate, is monitored by the 
Councils, associations (through their supervision committee), and CAR/Regional 
Offices, with special attention given to water quality in the case of small dams 
and water for human consumption.  Details concerning subprojects which require 
Page  6
6
or are exempt from licensing, are in the project file.   
 
Finally, in addition to the many requirements and procedures outlined above and 
designed to guarantee the Project’s environmental integrity, CAR has adopted a 
range of other measures, as additional safeguards:  
 
·
Included in the Operational Manual, all tools needed to ensure that 
Federal and State laws and Bank Safeguards are observed; 
·
Strengthened the environmental management skills of Regional Office 
technicians; 
·
Inserted in the CAR website (www.car.ba.gov.br), a link addressing 
environmental questions, possible impacts and mitigating measures; 
·
Incorporated the environmental “checklist” during subproject evaluation; 
·
Conducted an information campaign with appropriate materials including 
environmental advice/information; and 
·
Reviewed subproject norms to enhance environmental impact content 
and mitigation measures. 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
Bahia has an indigenous population of about 10,610 divided into 10 identified 
ethnic groupings, distributed among 20 indigenous lands of which 11 are 
formally demarcated by the Nat
ional Indigenous Foundation (FUNAI). 
 
Economic activities are diverse but have in common their subsistence level and 
extractive nature.  Under the first phase of 
Produzir
,
indigenous communities 
successfully identified and executed 21 subprojects valued at about R$572,200 
and benefiting about 1,860 individuals.  Indigenous groups are expected under 
the proposed project to execute another 50 investments valued at around US$1.5 
million.  Lessons of experience from Bahia and other states with indigenous 
populations show that such communities are clearly capable of expressing need, 
defining priorities and administering resources received, and for innate cultural 
reasons, respond very favorably to the associative project methodology, 
organizing themselves rapidly, participating in the MCs and 
operating/maintaining their investments communally.  
This second phase will continue support for the sustainable development of 
diverse groups and ethnicities by: (a) expanding its sphere of action to cover 
regions, indigenous groups and communities not already reached; and (b) 
intensifying the focus on indigenous communities which have already benefited 
under the first phase, through actions linked to/integrated with other 
projects/programs both public and non-governmental, with capacity and 
resources to benefit indigenous people.   
Building on techniques developed and lessons learned in Bahia and other 
Northeast states, indigenous groups will continue to be brought into the project 
through a culturally appropriate, pre-tested communications and outreach 
campaign developed in collaboration with indigenous entities/local leaders and 
designed to help communities understand project objectives and procedures.  
Communities will be encouraged to express their needs and priorities in an open, 
Page  7
7
democratic environment.  MCs in municipalities with an indigenous population 
will have at least one indigenous member nominated by his/her peers, with the 
right to vote.  This will be complemented by a training and capacity-building 
program developed in collaboration with relevant NGOs and institutions.   
The Project Operational Manual will define the guidelines and specific 
procedures for engaging indigenous communities in project activities.  The 
framework will be implemented by CAR through its 17 Regional Offices, 
working in partnership with indigenous representatives in the municipalities. 
FUNAI will support mobilization campaigns, ensuring that indigenous 
communities understand the goals/rules of the project.  Implementation of the 
indigenous participation framework will be monitored through the established 
MIS, as described above. In compliance with OD 4.20, a draft framework for the 
participation of indigenous peoples in the project has been prepared by the State, 
benefiting from the experience under the first phase of 
Produzir
,
discussions with 
indigenous interest groups and CAR technicians.  The framework is summarized 
in Annex 7 of the PAD
,
is available in the Bank’s Infoshop and has been made 
available to the public in the offices of CAR and on its website 
(www.car.ba.gov.br). 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Luis O. Coirolo 
Date 
Approved by:
 
Sector Manager: 
Mark Cackler 
Date 
Comments 
