Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC349 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 18, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Brazil 
Project ID: P086639 
Project Name: First Employment Project 
Task Team Leader: Maria-Valeria Pena 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: TBD 
Estimated Board Date: September 2004 
 
Managing Unit: LCSEO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: General public administration sector 
(60%);Vocational training (20%);Other social 
services (20%) 
Theme: Other social development (P);Conflict 
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:      
Other financing amounts by source: TBD 
($m.) 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The project 
development objective
 is to obtain improved sustainable income generation among targeted 
youth (200,000 youth.) The consequent change in youth behavior is a 
critical assumption
 linking the development 
objective to the contribution to CAS goals. The project would achieve its objective by participating in the pool of 
funds that finances the FEP, supporting actions that: (a) address professional and personal preparation for the labor 
market: (b) create and provide technical assistance to youth entrepreneurship; (c) strengthen a positive framework of 
personal and social values; and (d) monitor and evaluate different action and internalize lessons learned. 
Achievement of the development objective will be measured through comparison of those who benefit from the 
project with those who do not. Indicators and results of household surveys will be compared with a baseline to be 
established at the outset of the project for all programmatic components. In addition, other indicators and data 
sources on risk taking behavior will be added.  
 
C.  Project Description (subject to modifications during preparation) 
The First Employment Project is proposed as a modest sector-wide approach loan (SWAp) 
that unites in a comprehensive way, a set of actions related to formal and non-formal education, 
training, income generation preparedness and safety nets against crime and violence. The Bank 
will provide strategic support to the Government’s existing FEP. An alternative design that was 
considered to address escalating youth vulnerability was to focus on strengthening youth
 
education access and performance. However, this was not pursued since many youth are already 
away from the outreach of the formal education system. A mechanism to provide such incentives 
was needed and the FEP provides it. In addition, the programmatic design allows for the most 
coherent intervention addressing not only income creation, training and qualification, and 
educational enhancement, but also behavioral and cultural issues.   
The FEP is currently an ongoing program financed through separate federal grants transferred to consortia 
of civil society organizations (CSO) and micro- and medium-sized firms (MMF) that are responsible for services 
delivery. These grants finance the generation of income opportunities for youth, but under two different models, 
with both requiring that beneficiaries be enrolled in the formal education system and go through training, civic and 
qualification programs. The 
first model
 assumes that information and training enhance the balance between supply 
Page  2
 
 
and demand in the labor market, raise the qualification of workers, increase productivity and, in due course, produce 
social integration and prevent anomie. In this model, grants for CSOs finance non-formal education, training in 
specific trades, and technical assistance for youth entrepreneurship and cooperatives in economically feasible niches. 
A Banco do Brazil credit line for youth enterprises completes the model. The 
second model
 assumes that 
unqualified young workers are too expensive for firms, thereby granting MMFs a portion of the costs for hiring for 
an initial one-year period. It is expected that during this period, the young worker will gain experience, training and 
market value and increase his/her chance of securing employment. The subsidy is also considered an incentive to the 
formalization of informal firms, benefiting other laborers who are not direct beneficiaries of the program.  
The Borrower requested that the Bank provide support to the first model through the existing federal-
consortia financial arrangements. It also requested support for the monitoring, impact evaluation and dissemination 
of results of both models, and as part of the second, comparisons of impacts, including possible substituting effects 
between subsidized and non-subsidized employment, in for-profit firm and non-profit organization; in metropolitan 
and non-metropolitan areas; and in industrial and services sectors.  
For the purpose of the project, federal grants to CSOs and MMFs make up the pool of 
funds (the Youth Employment Programmatic Pool) from which a component, the Youth 
Opportunities Subprojects, would be derived. This Subprojects Component would consist of a set 
of pre-identified activities and eligible expenditures, delivered by CSOs, to train and generate 
income and jobs for youth, which are distinctive from the MMF. The components of the First 
Employment Project are: 
 
o
The Youth Opportunities Subprojects Component 
would finance eligible subprojects 
by consortia of CSOs that, in cooperation with municipal governments, deliver services 
regarding: (a) human, civil, political, social, public, and cultural right and responsibilities 
education; (b) basic information on labor legislation and workers rights and 
responsibilities; (c) training in selected skills; basic accounting; food security; and 
specialized services; (d) identification of labor opportunities that match the training and 
qualifications supplied; (e) organization of youth enterprises, including technical 
assistance for access to a Banco do Brasil micro-credit program and initiate the business 
and monitoring
 
during the first year; (f) regional centers for consortia; and (g) learning 
and knowledge sharing.  
 
o
The Institutional Strengthening Component
 not part of the Programmatic Pool, would 
finance: (a) design and implementation of a M&E system for the two delivery models, 
including a pilot-type learning approach based on the Betim’s experience with the MMF 
model; (b) institutional strengthening of the National Employment Service (SINE) and its 
re-engineering to the needs of the contemporary labor markets; and (c) training of 
consortia.  SINE was designed about 50 years ago with the expectation of finding jobs for 
the short-term unemployed in circumstances of full employment and is not responding to 
the challenges of today.  SINE is a source of recruitment for the FEP and all other first 
employment programs that are multiplying rapidly in municipalities and states. A Pilot-
type learning approach shall be taken using Betim as a case study of Model MMF. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
National program.  Targeted populations to be determined based on discussions with Government during 
preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
Page  3
 
 
The Ministry of Labor and Employment is a well-established centralized bureaucracy, with historic ties to the trade 
unions; with PPE it will implement activities through civil society organizations.  The project includes a strong 
institutional strengthening component and will work through existing and reputable civil society organizations.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [X] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The project does not trigger any of the Bank’s environmental or social safeguard policies.   
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare to 
mitigate them? 
 
As anticipated, preparation will include a social assessment and social analysis and a framework 
for the incorporation of indigenous youth and Afro-descendents.  The social assessment will also 
develop mechanisms to ensure the inclusion of other targeted population groups, particularly the 
large contingent of youth with precarious schooling and who are unable/unwilling to find jobs 
and join the integrated dynamics of major society.   
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
 
If there are shown to be any issues, the consultation and disclosure requirements will be followed. 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
LCSES-QAT concurred with the “C” category rating.  Other issues are noted above in A.
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:   TBD
 
