Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1709 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/26/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Burundi 
Project ID: P095211 
Project Name: Community and Social Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Yvette Laure Djachechi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 21, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 25, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS3 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P);Decentralization 
(S);Other social development (S);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project's key development objective is to improve living conditions and develop 
capacity at the community level.  This will be achieved through the provision of three sets of 
priority needs at the Commune level to targeted beneficiaries: (i) social and economic 
infrastructure; (ii) social and economic services; and (iii) targeted assistance to needy community 
members.  The project will also finance initiatives directed at youth groups and aimed at 
promoting peace and rebuilding social capital.  
 
In addition, through its design and implementation principles, the proposed project will aim at 
achieving three priority social developments outcomes aligned to the ISN's strategic priorities: (i) 
Community ownership, (ii) Community inclusion, and (iii) Community empowerment and local 
accountability.  To the extent possible, design features and processes aimed at achieving these 
social development outcomes will be mainstreamed in the project?s design and implementation 
procedures.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
The proposed project will use the planned Commune Block Grants to strengthen local level 
institutions and put in place a system of local accountability.  In this context, it will operate with 
both communities and communes and will strengthen capacity within existing institutions.  
 
The Communal law in April 2005 (Loi communale) provides for the creation of a Conseil 
Municipal whose members belong to political parties.  It also provides for the establishment of a 
Comit? de D?veloppement Communautaire (variably referred to in the Law), a consultative body 
that will be involved in the preparation of community development plans.  The proposed project 
will explore the ways in which these CDC could be made into effective consultative bodies, 
comprising representatives of both communes and the collines.  
 
Poor governance and corruption are burning issues in Burundi. The project would approach this 
issue by strengthening and consolidating existing development committees into harmonized 
viable local level institutions representing citizens from the colline to the commune level.  Given 
the size of Burundi, communes rather than collines is chosen as unit of reference for project's 
interventions and targeting of beneficiaries.  .   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
All communes in Burundi.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower institutional capacity in adressing safeguards issues will be further assessed, and 
the Government team will receive needed guidance from the Bank environmental and social 
safeguards specialists on the project team.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Mr Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is not anticipated to cause any irreversible damage to environment, or to forcibly 
displace beneficiaries from their land.  However, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF)will be prepared and will include a screening sheet to ensure that the project 
is implemented with due attention to environmental issues.  Given the number of concurrent 
community driven programs currently underway in the country at the local level, the screening 
sheet might need to include specific questions aimed at identifying potential cumulative negative 
effects on natural resources be further investigated.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
This policy is triggered with respect to the minorities Twa because the project will have a 
national coverage.  Although they integrated to a varying degree in the mainstream society, 
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Batwa are recognized nationally as a distinctive ethnic minority.  The project will define 
appropriate enhancement and/or mitigation measures to address this issue, in line with the new 
OP/BP 4.10.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The planned interventions are not expected to lead to new land acquisition.  However, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared as due diligence.  Voluntary land contribution 
might be expected from targeted beneficiaries as is sometimes the case with community-driven 
interventions. For this reason, the RPF might need to include special provisions for accepting and 
recording such contributions. These issues will be further determined.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/30/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental and Social Mmanagement Framework: before project appraisal  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework: before project appraisal  
 
Indigenous People Policy Plan : before project appraisal   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
07/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph Baah-Dwomoh 
07/22/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
