Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1244 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 24, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Cambodia 
Project ID: P087945 
Project Name: Cambodia Public Financial 
Management and Accountability 
Task Team Leader: Robert R. Taliercio 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 19, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 24, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASPR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Central government administration 
(100%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (P);Tax 
policy and administration (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 10 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
AUSTRALIA: AUSTRALIAN AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
2.25 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT (DFID) 
8.4 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
0 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY 
(SIDA) 
3
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The strategic level ob
jective of the RGC’s PFMRP
is “to install much higher standards of 
management and accountability in the mobilization of all government current and capital 
resources and effectiveness and efficiency in the use of resources in their application to the 
operation of the Government’s NPRS and other priority programs (PFMRP, 4).” The PFMRP 
intends to accomplish this objective by: (a) making the budget credible as a management 
instrument, (2) improving financial control and internal accountability, and (3) making the 
budget a reliable instrument of pro-poor policy implementation.
1
The objective of the proposed 
Public Financial Management and Accountability Project
(PFMAP) is to strengthen budget 
execution and control, improve public financial reporting, strengthen tax administration, and 
develop capacity in PFM. The primary target group is resource managers and their superiors in 
1
The fourth objective
—to improve accountability for pro-poor outcomes—is beyond the timeframe of the project. 
Page  2
MEF and the line ministries. The program will be monitored using the jointly developed 
performance management framework, based on the PEFA indicators. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project has the following components
2
:
A. Budget and Treasury Operations Reform
:
This component will support the modernization of 
Treasury management to improve budget execution and control, including by assisting the RGC 
to establish a Financial Management Information System (FMIS). Sub-components include: (i) 
mapping existing budget process in detail (from budget release to commitment to payment) and 
developing transition plan to new streamlined processes [Activities 6.1-6.14 in the 
PFMRP 
Consolidated Action Plan
]; (ii) increasing payments to and from Government through the 
banking system in terms of tax collections and Government payments to civil servants and 
contractors [Activities 7.1-7.16 in the 
PFMRP Consolidated Action Plan
]; (iii) designing and 
implementing measures to improve budget discipline by limiting accumulation of payment 
arrears [Activities 11.1-11.3 in the 
PFMRP Consolidated Action Plan
]; (iv) technical guidance 
on quality assessment of FMIS system framework and procedures, with an emphasis on 
streamlining and improving the transparency of key business processes before computerization 
commences; (v) technical advice on appropriate policy, system design, and content, taking into 
account capacity and technology constraints and including  a program of phased roll-out; (vi) IT 
system software and hardware, including testing and quality assurance; (vii) building sustainable 
capacity in the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) to operate the FMIS and use the reports 
that it will generate; and (viii) training and capacity development in line agencies as appropriate 
to allow use of system generated information [items iv.-viii. correspond to Activities 21.1-21.14 
in the 
PFMRP Consolidated Action Plan
]. This component would also require working with line 
ministries, which are at different stages of readiness to implement the reforms. 
 
B. Procurement
:
This component will support the development of improved arrangements for 
processing of procurement actions, in order to improve transparency, economy, and efficiency, 
streamline spending processes, and enable greater fiscal deconcentration. It will also facilitate 
implementation of the revised procurement procedures resulting from expected improvements in 
the legislative and regulatory framework for procurement, including use of the procurement 
manual and harmonized standard bidding documents that are currently under development. Sub-
components include: (i) revising procurement processing arrangements in light of new budget 
transaction processes, (ii) assisting with the drafting of a sovereign procurement law (while the 
new procurement law is prepared, the existing sub-decree is being strengthened
3
), (iii) 
decentralizing procurement to line ministries and provinces, and (iv) appropriate capacity 
building, which will also include training of  procuring entities, contractors, and suppliers for 
implementing the improved procurement procedures [items i.-iv. correspond to Activities 13.5 
2
Note that other components of the project will be funded by the Multi-Partner PFM Trust Fund and other DPs; 
these include: budget formulation and medium term expenditure framework reform, accounting and budget 
classification reform, and deconcentration of budget control to line ministries. In order to maintain some flexibility 
in the context of the SWAp, the MDTF is likely to finance additional activities, as long as they are part of the 
PFMRP. In this sense the 
MDTF is the donor “of last resort.” 
3
The Bank is currently providing an IDF grant to support initial procurement reform focusing on CAP activities 
13.3-13.4 and 13.6. 
Page  3
and 13.7-13.10 in the 
PFMRP Consolidated Action Plan
]. This component would also require 
working with line ministries, which are at different stages of readiness to implement the reforms. 
 
C. Tax Administration Reform
:
This component will support modernization of the Tax 
Department through capacity development based on institutional and organizational reform. 
Measures are likely to focus on the headquarters office. As an initial step the project would 
review the Tax Department’s reform program. Such a review would also provide an opportunity 
to build greater ownership through staff participation and to consult taxpayers on issues of 
concern. Attention would be paid to the incentives faced by staff in the institutional and 
organizational milieux in which they operate. Sub-components include: (i) reform of the 
organizational structure to a functional structure, (ii) development and implementation of a 
capacity development program for the Tax Department, and (iii) development of mechanisms to 
improve transparency and accountability, including possibly the establishment of a taxpayer 
ombudsman function, a taxpayer association, and/or a civil society oversight board [items i.-iii. 
correspond to Activities 3.20-3.21 in the 
PFMRP Consolidated Action Plan
]. The Bank would 
work explicitly with the IMF on the design and implementation of this component. 
 
D. Merit-based Pay and Employment Initiative (MBPI)
:
An innovative—and necessary—feature 
of the project will assist the RGC to pilot a civil service reform in the context of the PFMRP. 
Both the RGC and its DPs acknowledge that addressing the incentive problem, which consists 
both of the lack of meritocratic management and extremely low pay levels, is a prerequisite for 
reform and longer term capacity development. The lack of adequate incentives, and the lack of a 
meritocratic management framework, means that many civil servants do not show up for work, 
and, if they do, are ill-motivated to carry out their official duties. Previous attempts to reform the 
PFM system have floundered due to the lack of a mechanism to address the pay and employment 
problem. The MBPI reflects an agreement between MEF, the Council for Administrative 
Reform, and DPs to pilot a pay and employment reform in MEF. Core elements of the MBPI 
include: (i) funding from DPs (on a declining basis) and the RGC (on an increasing basis) for 
increased remuneration for selected staff; (ii) selection and management of staff for the MBPI 
based on merit and performance; (iii) payment through the payroll; (iv) parallel work on 
functional analysis leading to a rightsizing exercise; (v) complementary work on human resource 
management reform, including setting up an establishment register; and (vi) agreement to phase 
out salary supplements [the MBPI corresponds to Activities 31.1-31.11 in the 
PFMRP 
Consolidated Action Plan
]. 
 
E. Strengthening the Budget Oversight Capacity of the National Assembly and the Senate
4
:
This 
component would assist the National Assembly (NA) and Senate, including through a more 
informed understanding and review of the budget law, to hold the RGC to a higher standard of 
accountability. Thus far, the NA and Senate have had very limited influence on the budget. This 
component would assist them to better analyze and monitor the implementation of the budget 
law, thus playing a greater role in budget decision making and in overseeing the use of public 
funds. To this end, a capacity development program specifically targeting the NA and Senate  
would be developed.  Such a program would be tailored to meet the needs of both institutions 
and their staff members and would concentrate on a set of activities designed to strengthen 
oversight capacity, through local, regional, and international budget-related events and 
4
It is likely that this component would be funded through the MDTF. 
Page  4
workshops, study tours, and the development of relevant study guides/tools. The program would 
address such topics as: (i) the National Assembly, Senate, and the budget cycle, (ii) budget 
review and oversight, (iii) the role of parliament in measuring the impact of public expenditures, 
(iv) and transparency and participation in the budget process. This component is not included in 
the PFMRP, which pertains exclusively to the executive branch of government. 
 
F. Change Management
:
This component will provide support for education and advocacy about 
the project, including for extensive consultation with relevant stakeholders in MEF and line 
ministries, capacity development to design and implement a transparent and participatory change 
management process, and a communications strategy. Given the sensitivities likely to be roiled 
with such a significant and important overall of key business practices in MEF and eventually 
the line ministries, serious attention to a change management strategy will be critical to the 
project's success. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Largely Phnom Penh and provincial capitals. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[N] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[N] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[N] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[N] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[N] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[N] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[N] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
Page  5
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[
]
B
[X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
5
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Robert R. Taliercio 
1/25/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Kaye Henry 
2/3/2005 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Kazi Matin 
2/4/2005 
Comments 
wb94907 
C:\Documents and Settings\wb94907\My Documents\Cambodia\PFM Project\Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet - Concept Stage.doc 
January 24, 2005 11:29 PM
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
5
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
