                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                               Report No: AC127
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/18/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: CAMEROON                                            Project ID: P073629
Project: Community Development Program Support               Task Team Leader: Ousmane Seck
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 29, 2003                    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 18, 2004                                IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: AFTS3                                         Sector: Sub-national government administration
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program Loan (APL)             (90%); Information technology (10%)
Status: Lending                                              Theme: Municipal governance and institution building
                                                             (P); Municipal finance (P); Participation and civic
                                                             engagement (P); Rural services and infrastructure
                                                             (P); Rural policies and institutions (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
    The Community Development Program Support Project (PAPNDP) is the first phase of the program.
    Its objective is to assist the Government of Cameroon in setting up and implementing a decentralized
    financing mechanism to ensure participatory community development in rural areas. It would (i)
    establish a system for channeling funds to rural communities to finance prioritized collective
    infrastructures, (ii) strengthen the capacity of communities and local governments to plan and manage
    their own development, and (iii) improve the legal and regulatory framework for decentralized rural
    development. Communities and local governments would be engaged in a participatory appraisal of
    their needs, culminating in the implementation of subprojects cofinanced by the project. Efforts would
    be made to clarify procedures and build local government capacity for communes so that resources and
    local development responsibilities could be transferred to them.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
Financial support to rural community development:

The PANDP will co-finance socio-economic subprojects proposed by communities or communes. After a
participatory assessment of their needs, communities/communes will prepare Local Development
Plans/Communal Development Plans. To obtain "budget support" for the implementation of subprojects
under these plans, beneficiaries must provide proof that they (a) went through a participatory process; (b)
developed a priority action plan; (c) have made clear management arrangements for the subprojects; (d) are
making a contribution (in cash, labor or materials); (e) have a bank account; and (f) have legal status. The
"budget support" will be provided in the form of a grant. The level of "budget support" to communities will
be determined on a per capita basis, and will not be linked to the number and size of activities included in
the development plans. Subprojects proposed by communities will be approved by Communal Decision
Committees; subprojects proposed by communes will be submitted to Provincial Decision Committees.
Committees will make a determination of subprojects' eligibility based on field appraisals that will include
environmental and social considerations contained in World Bank guidelines. They will look at the technical
quality of subprojects, and the technical criteria for a wide range of possible subprojects will therefore be
listed during PANDP preparation. Experience from other countries has shown that proper up-front

                                                          2
                                                                                                             ISDS


determination of these technical criteria is critical for smooth implementation.

According to Law 74/23, communes will have ownership of all infrastructure, whether the subproject has
been requested by a community or not. When a communal subproject has been approved, the Provincial
Project Unit (PPU) would transfer a grant to an account opened by the commune. For a community-based
organization subproject, the commune would sign an agreement with the CBO to delegate implementation
and management responsibilities. The community-based organization and the commune would open a joint
account to receive the grant.

The project will co-finance any collective socio-economic subprojects such as social infrastructures
(schools, rural roads, health posts, markets, etc.) and natural resource management activities, as long as
they are not included on a negative list and meet the eligibility criteria set out in the PIP.
    - Collective social investments, including schools, classrooms, teacher training, literacy, health posts,
    HIV/AIDS prevention centers, health personnel training, rural roads and bridges, rural electricity,
    wells, latrines, and land tenure initiatives.
    - Public marketing infrastructures such as markets, storage, and slaughterhouses.
    - Natural resource management activities for soil erosion control, soil fertility control, and community
    forest management.
    - Rural finance subprojects to strengthen microfinance institutions.

Strengthening Communes under decentralization:

This component will:
l support studies and technical and advisory services to support the finalization of the preparation of
    legal and regulatory framework for local governance in particular regarding fiscal decentralization,
    including on mechanisms to transfer funds to municipalities.
l support commune-level capacity-building. The capacities of communes vary widely. Procedures for
    budget allocation, budget release, and financial management are not always clear and/or respected,
    elected officials and commune staffs are not always aware of their roles and responsibilities, and
    logistical support (information technology and transportation) at the commune level is in most cases
    very weak. A "commune graduation program" would be developed to assess the capacity of various
    communes. Each commune would be assessed according to criteria determined in a participatory
    manner (involving mayors, administrative services, civil society, and donors). These criteria would
    assess (i) poverty in the commune and (ii) local governance. Based on this assessment, specific
    capacity-building activities would be designed for each commune, and regular capacity assessments
    would produce progress reports. Communes would gradually build up their capacity and take on more
    responsibilities, including the temporary Communal Decision Committee responsibilities, with the
    ultimate goal of handling local development with no support from the PAPNDP.Trainings (communal
    accounting, decentralization, conflict resolution, local development ) for elected decentralized
    authorities and commune staff would be provided as well as equipment, mainly information technology,
    to allow adequate financial management and monitoring and evaluation. Familiarity and compliance
    with World Bank safeguard issues will be included in the communes' capacity-building effort.
l the project would support the MINATD outreach and communication campaigns for administrative
    decentralization. It would finance (i) workshops on decentralization, (ii) trainings, and (iii) field trips in
    Cameroon and in other countries where decentralization is more advanced.

Local capacity building

This component is aimed at strengthening the technical and organizational capacity of rural communities to

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


participate in decision-making and stimulate local development. It includes two subcomponents:
l Support for preparation of local and communal development plans, subprojects, and implementation.


Communities will receive assistance in preparing their participatory local development plans, getting
organized and electing their Communal Decision Committee representatives. This subcomponent includes
provisions for (a) training technicians and communities in community participation methodologies; (b)
training community organizations in project management and implementation; (c) training local
administrative, elected, and traditional leaders in their roles and functions; and (d) training technicians,
communities, local administrative leaders in World Bank safeguard issues. Training will also be provided
to community members in the areas of financial management, procedures for ensuring transparency and
accountability, and project management. To mitigate the risk of rent-seeking behavior by local elites,
special attention will be paid to the gender balance and to adequate representation of vulnerable groups
(especially women and the Baka (pygmy) ethnic group among those community members undergoing
training.
Service providers would also assist rural communes in preparing a communal development plan and
implementing subprojects. Each communal development plan would be prepared in a participatory manner,
involving community-based organizations, decentralized technical services, and traditional authorities.
Communal development plans would address intervillage issues and specific communal needs rather than
combining several local development plans.
The Communal Decision Committees and Provincial Decision Committees would also be strengthened to
enable them to appraise and approve subprojects, in accordance with PAPNDP principles. The project
would support (i) part of their operating costs (including regular field missions to supervise implementation
of approved subprojects) and (ii) training in such areas as local development, Cameroonian sector policies,
strategic planning, safeguard policies, and participatory monitoring.
l Specific training and outreach campaigns to improve communities' livelihoods and reduce poverty.
While assisting communities in the participatory planning process, facilitators would be able to assess
community capacities and design specific training and outreach programs to be implemented by specialists
contracted by the project. After each training or outreach campaign, beneficiaries would be surveyed to
determine quality and impact. Themes addressed by trainings and outreach campaigns would include
literacy, HIV/AIDS prevention, hygiene, nutrition, community-based integrated environmental
management, community forestry, microcredit and savings, and safeguard issues. Specific attention would
be given to marginalized groups, especially indigenous people, as described in the Indigenous People
Development Plan.

Project management and monitoring

This component will provide support for project management, coordination, communication and for the
establishment of a monitoring and evaluation system.


I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

Geographic location. The project will support the design and implementation of the Government's policy
with regard to community development, and will as such be implemented on a national scale. As part of the
first phase, the project will be initiated in the following five regions: province of the North, Center, West,
Adamaoua and South. The following agro-ecological zones are represented: (i) Sudano-sahelian zone; (ii)
High plateaux of the West zone and (iii) Tropical humid dense forest zone.

                                                      4
                                                                                                        ISDS




Population likely to be affected. Cameroon has a population of 15.4 million (2001 estimate). There are
about 250 ethnic groups in Cameroon and more than 80% of the population are farmers. The population of
Cameroon is ethnically extremely diverse and includes Bantu-speakers [Bamileke, Beti, Bulu, Bassa,
Douala], Sudanic-speakers in the north [Fulani, Sao], semi-Bantu, Choa and pygmies.

Key social issues. Economic reforms have brought few tangible benefits for the poor. Poverty reduction
continues to be a challenge due to poor infrastructures and inadequate delivery of public services.
Structural adjustment programs have resulted in decreased state spending on health, education, agricultural
research, extension services and road maintenance. Price liberalization and currency devaluation have
raised the prices of basic necessities.
l poverty. As of 1996, based on an absolute poverty line of CFAF 148,000 per adult equivalent, the
    incidence of poverty was estimated to be 50.5 percent, or 38.4 percent households. The rural areas
    account for 86.5 percent of the poor and malnutrition affects about 24 percent of rural children. There
    is great regional variation in the incidence of poverty, with the upper plateau contributing the most,
    followed by the forest and savannah areas.
l education. The enrolment rate for children aged 6 to 14 years was 80 percent in 1998. Enrolment rates
    for girls (76 percent) are lower on average than those of boys.
l health. Health facilities are unevenly distributed in the country. Health care delivery is inadequate,
    especially in rural areas. Both private and national health care services lack adequate equipment,
    medical personnel, etc. In the West and North Provinces, the most common ailments are waterborne
    and dust-related diseases such as typhoid, bilharzia, river blindness, diarrhea, respiratory infections,
    meningitis, etc. Malaria, AIDS, and yellow fever are prevalent in all four Provinces affected by Phase
    1 of the project.
l access to services. According to Government sources, 40 percent of the country's rural population has
    access to safe drinking water. However, due to the financial crisis, over 40 percent of water supply
    systems are not operational. According to official statistics, about 50 percent of the urban population
    and six percent of the rural population have access to electricity.
l land rights. The largely rural and agrarian population derives much of its livelihood from the land.
    Except among the elite, the concept of land title is not yet widespread in rural areas (although various
    groups have developed traditional land ownership patterns and regulations). Rural women have
    traditionally had access to land, although only male heads of household have land rights. Problems
    with access may arise particularly in the case of widows who are not on good terms with their in-laws.
l land use. The general pattern of land use in the West, Adamaoua and North Provinces is the cultivation
    of gentle slopes, plains and plateaus, whereas livestock raising is done on the hilly grass areas and the
    highlands. In the South and Centre Provinces, land is subject to competing interests: farming, fire wood
    collection, construction, logging concessions to foreign companies, community forestry, urbanization,
    Government projects, etc.
l access to micro-credit. Access to credit in rural areas is problematic for both men and women, due to
    high interest rates and collateral requirements.

The specificity of indigenous peoples (Baka, Kola, Aka). Three pygmy groups are found in Cameroon: the
Baka (numbering about 25,000 in Cameroon in the southern part of the East Province and the eastern part
of the South Province); the Kola (about 3,500 of whom live in the western part of Cameroon's South
Province); and the Aka (fewer than 500 of whom live along the border with the Central African Republic).
The smaller groups of Aka on the southeastern border are closely related to the Baka. The status of the
Baka and Kola communities in southern Cameroon is analyzed in the IPDP. As a result of competition for
space (for logging, conservation, cash crops, etc.) and several campaigns to sedentarize them, these
peoples, who formerly ranged over broad swaths of intact forest as full-time hunters and foragers, have

                                                          5
                                                                                                          ISDS


been increasingly confined to areas where they have `home bases' involving agriculture and outlying locales
where some hunting is still practiced. The earlier relationship of interdependence with sedentary farmers,
in which pygmies supplied village labor during the hunting off-season, and villagers relied on the pygmies'
production of meat and wild forest products, has evolved into one of increased dependency on the part of
the pygmies vis-à-vis villagers for cash income, work, and a few government-derived social services. Unlike
other ethnic groups, however, pygmy communities are not full-fledged citizens of Cameroon. There is not a
single Baka or Kola civil servant, no pygmy members of any of the 339 local councils, and only one of
Cameroon's 13,000 villages is headed by a pygmy. Rough estimates of cash income indicate that pygmy
households may earn about one third of average rural incomes in the country. Some issues they face are the
following:
l Most Baka and Kola do not have ID cards or birth certificates (because almost none can afford the
    US$25 fee and administrators issuing such documents are unfamiliar with pygmies), and thus cannot
    participate in civic life, register to vote or interact on a legal basis with governmental services;
l Baka and Kola settlements are usually not considered to be independent villages, administratively
    speaking, and are therefore usually unable to articulate their needs to governmental institutions. The
    interests of the Baka and Kola are often at the mercy of elected mayors who see themselves as
    representing a mostly `Bantu' constituency;
l Lands of ethnic minorities, hunter-gatherer societies, and/or settlements without legal status as
    independent villages, do not enjoy any form of legal protection. They have no way to acquire rights
    to "community forests" or to defend the remnants of their "homelands" from outside interests.

Biodiversity and Protected Areas. Cameroon is one of Africa's most geographically diverse countries and
contains a wide range of habitats, some of which are fragile and endangered (equatorial rainforests,
beaches, coastal plain, savannas, volcanic mountains and semi-arid plains). There are 9 000 plant species
in Cameroon, of which at least 156 are endemic. It is home to between 250 and 300 mammal species and
around 850 birds. 48% of the African mammals species and 75% species of reptiles are found presently in
the country. In 2000, protected areas covered a surface area of 4 551 990 ha. A majority of them are facing
massive encroachment due to population pressure and a lack of good management plans. The situation is
very significant in the West Province where more than 90% of the protected areas have been deforested to
become farmlands, etc.

Key environmental issues.
l desertification and deforestation: the environment in the north of Cameroon has been severely
    damaged by desertification, and this now threatens the forests of the central region. In the Centre and
    South Provinces, logging operations among the villagers and internationals logging companies results
    in extensive deforestation. Desertification and deforestation are due to (i) ecological reasons, (ii)
    clearing for cash crop cultivation, (iii) unsustainable logging activities (which does not give forests
    enough time to regenerate their dense cover of trees), (iv) firewood collection (soaring poverty rates
    have forced residents to clear more forest for firewood).
l soil erosion and loss of fertility: bush fires generally used by hunters in the dry season to obtain bush
    meat and by the Fulani cattle herders are frequent causes of the reduction in organic components of the
    soils, which reduces soil fertility. This is especially seen in the West and North Provinces. Soil erosion
    and soil impoverishment are also the consequences of deforestation, which act as the causes of low
    agricultural output especially in the rural areas. Another significant cause of soil erosion is seen in the
    West and North provinces with the movement of cattle especially in the hill slopes whereby fertile soils
    are eroded rendering the soils infertile leading to the reduction of agricultural production.
l Environmental degradation: environmental degradation is most acute in the northern part of the
    country, which is subject to drought and floods, locusts, and destruction of fields by elephants and
    other wildlife, rendering the area increasingly dependent on outside food aid. Moreover, this risk is very

                                                        6
                                                                                                         ISDS


    high in the highly populated zone of the high plateau of the Western Province, and of the Central
    Province where the carrying capacity of the land has been reached or exceeded.



B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: Community Driven Development Projects are classified as Bs.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on    for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Significant issues. Most of the subprojects planned under the PAPNDP's will be small in scale. Their
direct negative environmental and social impacts are therefore likely to be small. The project will not have
any large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. Since the financial support to local and communal
development plans remains very modest and will be distributed among a large number of communities in
the country (about 1,200 during the first phase of the operation) there is little risk of cumulative impact of
combined subprojects. Nevertheless, in some areas many community subprojects may create cumulative
impacts.

Environmental assessment. OP 4.01 has been triggered because the potential exists that implementation of
the PAPNDP may lead to negative environmental impacts, mainly of a localized nature associated with
activities to be financed under the community investment fund. An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) has been designed in the context of preparation to ensure that the PAPNDP complies
with the country's environmental policies and the donors' safeguard policies. Most negative impacts can be
effectively mitigated and are addressed under the ESMF by the screening and review procedures described
in the following chapters. However, Cameroon's environmental management capacity is currently very
weak. Thus, a negative list of projects has been identified that will not be financed during the first year of
project implementation, until sufficient capacity for screening and mitigating subproject impacts is
developed. The ESMF has also identified the major potential environmental and social issues that could

                                                        7
                                                                                                           ISDS


result from project interventions and has proposed measures, including training and monitoring, to mitigate
these effects.

Natural Habitats. The OP 4.04 has been triggered due to the potential of PAPNDP activities to affect
natural habitats. The project areas encompass a number of natural habitats and/or may border or operate in
these areas, specifically in the North (Faro, Bénoué, and Bouba-Ndjidda) and in the South (Camp-Ma'an).
Moreover, the PAPNDP aims to finance investments in natural habitat and biodiversity conservation.
Cameroon possesses great biodiversity and a number of legally protected areas. Thus, the screening form
will identify any potential impacts that project-financed activities may have on natural habitats, reserves or
protected areas.

Forestry. The PAPNDP aims to support natural resource management through several micro-investments
including: soil protection and restoration, reforestation and woodlots, support for the development of simple
management plans for community forests, and the management of buffer zones around protected areas,
including forested zones. It is unlikely that subprojects under the PAPNDP will adversely affect the use or
sustainability of forested areas in Cameroon; however, there is a potential for indirect impact on forestry
resources due to the demand for construction materials for subprojects. To mitigate this risk, appropriate
criteria have been added to the screening tools provided to address potential impacts on forestry resources.
Moreover, training under the PNDP will focus on boosting awareness of community forest protection,
illegal logging, and poaching.

Pest Management. A number of subprojects proposed under the program (e.g., small-scale irrigation, tick
dips) have the potential to introduce or increase pesticide use into certain areas/villages in Cameroon.
However, the project in general is not expected to promote widespread pesticide use. Thus, the project at
this stage has included appropriate criteria in the screening tools to address issues of pesticide use, and will
require a mini-pest management plan for micro-activities triggering this criterion. During the first year of
project implementation, technical assistance will also be provided for the development of an Integrated Pest
Management Framework to address the project's induced effects on pest management as a whole.

Cultural Property. Cameroon has an extremely rich and diverse cultural heritage and is home to ancient
tribes and civilizations. The main concern in terms of cultural property is related to construction work
required for certain small-scale infrastructure projects. To mitigate the risk of negative impacts on cultural
property, community training and technical service providers will ensure that `chance find' procedures are
incorporated into civil works contracts, and that buffer zones are created to avoid damaging certain cultural
assets such as traditional or "sacred" forests.

Indigenous People. Because the PAPNDP is a national program focusing mainly on rural areas, it can be
expected to affect ethnic minorities, and particularly those who are referred to by others as "pygmies".
According to OD 4.20, an Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP) should provide additional
information to the ESMF and the RPF. An IPDP has been prepared to ensure that the PAPNDP will
respect the dignity, rights and culture of Cameroon's "pygmy" populations and that they are also benefiting
from the PAPNDP.

Involuntary Resettlement. Past community-driven development experience shows that infrastructure
subprojects ­ primarily improvements to existing villages and communes such as roads, irrigation and
water control, wells and schools ­ sometimes cause loss of land or loss of access to other resources,
particularly in the case of new physical works or changes in the configuration of existing infrastructures.
Land tenure and property rights in Cameroon are regulated under the national land tenure system, although
traditional land tenure systems are in place at the community level. Communal land is typically volunteered

                                                       8
                                                                                                           ISDS


or chosen by the village elders for community development. It is unlikely that micro-investments financed
under the PAPNDP will result in the involuntary resettlement of individuals, since communal laws and
traditional practices strive to avoid this. Nonetheless, to mitigate the potential for involuntary resettlement,
a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared for purposes of planning resettlements under
the PAPNDP in compliance with the policies and principles of the World Bank, namely OP 4.12 for
Involuntary Resettlement, and the land tenure policies and regulations of Cameroon. It will ensure that all
subprojects are screened for potential resettlement and, where resettlement is anticipated, that appropriate
steps are taken to compensate the affected persons. The screening tools provided under the ESMF have
been designed to address issues of resettlement and land acquisition in parallel with the screening criteria
developed under the RPF.

Projects in International Waterways. Cameroon borders six countries (Central African Republic, Chad, the
Republic of Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Nigeria) and shares a number of waterways. This
safeguard policy applies to the PAPNDP because subprojects might have an impact on waterways (small
dams, water delivery infrastructure). The notification process took place in accordance with the
requirements of the policy.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

Since the financial support to community action plans remains very modest and since this support will be
spread over a large number of communities in the country (about 1,200 during the first phase of the
operation) there is little risk of cumulative impact of combined subprojects. Nevertheless in some areas
many community subprojects may create cumulative impacts. Cumulative impacts are impacts which may
result from individually small-scale activities with minimal impacts but which over time can combine to
have a significant impact.

Examples are:
l Deforestation due to the exploitation of forest resources, owing to the use of poles and timber in
    small-scale construction;
l Depletion of soil fertility due to clearing (using slash and burn methods) of marginal forest land;
l Potential impacts on groundwater, owing to the construction of numerous wells and to the introduction
    of numerous small scale irrigation works and potential cumulative impacts on water users (especially
    downstream users of potential river and streams);
l Fragmentation of habitats from road projects;
l Waste and dumping sites due to the inappropriate disposal of waste materials;
l Strengthening of traditional systems of environmental and social governance and the community
    dialogue;
l An increased number of strategically-located small-scale water points will lead to a more diffuse
    distribution of human and livestock pressures;
l Investment in social infrastructure, such as schools, health clinics, sport and leisure facilities, markets,
    etc. will promote sustainable rural development;
l The low capacities of the pygmies might result in the facts that they are not able to carry out some or
    any subproject which would increase their marginalization;
l The economic development intended by the PNDP might in the long run be incompatible with the
    livelihood patterns, lifestyle and believe system of the Baka and Kola and result in their assimilation.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

                                                       9
                                                                                                          ISDS


Examples of potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area are the
following:
l Illegal poaching of wildlife due to increased proximity and access to protected areas through
    construction of small access roads;
l Attraction of large migrant populations (especially in the Northern Province) to communities that have
    successfully introduced social infrastructure (such as schools, health centers or water sources) resulting
    in pressures that lead to overcrowding, depletion or constraint of resources (e.g. space, supplies,
    water), etc.;
l Improved understanding of the tools and mechanisms for environmental and social impact assessment
    and participatory approaches to community development will ensure the long term application of these
    tools in communities and villages across the provinces;
l Alternative livelihoods and improved marketing of agricultural products (including livestock), resulting
    in improving well-being, may lead to increased areas brought under cultivation and numbers of
    livestock or tropical livestock units, and increased demand on natural resources or degradation of the
    surrounding environment;
l Introduction of diseases as a result of new roads;
l The interests of the Baka and Kola might not be considered in the decentralization process - due to the
    fact that the Baka/Kola are not represented at council level - which would increase their
    marginalization;
l The strengthening of the capacities of the councils ­ which are "Bantu" only organizations ­ might
    increase the dependence of the Baka and Kola towards ethnic majorities in their area of living;
l An increase of law enforcement ­ as a result of a more efficient decentralization ­ might undermine the
    livelihood patterns of the Baka and Kola, which are perceived by the law as illegal exploitation of state
    territory, and results in impoverishment and landlessness.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

No project situation. In the no-project scenario, poverty and conflict over resources are likely to increase in
extent and severity over most of the rural areas in Cameroon, especially in areas like the Northern Region
where increased population pressure due to migration is leading to increased conflicts. This will result in
greater resource degradation than the `with-project' situation.

Top-down approach to service delivery. It is apparent when reviewing the track record of Government
services and projects in rural areas that `blueprint' solutions offered as a result of centralized thinking did
not ensure long-term sustainability, because they did not devote sufficient effort to understanding rural
livelihood strategies and failed to address the driving forces of natural resource degradation and the
increasing vulnerability of the rural population. Such top-down appraoches would be likely to further
disenfranchise the poorer segments of the population from participating in decision making on resource
management, potentially leading to increased poverty and increased conflict over scarce resources, and
offer little incentive for improved resource management.


II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

Principle. The ESMF proposes that environmental and social considerations be fully incorporated into the
participatory process for identifying, implementing and monitoring activities or subprojects, in order to
ensure that such operations are screened for their potential impacts and that they are consistent with World
Bank safeguard policies.

                                                      10
                                                                                                          ISDS


Mainstreaming environmental and social considerations into the PAPNPD design. Environmental policy
formulation is still in an early stage of development in Cameroon.            The capacity for environmental
management is still relatively weak. Qualified staff trained in impact assessment are scarce and budgets
are inadequate to carry out such studies at the community level. Finally, concrete guidelines for carrying
out environmental impact studies are lacking. Consequently:
l key focal points in charge of coordinating and implementing the ESMF will be designated within the
    administrative unit's of the PAPNDP: (i) in the PCU (one Environmental and Social Coordinator for
    addressing environmental and social issues in accordance with the Bank's safeguard policies); (ii) at the
    provincial level (one full-time Environmental and Social Mitigation Officer per province to provide
    technical backstopping); (iii) at commune level (Mobile Extension Teams (METs) ie service providers
    to support villages in screening subprojects);
l subproject impact guidelines relevant to the main types of subprojects submitted by communities will
    be developed by the end of the first year in order to facilitate assessment and the formulation of
    recommended measures to mitigate and address potential impacts. The guidelines will be used to train
    communities in performing their own impact studies;
l the PAPNDP will ensure that all levels of project management and service providers are given adequate
    preparation/sensitivity training in socio-environmental issues, and will build capacity for
    implementation of the ESMF and the RPF. Training will be provided in, but not limited to, the
    following: (i) the use of the screening and reporting system proposed for the project; (ii) linkages
    between     natural  resource    management      and   sustainable    rural   livelihoods; (iii)  potential
    localized/cumulative impacts and suitable mitigation measures; (iv) relevant environmental policies;
    and (v) the PAPNDP's approach to policy reform and enforcement. The PAPNDP will also provide
    basic outreach and awareness training for community representatives and interested members of the
    communities to raise the level of environmental consciousness, promote adoption of the screening
    checklist by literate community members, and alert communities to the fact that the PAPNDP can
    finance environmentally positive subprojects should they choose them. These training/sensitization
    activities should be incorporated into the training that will be required for the smooth functioning of the
    entire project management system (included in the Capacity- Building at the Local Level component).

Planning, approving, implementing and monitoring PAPNDP subprojects.
l planning of subprojects. After a participatory assessment of their needs, Communities/ Communes will
    prepare Local Development Plans/Communal Development Plans.
l identification/screening/submission of subprojects. The PNDP will co-finance socio-economic
    subprojects proposed by communities or communes. Local Committees (elected by the
    communities/communes) will in particular be responsible for (i) verifying that subprojects are
    consistent with Local/Communal Development Plans; (ii) appraising subprojects from the technical,
    financial and socio-environmental standpoints; and (iii) forwarding requests to Communal/Provincial
    Decision Committees.
   o    Each proposed subproject will be checked against a screening checklist with the assistance --
        especially during the first years -- of the Provincial Project Units (PPU) or Mobile Extension
        Teams (MET). PPUs should encourage communities/communes -- possibly the community animal
        health workers, teachers or other literate community members -- to perform this task themselves.
        This checklist is a simple yes/no checklist, culminating in whether specific advice to the community
        on environmental mitigation, environmental assessment (EA), Resettlement Action Plans (RAP),
        mini-Waste Management Plans (Mini-WMP) and mini-Pest Management Plans (mini-PMP) are
        necessary. This decision is based on likely impacts. METs will give this advice, or in cases, will
        call upon Environmental and Social Mitigation officers for specific technical advice. It is
        anticipated that a full EIA will not be warranted for all sub-projects.
   o    Screening forms will be reviewed quarterly at CDC/PDC meetings. The completed screening form

                                                      11
                                                                                                          ISDS


        will need to be submitted along with the application for the subproject. The subproject application
        document should have a section on "Environmental and Social Concerns" wherein, if needed,
        design features to avoid negative impacts and capture benefits are described, and any "Yes"
        responses on the form are discussed and justified. These forms should ultimately be merged fully
        with the Project Implementation Manual and the overall system of project management;
l approval of subprojects. subprojects proposed by communities will be approved by Communal
    Decision Committees and, subprojects proposed by communes will, in turn, be submitted to Provincial
    Decision Committees. Committees will make a determination on the eligibility of subprojects, taking
    environmental and social factors into account according to World Bank safeguards.
l implementation of subprojects. subprojects (including any mitigation measures) will be implemented
    by the communities/communes.
l reporting. The Environmental and Social Mitigation Officers will be responsible for the provinces'
    annual reports. The Environmental and Social Coordinator will complete an annual synthesis of
    impacts, on the basis of the province's annual report.
l monitoring/evaluation (M&E):
    o   The key issues to be considered include monitoring of water quality, biodiversity indicators,
        agricultural production, income generation, health and population influx. The ESMF outlines
        indicators, baseline data and targets, although monitoring indicators will be highly dependent on
        specific projet contexts. M&E of subprojects will take place on a "spot check" basis, as it would
        be impossible to monitor all the subprojects. The M&E data will be imported in the M&E system
        of the project. It is not recommended that large amounts of data be collected, but instead that
        monitoring be based on observations by project technicians and stakeholders to determine trends in
        indicators.
    o   As for the whole project, monitoring will take place at several levels and be the responsibility of
        Local Committees (to allow for a participatory monitoring of the project, there will be one person
        in charge of M&E in the local committees), PPUs (by the person in charge of the M&E in the PPU
        in relation with the Environmental and Social Mitigation Officers and with the support of METs),
        the PCU (by the person in charge of the M&E in the PCU in relation with the Environmental and
        Social Coordinator) and the consultant contracted to undertake the annual audit. It will also be
        important to include the decision committees in the M&E process and ensure that results and issues
        are reported back to them in a timely manner. M&E reporting should occur on a monthly basis and
        be the primary responsibility of the METs working with the Environmental and Social Mitigation
        Officers.
    o   Annual audits of the social and environmental performance will be carried out by an independent
        consultant who will, in particular (i) review the paper trail of screening checklists and EIA and
        resettlement reports; (ii) make field visits to a selected number of community subprojects and
        sub-projects to investigate compliance with proposed mitigation measures, and identify potential
        impacts that are not being adequately addressed; and (iii) recommend practical improvements.

Resettlement Policy Framework. Resettlement issues will be identified as part of the environmental and
social screening. The RPF specifies the cases in which a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or abbreviated
RAP is necessary. Project Affected Persons must be identified on the subproject application form. RAPs
and abbreviated RAPs shall be prepared by communities, with technical support, mainly during the first
year. For this purpose, there will be one specialist for each province ­ the above-mentioned Environmental
and Social Mitigation Officer -- and a pool of consultants at commune/village level who will have been
trained in land tenure policies, the RPF, etc.. Once complete, RAPs and abbreviated RAPs will be
submitted to the decentralized decision committees for screening and approval. RAPs will be submitted to
the Bank and the Project Coordination Unit during the first year for quality assurance (and additional
training will be provided if gaps in quality are identified). Subsequent RAPs will be reviewed by

                                                        12
                                                                                                         ISDS


decentralized decision committees and local management units under an independent annual review.
Compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation activities must be satisfactorily completed and verified
before funds can be disbursed for civil works.

Indigenous People Development Plan. In the absence of specific measures, pygmy communities will not be
able to share in the benefits of the PAPNDP and would face increased risks of marginalization. The
PAPNDP must carry out the following activities to fulfill the requirements of OD 4.20:
l Establish equal legal opportunities:
   o     Establish equal legal status for Baka, Kola and Aka individuals (including ID cards) to guarantee
         that they are citizens like all other Cameroonians and that they are taken into account by the
         councils;
   o     Establish equal legal conditions for IP settlements (communities), if they so desire, particularly to
         reduce the risk of increased marginalization and dependency upon community leaders of other
         ethnic groups;
   o     Establish community forests or traditional hunting zones for IP communities so that they can
         pursue their hunter-gatherer lifestyle;
l Establish equal financial opportunities:
   o     Offer AFDCR-financed projects to the Baka, Kola and Aka at a subsidized rate because of their
         very low economic capacity;
   o     Offer special programs to help the Baka, Kola and Aka benefit from job-creation opportunities
         (teachers, health personnel, civil servants, etc) under the PNDP program.
l Establish equal organizational opportunities:
   o     Assist the Baka, Kola and Aka in the decision-making process;.
   o     Provide training on intercultural communication to civil servants and councilors working in
         subdivisions with IPs.
   o     Assist the Baka, Kola and Aka in establishing independent bodies at various levels to coordinate,
         communicate and facilitate the above-mentioned activities;
   o     Include IP representatives in the various PNDP committees;
   o     Establish a participatory monitoring and evaluation system for the IPDP of the PNDP.
l Equal cultural opportunities:
   o     Sensitize the Baka, Kola and Aka to the risks of the development process.
   o     Assist IP association with capacity-building in order to prevent the loss of traditional knowledge,
         culture and livelihoods;
   o     Foster the creation of forums for communication and exchange between IPs and other ethnic
         groups and promote this process of mutual understanding.

Monitoring of the IPDP. The IPDP has proposed the establishment of an independent, participatory
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for the IPDP of the PAPNDP.                 Indeed, for purposes of
monitoring and evaluating the impacts of mitigation strategies, an independent supervisory body that
integrates IP into the PAPNDP process seems to be more effective than leaving these important tasks in the
hands of the program's "Bantu"-only M&E unit. An international supervisory body should conduct
bi-annual evaluations of the IPDP process. Nevertheless it also seems important to offer qualified Baka and
Kola representatives the opportunity to participate in the PAPNDP's national M&E meetings. Draft impact
indicators have been developed and one of the first tasks of participatory impact monitoring should be to
redefine them. Due to the uncertain data collected during the baseline study for the M&E system of the
IPDP, the size and distribution of Baka, Kola and Aka populations in the different divisions and
subdivisions need to be clarified.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard

                                                      13
                                                                                                        ISDS


policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

a) ESMF and RPF

Stakeholder interviews in Yaoundé and Project Target Areas. Stakeholder consultation was a key tool in
achieving the ESMF/RPF objectives. Project preparation included an intensive schedule of interviews with
key stakeholders and informants, especially in representative villages at the provincial levels, as well as
joint meetings/workshops with groups of stakeholders. The ESMF/RPF team consulted stakeholders and
key informants in Yaoundé. Four separate field visits to the provinces of the North, South, West and Center
were carried out over the period of January- February 2003. The purpose of these visits was to meet and
consult with local governments and agencies, as well as with potential participating communes and
communities, and to verify our initial analysis of the Project's potential environmental and social impacts.
Meeting agendas typically included an introduction of the ESMF team and of participants/consultees, a
brief overview of the project, views and comments of the consultees, and specific questions from the ESMF
team regarding the details of environmental and social sensitivities, people's interaction with the
environment, and potential impacts of the project. Key stakeholders consulted on the project included:
l Officials of ministries and other relevant agencies present in Yaoundé;
l Regional ministerial delegations;
l Commune and community administrations and organizations;
l Community members in each of the four Provinces;
l Environmental and social NGOs; and,
l International development agencies, and the staff of agency-funded projects.


Wrap-up and completion. A briefing meeting in Yaoundé to present and discuss preliminary findings of
fieldwork was held on February 13, 2003. After comments from stakeholders and ASPEN were received
and incorporated into a draft report, a final workshop to present and discuss the final report took place on
April 28, 2003 (through videoconference).

Disclosure. Hard copies of the reports have been disclosed in Cameroon and in the Infoshop in Washington,
both in english and in french, prior to appraisal. EIA, RAP and mini-pest management plans to be designed
for subprojects during implementation will be disclosed in country in appropriate places depending on the
subproject. This will be supervised by the Environmental and Social Mitigation officers.

b) IPDP


The IPDP was carried out between March 10 and April 8, 2003, in a participatory manner and in close
collaboration with all stakeholders (governmental agencies, donor organization, indigenous population as
defined in OD 4.20, other rural populations, NGOs, etc.). The study had three phases:
l Government agencies in charge of the PNDP (PNDP Project Coordination, MINEPAT) and
    responsible for ethnic minorities (Cellule des populations marginales et des sinistrés, MINAS), donor
    organizations with projects affecting indigenous people (Chad Export Project, World Bank,
    PGPA/GTZ, Profornat/GTZ, ECOFAC, SNV), NGOs (CERAD, INADES, RECOPY, Catholic
    Mission) and associations of indigenous people (ASBAK, CODEBABIK) were consulted to fill in
    background information and assess current approaches to integrating indigenous peoples into the
    development process.
l The Baka and Kola people were directly consulted during two field missions, each of five days'
    duration. Possible impacts and mitigation measurements were discussed with the population as a
    whole and in separate meetings with young people, the elderly, men and women. An initial focus was

                                                     14
                                                                                                           ISDS


    the impact of various forms of legal administration (e.g., independent Baka/Kola villages, versus
    Baka/Kola areas under a "Bantu" village leader). The secondary focus was on the various experiences
    acquired with community forests and, in particular, the difference between Baka/Kola-only community
    forests and joint "Bantu" and Baka/Kola community forests. A third focus was the level of interaction
    with other ethnic groups and the various perceptions of those interactions. Another point of discussion
    was the various rural development approaches employed by government agencies, international donors
    and NGOs, their impact on the Baka/Kola population and the Baka/Kola perception of donors, NGOs
    and the Baka and Kola associations. In addition, the various elements and anticipated results of the
    PNDP were discussed in detail with different focus groups (forest management committees, traditional
    rulers, members of Baka/Kola associations) and the various strata of Baka/Kola society (old, young,
    men, women).
l After completion of the draft report, the findings and recommendations were discussed in a
    participatory workshop (including four representatives of the Baka, four representatives of the Kola,
    and representatives of PNDP, MINAS and several NGOs). The participants agreed with the general
    findings and recommendations. In a second workshop, the IPDP was adopted by the PNDP as an
    official document of the Government of Cameroon.

Disclosure. Hard copies of the report have been disclosed in Cameroon and in the Infoshop in Washington,
both in english and in french, prior to appraisal.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/25/2003         6/12/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/1/2003          6/19/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            6/1/2003          6/19/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/25/2003         6/12/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/1/2003          6/19/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            6/1/2003          6/19/2003

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/25/2003         6/12/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/1/2003          6/19/2003

                                                     15
                                                                                                    ISDS


Date of submission to InfoShop                                           6/1/2003        6/19/2003

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Ousmane Seck                                       02/13/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Kristine M. Ivarsdotter/Person/World Bank          02/13/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Robert A. Robelus/Person/World Bank                02/13/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                                        02/13/04
Sector Manager/Director               Joseph Baah-Dwomoh                                 02/13/04

