Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1445 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/10/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Central America 
Project ID: P085488 
Project Name: Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve Project 
Task Team Leader: Douglas J. Graham 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 19, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
12.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
21.00
21.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The global development objective of the Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve Project is to 
strengthen the local and binational capacity to manage Nicaragua's and Honduras' proposed 
Transboundary Biosphere Reserve "Corazon del Corredor Biologico Mesoamericano" ("Corazon 
Reserve"). As a GEF project, it is expected that the improvement of local and binational 
management capacity for the Corazon Reserve will lead simultaneously to a strengthening of the 
protected areas systems of the two countries, enhancement of biodiversity conservation within 
the reserve, and improvement of the community management of natural resources.  
 
The joint Nicaraguan/Honduran team has identified the following key national objectives and 
outcomes of the project:  
 
*
Corazon Reserve established, with binational institutional mechanisms that guarantee 
adequate management;  
 
Page  2
*
National Protected Areas Systems strengthened politically, technically and administratively, 
to manage the Corazon Reserve;  
 
*
Management plans for the Corazon Reserve harmonized and effectively implemented with 
local participation;  
 
*
Local communities empowered in the management and administration of territory and natural 
resources;  
 
*
Monitoring and information management capacity of National Environmental Information 
Systems strengthened for the management of the Corazon Reserve.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Corazon project is composed of six primary components:  
 
A) Establishment and Consolidation of the Corazon Biosphere Reserve  
 
This refers to the establishment and consolidation of the UNESCO Transboundary Biosphere 
Reserve "Corazon del Corredor Biologico Mesoamericano." An initial petition to create the 
Biosphere Reserve was submitted to UNESCO by Nicaragua and Honduras in August 2004; the 
Corazon project will support the design, implementation, and consolidation of the proposed 
reserve. The Corazon Reserve will help preserve uninterrupted connectivity of the ecosystems 
present within the four protected areas constituting the reserve and support the conservation of 
ethnic and cultural values of resident populations. The presence of varied and diverse multiethnic  
 
populations, including five ethnic and indigenous groups, makes the area of the Corazon 
Reserve a complex socioeconomic and cultural setting. This is especially true given the strategies 
each of these groups have developed to manage their environment and natural resources. In 
biological terms, the core areas of the Bosawas Biosphere Reserve in Nicaragua and Patuca 
National Park, Tawahka Biosphere Reserve, and Rio Platano Biosphere Reserve in Honduras 
represent the largest area of contiguous tropical forest north of Colombia, with approximately 1.2 
million hectares of mostly pristine natural habitat. Both countries have tried individually to 
consolidate the sustainable management of these protected areas. However, these efforts need to 
be strengthened through better management, and through the creation of binational institutional 
mechanisms to  
 
achieve this. Honduras and Nicaragua have both recognized that only joint action can achieve 
the integrated management of the reserve, conservation and continuity of ecosystems, and 
preservation of threatened cultures.  
 
Subcomponents of this component include:  
 
*
Consolidation of the process of nomination and approval of the Corazon Reserve by 
UNESCO  
 
*
Implementation of a strategy for working administrative mechanisms and coordination of the 
Corazon Reserve's binational management mechanisms.  
 
B) Strengthening and Improvement of the Sustainability of the National Protected Areas 
Systems  
Page  3
The Corazon Reserve constitutes a huge area, representing well over half the total area of the 
two countries' protected area systems. A project focused on the Corazon Reserve is thus an 
appropriate vehicle for addressing systemic issues in the sustainability of the protected area 
systems of both countries. This component aims to promote the establishment of policies, legal 
frameworks, and financial and administration mechanisms to assure the sustainability of the 
National Protected  
 
Areas Systems (NPASs) of Honduras and Nicaragua. Currently, the budgetary and personnel 
allocations of the national governments are insufficient for the management of the NPASs and 
are being reduced, provoking a deterioration of in the protected areas and limiting their 
conservation and development potential.  
 
In Honduras, the World Bank's previous GEF project and the Rural Land Administration 
Project have promoted a Protected Areas Fund and a reform of the Forestry/Protected Areas law. 
In  
 
February 2005 the Fund was officially created but still needs to be consolidated and made 
operational. In Nicaragua, much remains to be done in addressing issues of financial 
sustainability, private sector participation, and comanagement. The activities carried out under 
the Corazon project will lay the groundwork for a proposed GEF project, implemented by 
UNDP,  
 
which will build on this work to further improve the NPAS of Nicaragua. In Nicaragua, work 
under the Corazon project will focus specifically on the NPAS in the Atlantic Coast area, while 
the UNDP project will have a broader geographic focus. This project component will support 
policy reforms, legal reforms, training, and advances to financial sustainability through 
environmental service payments and other mechanisms. It is also intended to use project funds to 
contribute to the patrimonial fund of the Honduran Protected Areas Fund (jointly with the 
Forestry and Rural Productive Project, from which the Government of Honduras has designated 
additional seed funds to be directed to the patrimonial fund).  
 
Subcomponents of this component include:  
 
*
Development and strengthening of financial sustainability mechanisms of the National 
Protected Areas Systems, including the management of financial contributions.  
 
*
Technical, legal, and administrative strengthening of the National Protected Areas Systems.  
 
C) Implementation of Management Plans in Constituent Protected Areas of the Corazon 
Reserve  
 
The objective of this component is to harmonize and implement management plans within the 
Corazon Reserve, with social participation. These plans are the operational tools for the  
 
participatory management of the Reserve. The current GEF Nicaragua Atlantic Biological 
Corridor (ABC) has financed management plans for areas in the Mosquitia adjacent to Bosawas  
 
Reserve and GTZ and USAID have financed management plans in Bosawas Biosphere 
Reserve. In Honduras, the current GEF Project Biodiversity in Priority Areas has financed 
management plans  
 
in the Tawahka Biosphere Reserve and the Patuca National Park and GTZ has done likewise in 
the Platano Biosphere Reserve. However, these plans have been created and in the absence of 
this project would be implemented in isolation. By harmonizing these plans, the project will help 
assure a more rational management of cross-boundary natural resources, more effective  
Page  4
conservation of ecosystems, easier sharing of information, economies of scale, and learning 
opportunities. This component will also help the respective protected area administrations of  
 
Nicaragua and Honduras implement the plans, through a community-based co-management 
structure. This integrated management structure does not imply a single plan for the reserve, but  
 
rather that it will benefit from a binational coordination and synchronization encompassing 
existing plans and activities.  
 
Subcomponents of this component include:  
 
*
Programmatic integration of the management plans of the Corazon Reserve  
 
*
Participative implementation of the management plans of the Corazon Reserve  
 
D) Strengthen the focus on biodiversity in community natural resource management, as well as 
local communities  
 
One of the primary objectives of this component is strengthening local communities and 
providin them with the tools necessary to promote a better management of natural resources. A 
special emphasis is placed on local and binational indigenous institutions. The component also 
focuses on  
 
strengthening local communities in their own management of natural resources, with an 
ultimate goal of enhancing the mainstreaming of biodiversity conservation into everyday 
productive activities. In part, the project will focus on agricultural subsistence activities but 
primarily on community-based forestry. This component will be closely linked and jointly 
implemented with major cofinancing from the two associated IDA projects with similar forestry 
management goals.  
 
The focus will be on the management of natural resources, training, and provision of assistance 
through subprojects, as well as on environmental education efforts promoting biodiversity 
conservation and the sustainable use of biodiversity.  
 
Although not intended to be a land administration or land titling project, it is recognized that 
resolution of land titling and land territory conflicts must be addressed in some areas of the 
Corazon Reserve in order to advance with other components. Under the component where funds 
are allocated for strengthening of local communities, it is intended to provide substantive support 
to indigenous communities and associations in the pursuit of communal titling. Other World 
Bank projects in both countries as well as other international cooperation projects have a special 
focus in this area and substantial funding available, so the Corazon Project will focus on better  
 
coordination between these efforts and facilitating the access of indigenous communities to 
appropriate resources.  
 
This component is cofinanced by $15 million in investments under two partially-blended IDA 
Credits (Forests and Rural Productivity Project in Honduras and Support to the PRORURAL  
 
SWAp Project in Nicaragua), which are also focused on community-based natural resource 
management.  
 
Subcomponents of this component are:  
 
*
Strengthening local organizations, especially indigenous organizations  
 
*
Promotion of sustainable production systems for goods and services, and commercialization  
 
*
Strengthening of formal and informal environmental education  
Page  5
E) Monitoring and Information Management  
 
Effective management of the Corazon Reserve and the protected area systems of both countries 
requires a continuing emphasis on monitoring and management of environmental information. 
This component seeks to ensure the continued monitoring of the Corazon Reserve through 
harmonized monitoring systems, create an information-sharing relationship with national and  
 
international environmental and risk management systems, and support scientific research 
promoting better natural resource management. In order to ensure socioeconomic and biological  
 
monitoring, training and equipment are needed, and systematic and harmonized methodologies 
must be established and implemented. Information management activities will coordinate with 
and be based on existing programs at national levels (e.g., the National Environmental 
Information System (SINIA) in Nicaragua) and at regional levels, the Mesoamerican 
Environmental Information System (SIAM) and the Inter-American Biological Information 
Network (IABIN). Research to promote a better use of natural resources will also be supported in 
order to further project objectives.  
 
Subcomponents of this component are:  
 
*
Socioeconomic and biodiversity monitoring  
 
*
Linkages to information systems  
 
*
Support to research  
 
F) Project Administration  
 
This component supports the effective and efficient administration and operation of the 
Corazon project. Activities will include project coordination, audits, financial management, a 
mid-term review and activities related to project closing. Other activities include the 
coordination of a small  
 
grants program, likely by taking advantage of existing programs, a communications strategy, 
publications, the systematization of project information, and participation in trips or conferences.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Corazon Reserve extends in Honduras from the Platano Biosphere Reserve through the 
Tawahka Asagni Indigenous Reserve and Patuca National Park, to the Bosawas Biosphere 
Reserve in Nicaragua. Honduras and Nicaragua jointly submitted a proposal to UNESCO in 
August 2004 to form the Corazon Transboundary Biosphere Reserve, as an overarching strategic 
instrument to manage the area.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The need for safeguard capacity is relatively limited in this project. The needed capacity is in 
place as has been determined during supervision of two similar predecessor projects in each  
 
country as well as during project preparation. Safeguard requirements specific to the IDA 
cofinancing have been addressed separately under those two operations.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (LCSEN) 
 
Page  6
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Effects of the project on the environment are likely to be overwhelmingly positive, stemming 
from better conceptualization and implementation of conservation strategies, increased capacity 
for protection, a shift to more sustainable land use, improved biodiversity conservation and a 
more sustainable use of natural resources. Possible negative inputs stemming from the 
construction  
 
of
minor infrastructure for reserve facilities and trails, as well as potential income 
generating activities promoted by Component D, will be addressed in an environmental 
management plan. As these activities are designed to be sustainable, take the conservation of 
biodiversity and natural resources into  
 
account, and have the smallest possible footprint, impact on the environment is expected to 
be minimal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project provides support to community forestry activities through the sustainable 
harvesting of timber and non-timber forest resources in the buffer areas of the reserve, but will 
not finance commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment. The project 
will provide technical assistance and  training to community forestry groups so that they may 
comply with the relevant protected area management norms and  regulations, and provide 
technical assistance and small grants to promote more sustainable forestry techniques. These 
activities will be carefully screened, and are designed to replace less sustainable techniques and 
forest management strategies currently in use in the buffer zones of the reserve, and should 
therefore lead to a more sustainable use of forest resources.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
There is a slight possibility that this project will trigger OP 4.09 as the project work with 
community forestry and agroforestry activities in the reserve area. Although only a possibility, 
small amounts of herbicides or pesticides could be potentially procured and used under the 
project. The project team has therefore developed a short Pest Management Plan (PMP) which 
provides guidance on cultural practices and biological controls to control insects and diseases 
and information on integrated pest management. Should biocide use prove to be considered 
necessary, the PMP lays out guidance to ensure the lowest possible  
 
environmental impact, training in safe pesticide use, handling and disposal.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
The project is not expected to have any negative impact on movable or immovable objects, 
sites, structures, groups of structures, natural features or landscapes with archeological, 
paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural significance. The 
assessment carried out during project preparation indicated that it would be very unlikely that 
any project activity would have any conceivable impact, positive or negative, on physical 
cultural resources. Nevertheless, in the unlikely event that project activities were to have such a 
potential impact (for example, if an archeological site were uncovered during biological 
monitoring activities), the Environmental Assessment studies include abbreviated guidelines on 
what measures should be taken if a physical cultural resource were to be endangered by the 
management strategies or productive activities of the project.   
Page  7
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
The project will work directly with the Tawahka, Sumu-Mayangna,  Pech, Garifuna and 
Miskito peoples in the reserve area. Indigenous groups are expected to be the primary 
beneficiaries of the project, and the overall impact on local indigenous people is expected to be 
highly positive. In order to minimize potential  negative affects, all activities have been designed 
to be compatible with local cultures, and a special emphasis has been placed on strengthening 
local and binational indigenous organizations in order to allow them to maximize benefits gained 
from this project and other initiatives. Indigenous groups were consulted throughout project 
preparation, and the implementation of the project will be highly participatory at all stages. A 
stand-alone Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) will be prepared.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental, social, and indigenous assessments are being implemented and will be 
completed by mid-May.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
03/10/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
03/14/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
03/14/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
