                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                   Report No.: 30300



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 6, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Chile                                     Project ID: P088498
Project Name:                                      Task Team Leader: Lauritz B. Holm-
Higher Education Improvement Project               Nielsen
(1st Phase APL)

Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2005           Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2005
Managing Unit: LCSHE                               Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                   Loan
Sector: Tertiary education (100%)                  Theme: Education for the knowledge
                                                   economy (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IBRD: 25
Other financing amounts by source: 75                                                 ($m)



B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]


The Project would support Chile's transition to a knowledge economy by increasing the effectiveness of
its higher education system. Specifically, the Development Objective of the project would be to increase
the effectiveness of public funding for Higher Education by enhancing coherence, responsiveness, equity
and quality in the system, through stronger accountability for performance. The objective is closely
linked to the identified sector issues which include:
·   Internal inefficiencies. Long first careers associated with undue completion time and high dropout
    rates and insufficient economies of scale in tertiary programs are sources of waste in Chilean tertiary
    education. Furthermore, few provisions have been made for holding universities accountable for the
    use of funds received from the Government.
·   Inadequate coherence and responsiveness of tertiary education. Chilean tertiary education does not
    build on a clear strategy for responding to student needs, balancing diversification and specialization
    between institutions and meeting industry demand for advanced skills due in part to insufficient
    capacity in the Ministry of Education to lead and incentivize change.
·   Bottlenecks for equitable participation. In recent years, the GoC has made considerable advances in
    increasing the coverage of student financial assistance. Nonetheless, bottlenecks persist such as lack
    of advanced learning options for insufficiently prepared secondary graduates and lack of articulation
    between tertiary programs resulting in educational dead-ends for students enrolling in non-university
    tertiary education.

·    Quality of tertiary education varies considerably. Despite considerable advances in quality assurance,
     potential exists for improving the quality of Chilean tertiary education. Among other things,
     disincentives for staff to retire have made it difficult to bring dynamic scholars with advanced degrees
     into the faculty.

The following indicators would be included to monitor progress towards the Development Objective: (i)
the average number of students per tertiary course; (ii) the percentage of public funding for tertiary
education allocated on a performance basis; (iii) transfer of low income students between non-university
and university tertiary institutions; (iv) tertiary graduation by income quintile; and (v) earnings of
university graduates.


C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
The Development Objective would be addressed through two components: (i) strengthening institutional
framework for higher education including equity and (ii) funds to enhance coherence, equity and quality.

(A) Strengthening institutional framework for higher education. Subcomponents: (i) sector oversight and
     regulation; (ii) policies and strategies for higher education; e.g. for degree structure and curricular
     innovation; sufficiency of student financial assistance; preparatory programs for inadequately
     prepared entering students and mechanisms for the transfer of academic credits; (iii) establishment of
     a national observatory for tertiary education; and (iv) project implementation.

(B) Funds to enhance coherence, efficiency, equity and quality. This component would comprise two
     sub-components:

(i) Innovation fund for tertiary education. This sub-component would be used to incentivize innovations
and strengthen tertiary programs in areas critical to reaching the Development Objective. Proposals would
be evaluated by peers based on transparent eligibility and selection criteria, resulting in the successful
proposals being those that best meet the specific objectives of the selection round and have appropriate
institutional support. The fund would provide support through three lines: (a) technical training at the
tertiary level, e.g. quality improvements in institutions enrolling low income students; (b) undergraduate
university education, e.g. transition programs for inadequately prepared entering students and
strengthening of pedagogical programs; and (c) post-graduate university education, e.g. support for
doctoral programs in areas closely linked to the needs of the Chilean economy.

(ii) Performance agreements to stimulate institutional restructuring and modernization. This sub-
component would increase accountability for the use of public subsidies through institutional performance
agreements. In doing so, the sub-component would contribute to the Development Objective by providing
an incentive for institutions to implement plans of action to enhance access for low income students,
improve quality based on results from the accreditation process and increase efficiency by reducing
dropouts and reforming the degree structure. Each agreement would be negotiated between the institution
and the Ministry of Education. The agreements would be multi-year and contain funding commitments
for the first year and projections for subsequent years of the agreement; agreed targets for institutional
restructuring and modernization; and indicators to monitor progress. Based on annual reviews compiling
quantitative and qualitative evidence, Government financing would be adjusted in a transparent manner
according to the performance of each institution measured against the targets reflected in the agreement.
The Bank would disburse/reimburse against a fixed percentage of the payments made under each
agreement and would monitor the GoC's assessment of institutional performance on which it base the
payments.

The proposed operation was discussed with the GoC with the aim of a long-term, on-going partnership
(APL of 8-10 years duration comprising two or three phases). A sustained engagement is critical to
successfully implementing the Government's strategy for the sub-sector and would permit a deepening of
the reform process over time.

The first phase would: (i) strengthen the capacity for government sector planning and oversight; (ii)
support studies addressing sector issues such as the sufficiency of the student financial support system;
(iii) establish an information system for higher education; and (iv) enter institutional performance-based
funding agreements with 4-6 universities gauged to have information systems that will allow for the
tracking of results. The second phase would: (i) include all 25 traditional universities in the performance-
based funding system and (ii) initiate actions arising from the sector studies, e.g. actions to improve
participation of low income students in tertiary education. A possible third phase would achieve a
transition from the current historically based institutional funding to an entirely performance-based
funding system.

The triggers used to decide when to move from the first to the second phase would include: (i)
establishment of the National Observatory for Higher Education; (ii) entering of performance contracts in
at least four tertiary institutions; and (iii) completed design and implementation strategy for innovation of
the tertiary degree structure and curricula. Triggers for a potential third phase would include the
development of a strategy for phasing out the historically-based institutional funding system.

The following alternatives were considered: First, investment in a student loan scheme that would
improve access of low income students to tertiary education. This alternative was rejected due to
considerable government commitment in this area. Between 1997 and 2003 public support for student
financial assistance increased 87 percent in real terms to 31 percent of public spending on higher
education. In addition, a proposed law ­ likely to be adopted in late 2004 ­ would open financial
assistance to students attending all accredited tertiary institutions. Furthermore, the Government is
operating a scholarship program targeting indigenous students. Second, focusing the project exclusively
on improving the quality and relevance of non-university tertiary education. This alternative was rejected
due to the importance of building bridges to the university system, the need for a broad financing reform
in tertiary education and the priority given by the GoC to strengthening graduate education. Third,
implementing a legal framework reform up front. This alternative was rejected since changes in the
funding of the 25 traditional universities would likely meet strong resistance from both political interests
and students. As a result, the Government has a pragmatic approach, building the case for legislative
action on the basis of results rather than more radical immediate reforms.



D. Project location (if known)

[Guideline: If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation]



E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

The Bank has excellent experience with the Borrower's Institutional Capacity from three projects in the
same sub-sectors: Chile Millennium Science Initiative; Chile Higher Education and Chile: Science for
the Knowledge Economy.

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


                   Safeguard Policy
Applicable?
                   If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
      [ ]          Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
     N.A
      [ ]          Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
     N.A
      [ ]          Pest Management (OP 4.09)
     N.A
      [ ]          Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
     N.A
      [x]          Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
                   The project would increase the quality of tertiary education in unrepresented
                   regions and seek ways to improve access to university education for inadequately
                   prepared secondary graduates and students in non-university tertiary institutions.
                   As such, the project would have positive implications for tertiary learning
                   opportunities of poor and indigenous students.

                   The project would complement actions already taken by the Government to
                   secure the participation of indigenous populations in higher education. As part of
                   the Chile: Science for the Knowledge Economy Project a study on indigenous
                   post-secondary students was conducted. This study found no discrimination
                   against indigenous populations in Chilean higher education. Rather, the study
                   documented that the Government's scholarships program for indigenous
                   populations has been successful in increasing participation of indigenous students
                   in advanced education.
      [ ]          Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
     N.A
      [ ]          Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
     N.A
      [ ]          Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
     N.A
      [ ]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*
     N.A
      [ ]          Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
     N.A



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ ] B [X] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)




*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims on the
disputed areas

If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that
EA category (mandatory):

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared.

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:                        Name                                                               Date
  Task Team Leader:                               Lauritz B. Holm-Nielsen                                          10-08-04
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                Juan David Quintero                                              10-07-04
    Comments
  Sector Manager:                                 Eduardo Vélez Bustillo                                           10-08-04
    Comments




1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.


