Page  1
1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) 
Section I 
–
Basic Information 
Date ISDS Updated: January 19, 2005 
Report No.:AC1249
A. Basic Project Data 
 
A.1. Project Statistics 
Country: China 
Project ID: P086505 
Project: Ningbo Water and Environment 
Project 
TTL: Greg Browder  
Total project cost: US$291 million: 
1.  Ningbo Water Supply-US$158 million 
2.  Cixi Wastewater Management-US$128 million 
3. 
Institutional Development-US$5 million 
Appraisal Date: December 6-15, 2004 
Loan amount: IBRD: US$130 million 
Board Date: March 16, 2005 
  
Other financing amounts by source: 
Counterpart Funding: US$161million 
(Commercial Banks and Internal Cash) 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Sector: Water Supply and Sanitation 
Lending Instruments: SIL 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency 
recovery? 
Yes?
[
]
No?
[
X] 
Environmental Category:
 A
 
A.2. Project Objectives 
The Project will facilitate the expansion of water and wastewater services in Ningbo City and Cixi City  in 
an economically efficient and environmentally sustainable manner, thereby protecting public health, 
improving the environment, and sustaining the area’s rapid economic growth. 
A.3. Project Description 
 
The  Project has the following three components.   
 
Component 1: Ningbo Water Supply 
The component includes: i)  raw water supply line 
consisting of an intake tower in Jiakou reservoir and a 9.6 km tunnel; ii) 500,000 m3/day 
Maojiaping water treatment plant; and iii) treated water transmission pipes, including a 
new 47 km ring main around Ningbo City and transmission pipes from Maojiaping water 
treatment plant to the new ring main (approximately 20 kms distance). The component is 
a
significant part of Ningbo’s overall plan to increase water supply coverage in the City, 
improve water quality by accessing new water sources and upgrading water treatment, 
and enhance distribution system reliability and flexibility.  
 
Component 2: Cixi Wastewater
The component includes: i) two wastewater treatment 
plants, one located in  the north of Cixi (100,000 m3/day) and one in the east (50,000 
m3/d); and ii) associated collection system main and link sewers (230 km of pipe and 58 
pump stations).  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building
:
The component includes: i) 
support for the improvement of water planning, 
utilit
y
price and service regulation; ii) 
Page  2
2
enhancement of the Ningbo Water Supply Company (NWSC) and Cixi Municipal 
Sewerage Company (CMSC) operational and business management capacities; and iii) 
design review and construction management technical assistance to ensure smooth and 
high quality implementation of the infrastructure works. 
A.4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis: 
 
Ningbo is located on the East China Sea, approximately 175 km south of Shanghai on the 
southern edge of Hangzhou Bay.  Ningbo Municipality is part of Zhejiang Province, but 
is classified as a “sub-provincial municipality” which means it is a separate economic 
planning unit and is not administratively controlled by the provincial government. With 
its excellent deep water harbor, Ningbo boasts the second busiest port in China and has a 
thriving industrial sector focused on the export of manufactured goods. The Ningbo 
Water Supply component will cover the urban districts in Ningbo which together are 
termed the “Ningo City” with a total population of 2.5 million. The districts are: Haishu, 
Jiangdong, Jiangbei, Zhenhai, Beilun, and Yinzhou Districts. The wastewater component 
will cover Cixi City, located north of Ningbo City and bordering on Hangzhou Bay. Cixi 
City has approximately 1.2 million residents, approximately 60% of whom live in urban 
areas or towns. 
 
Ningbo has a humid subtropical monsoon climate with annual average temperature of 
16.9 
o
C
(max 36.3 
o
C
and min –5.0 
o
C
)
and precipitation of 1128 mm. The urban area of 
Ningbo City is located in flat plain of Yongjiang River basin with an average elevation of 
3.0 m. Yinzhou District, which is a more rural area in Ningbo City, is a low hilly area 
with average elevation of 100-450 m. The main river system is Yongjiang River system, 
including two major tributaries (Yuyao River and Fenghua River) and densely distributed 
small rivers and canal systems. One of the sub-tributaries to the Fenghua River, via the 
Yingjiang River, is the Zhangxi River on which the Jiaokou and Zhougongzhai reservoirs 
are located. The Zhangxi River is a medium-sized river with average monthly flows 
downstream of Jiaokou ranging from 4 m3/s in winter to 18 m3/s in summer. The 
distance between Jiaokou reservoir, which is the water supply source for project, and the 
confluence of the Zhangxi River and the larger Yingjiang River is approximately 15 kms. 
The Jiaokou reservoir was commissioned in 1975, and construction for the Zhougongzhai 
dam started in 2003 and will finish in 2007.  
 
The Ningbo Water Supply Company (NWSC) currently serves 1.26 million people in the 
core urban area with a total treatment capacity of 820,000 m3/d. The remaining 1.3 
million people obtain water from 29 town water supply systems with an estimated 
treatment capacity of 610,000 m3/d, or are self-supplied. Most large industries 
independently draw water from local surface water sources, and the total estimated self-
supply capacity is 460,000 m3/d.   Both NWSC and the towns draw water primarily from 
local rivers with poor water quality and unreliable supplies.  The Ningbo Municipal 
Government has directed the NWSC to incorporate the small town systems, supply water 
to all industries, and dramatically improve service quality. To meet these targets
,
the 
Page  3
3
Ningbo Water Conservancy Bureau has recently finished construction of one medium-
sized reservoir, Baixi, and will complete the Zhougongzhai reservoir in 2006. These 
reservoirs, along with three existing other reservoirs, will provide high quality raw water 
supplies, and NWSC is investing in associated conveyance lines, three new water 
treatment plants, the first regional water transmission ring main in China, and an 
expanded distribution system. 
 
Cixi City, located north of Ningbo City and bordering on Hangzhou Bay, is an affluent 
and rapidly developing area, covering 1154 sq. km with a coast line of about 80 km.  The 
total urban/town population in 2005 is around 720,000 and is expected to grow to around 
1.3 million by 2020. Careful planning and large investments in water supply and water 
pollution control are necessary to support Cixi’s rapid economic development. Cixi is 
located on a flat coastal plain and the scope for constructing water supply reservoirs is 
very limited. Cixi is addressing this constraint through two measures: i) importing water 
from the Caoerjiang basin in Eastern Zhejiang; and ii) upgrading a network of canals in 
Cixi to collect stormwater run-off for agricultural and landscape uses. The canal network 
is of particular importance because the treated effluent from the project-financed 
wastewater treatment plants will be discharged into this system.  
 
Only 10% of the wastewater generated in Cixi City currently receives wastewater 
treatment which is provided by the Jiaochangshan central city wastewater treatment plant. 
The Jiaochangshan plant collects wastewater from an area of 10 sq. km, comprising only 
one third of the central city area. The current capacity of the WWTP is 20,000 m3/day 
but the plant is being expanded to 45,000 m3/d in 2005. Municipal sewage from the 
central city and each town is discharged directly into the river and canal network, with 
the result that most of the canals and main river networks are polluted to Class V 
standards or worse. In addition to causing environmental problems, the lack of 
comprehensive wastewater management is inhibiting economic development as industries 
are reluctant to move into estates without proper environmental management. 
 
Proper treatment and disposal of wastewater is essential to attracting new industries and 
maintaining the ecological balance. Fortunately, most of the industries in Cixi are modern 
and profitable enterprises which are able to afford proper industrial pre-treatment.  
 
Disposal of treated wastewater poses a major challenge in Cixi because of the shallow 
shoreline along Hangzhou Bay. The shoreline in Cixi is constantly expanding due the 
natural accumulation of sediment. This natural phenomena creates opportunities for land 
development, but also places constraints on disposal of effluent into Hangzhou Bay. The 
shallow bay, combined with large diurnal tides, makes an outfall impractical and thus the 
treated effluent will be disposed into the canal network. The area along the Cixi coastline 
has rich benthos resources and good vegetation and provides excellent habitat for 
migratory and indigenous water birds. 
B. Check Environmental Category 
A
[
X
], B [ ], C [ ], FI [ ] 
 
Page  4
4
Comments:
 The project is classified as a Category A project given its regional scope, 
significant construction activities, and focus on water and wastewater issues. Full EIA 
has been prepared for the project by local EA institutes with the assistance of 
international consultants.
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
 
Yes No 
 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
4.01) [x] 
[ 
]  
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) [] 
[x] 
 
Pest Management
(OP 4.09) 
[ ] 
[x] 
 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 
11.03
-) 
[x] [ 
] 
 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) [x] 
[ 
] 
 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
[x]  
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) [ 
] 
[x] 
 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) [ 
x] 
[] 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
[x]  
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/GP 7.50) 
[
]
[x]  
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  5
5
Section II 
–
Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
Environmental Assessment:  
The project as a whole will have significant net positive 
impact as it will improve water supply quality in Ningbo City and ambient water quality 
in Cixi City, and promote sustainable development of Ningbo Municipality. The China 
Academy of Environmental Science/Ningbo Environmental Science Institute prepared 
the EIA for the Ningbo Water Supply component, and the Beijing Novel Environmental 
Protection Co. Ltd prepared the EIA for the Cixi Wastewater component. Both EIAs have 
been approved the Chinese State Environmental Protection Agency (SEPA). An 
international consulting firm, Sogreah, prepared a consolidated Project EIA and EMP 
according to Bank’s operational policies and based on the Chinese EIAs. A 
comprehensive EIA was also carried out by Ningbo Municipality before the 
commencement of the Zhougongzhai reservoir project in 2001 and this was approved by 
SEPA and reviewed by the Bank task team during project preparation. The summary 
results from the Zhougongzhai reservoir were also incorporated into the Project EIA. The 
Project EIA report addressed relevant environmental issues and developed necessary 
mitigation measures in the EMP. Key environmental issues are as follows: 
 
Ningbo Water Supply
.
The key environmental impacts identified during the analysis of 
this component include: 
 
a) Impacts on Zhangxi River Downstream of Jiaokou Reservoir: 
There are two reservoirs 
on the Zhangzi River which supply water for the project--Jiakou reservoir and the 
Zhougongzhai reservoir which is located 8 kms upstream of Jiakou and is currently under 
construction.  The raw water intake for the Maojiaping water treatment plant will be 
located at Jiakou reservoir.  The Zhangxi River flows into the western Yinzhou plain and 
is secondary tributary to the Fenghua River via the larger Yingjiang River. The combined 
storage capacity of the two reservoirs is approximately 240 million cubic meters and the 
median annual inflow into Jiaokou reservoir is estimated at 280 million cubic meters.  
 
The analysis conducted during project preparation indicates that, when fully utilized, 
around half of the annual average inflow into Jiaokou reservoir will be diverted to 
Ningbo City.   The water balance calculations indicate that this will not have an adverse 
impact on other water users such as irrigation, animal husbandry, village water supplies, 
etc. The reason for the lack of impacts is the additional storage provided by 
Zhougongzhai reservoir. During the critical dry season months of April-May, Jiaokou 
reservoir will release sufficient water to meet downstream demands, while still satisfying 
the demand from Ningbo City.  The rapid conversion of land from agricultural to urban 
and industrial use is expected to reduce the irrigation demand over the next ten to twenty 
years, although the conservative water balance calculations assumed that the amount of 
agricultural land would remain unchanged and would be used for high water consuming 
rice cultivation.
Page  6
6
The annual hydrograph on the Zhangxi River will be modified due to the Zhougongzhai 
reservoir and the diversion of water to Ningbo City, with reduced wet season flows and 
moderately reduced dry season flows. The estimated flow variations on an average year 
before the diversion are 3.9 m3/s (January)-20 m3/s (August), whereas after the diversion 
the flow range is estimated to be within the range of 3-5 m3/s throughout the year. 
During a drought year (P=90%), the low flow in January is only 0.4 m3/s, whereas after 
the diversion a minimum flow of 0.8 m3/s will be maintained under all conditions. 
 
While the reduction in high season flows is likely to have some impact on the river 
benthic fauna and fishery communities, the actual impact is difficult to predict in 
advance. An analysis of the Zhangxi River shows that it does not have any identified rare 
species or important commercial fisheries, although there may be an impact on some 
sedentary fishes which are used by local residents, such as the snakehead fish. The EIA 
concludes that the planned flow releases from the Jiaokou reservoir, after the diversion, 
can meet the water and ecological demands without causing significant environmental 
impact. 
 
The analysis presented in the EIA is appropriate at this stage of the planning process. 
However, environmental flow assessment is a complex issue and thus a more 
comprehensive study will be conducted during implementation and prior to the start of 
water diversions to further optimize the operation of Jiaokou reservoir. In particular, it 
might be useful to have occasional larger flows to preserve an element of natural 
variability. Although no adverse impacts are expected from the water diversion, Ningbo 
will establish a monitoring an
d
“Grievance Redress System” to identify and rectify any 
unexpected impacts. The Redress System will include notifying local authorities, posting 
signs along the river, and other appropriate notification methods, as well as establishing a 
system for recording, investigating, and where necessary, rectifying any adverse impacts. 
The Environmental Flow Assessment and Grievance Redress System is included in the 
EMP.   
 
b) Ningbo City Wastewater: 
Ningbo City has recently prepared a Wastewater Master 
Plan, the first phase of which (approximately US$140 million in wastewater 
infrastructure) is being financed by the World Bank under the existing Zhejiang Urban 
Environment Project.  The Ningbo Water Supply component of the proposed Project 
would not result in large additional increases in per-capita water use, rather it would 
provide Ningbo City water users with higher quality water and more reliable service.  
Therefore, the incremental impact of the Project on wastewater generation is expected to 
be moderate and the investments planned under the Zhejiang Urban Environment Project 
will help meet wastewater needs in Ningbo.  
 
Cixi Wastewater component
.
a) 
Wastewater Treatment
:
Both the Northern and Eastern wastewater treatment plants are 
designed to meet discharge standard Class 1A, with limits of 10 mg/l BOD and SS, and 
removal of nutrients to 15 mg/l total
-
nitrogen and 0.5 mg/l of phosphorus. The proposed 
Page  7
7
treatment process is a modified A/O (anaerobic followed by aerobic) with tertiary 
treatment. Two options were considered for the tertiary treatment process: i) engineered 
wetland; and ii) conventional filtration. Since the land in the vicinity of the plants is 
recently reclaimed coastal land with no development and is owned by the Cixi City 
government, there are no land acquisition costs or resettlement issues. The engineered 
wetland was therefore chosen as the preferred alternative because it helps create 
ecological habitat as well as providing robust treatment with considerable buffering 
capacity. 
 
b) Effluent Disposal:
 Two alternative treated effluent disposal options for the Cixi 
wastewater treatment plants were analyzed during project preparation: i) disposal to 
Hangzhou Bay, and ii) disposal to the Cixi canal network.  Due to the shallow depth of 
Hangzhou Bay off the coast of Cixi, the large tidal fluctuations, and since water is scarce 
in Cixi and the treated effluent is therefore considered a resource, this analysis showed 
that the preferred alternative is to discharge to the Cixi canal network and to reuse this 
effluent for agricultural and landscape irrigation.   
 
Water quality modeling was conducted for both the canal network and the marine near-
shore areas. Various scenarios were simulated and the modeling results confirmed that 
the project will significantly improve the water quality of the overall Cixi canal network. 
There will be a moderate deterioration of water quality in the vicinity of the wastewater 
treatment plant discharge points, but the overall water quality is considered acceptable by 
SEPA. Modeling was also conducted for different treatment plant discharge location 
options. A multi-point discharge option was selected for the Northern wastewater 
treatment plant to minimize water quality impacts. For the Eastern wastewater treatment 
plant, a site on the Shitangheng river between two canal-sea sluice gates was chosen as 
the optimal discharge location. The feasibility of including an additional discharge 
point(s) for the Eastern plant will be considered during the operations stage and is 
included in the EMP. 
 
During the flood periods, the canal-sea gates in the vicinity of the two treatment plants 
will be opened to release flood waters to Hangzhou Bay. The flood waters will be mixed 
with treated effluent and thus the impact of these occasional releases on near-shore areas 
was modeled under different scenarios. The scenarios considered various tidal regimes, 
and flood season and dry season flows. The modeling indicated that the mixing zone 
during discharge periods is kept within 2 kms from the shoreline, and the resulting water 
quality would be in compliance with the national ocean function zone requirements. The 
modeling results were accepted by SEPA. The task team noted that there is still potential 
for minor adverse impacts along the shoreline which supports considerable fishing and 
aquaculture activities. This impact might be reduced if the mixing and retention of the 
treated wastewater in the canals were improved and short-circuiting to the sea gates 
avoided. The EMP includes a program to evaluate various options during the operational 
phase. 
 
c) 
Sludge Management
:
The sludge from the treatment plants will be dewatered through 
gravity thicke
ning followed by centrifuges. A 
total 67,000 m3 of sludge with a moisture 
Page  8
8
content of 78% will be generated per year from the two plants. The sludge will be 
transported to nearby municipal landfill sites in trucks with air-tight tanks. The sludge 
from the Northern plant will be disposed in the Cixi West landfill, and the sludge from 
the Eastern plant will be disposed in the Eastern landfill. The Western landfill was 
expanded and upgraded in 2002, and currently has 10 empty cells which will use 
impermeable liners and leachate treatment systems. Cixi City plans to upgrade the 
Eastern landfill in 2005 and utilize impermeable liners and leachate treatment systems for 
the four remaining cells. Upgrading of the Eastern landfill is included in the EMP. The 
Western landfill is forecast to reach full capacity around 2012, and Eastern landfill will 
reach capacity in 2015. Since the two landfills will be full after only 5-7 years of 
wastewater treatment plant operation, the EMP calls for the Cixi Municipal Sewerage 
Company to develop a sludge management plan to consider alternative long-term options 
for sludge management. Monitoring of sludge quality is also included in the EMP to 
ensure that the sludge can be safely disposed in a municipal landfill. 
 
e) 
Industrial Pollution Control
:
An assessment of the industrial pollution control system 
in Cixi was conducted during project appraisal. Control of industrial discharges to both 
the canal and sewerage systems by the Cixi City Environmental Protection Bureau 
appears to be effective and high level of compliance is reported. Industries account for 
approximately half of the wastewater discharges in Cixi, and a rapid pace of industrial 
growth is planned for Cixi City over the next decade. It is expected, however, that the 
new industries will take the form of modern and more efficient plants with relatively 
reduced levels of pollution and more efficient use of resources in general. 
 
f
)
Environmental Technical Assistance: 
Cixi will use the Bank loan for technical 
assistance in the following areas: wastewater treatment plant operations, sludge 
management, industrial pollution control (for both CMSC and the EPB), canal water 
quality management, and building business management capacity in CMSC. 
 
Dam Safety: 
There are two dams who reservoirs supply water to the Maojiaping water 
treatment plant and thus are directly associated with the NWEP: i) Jiaokou dam which 
was commissioned in 1975 (stone-masonary dam, 67 meters high and 407 meters long, 
and 120 million m3 storage); and ii) Zhonggongzhai which started construction in 2003 
and will be completed in 2006 (concrete arch dam, 126 meters high, 240 meters long, and 
112 million m3 storage). There are an additional three dams which will supply water to 
the ring main to be constructed under this project: i) Baixi Dam completed in 2001 (rock-
fill dam, 124 meters high and 398 meters long, 168 million m3 storage); ii) Hengshan 
Dam completed in 1995 (rock-fill dam, 70 meters high, 123 meters long, and 111 million 
m3 storage); and iii) Tingxia Dam completed in 1985 (concrete gravity dam, 76 meters 
high, 317 meters long, and 150 million m3 storage). An independent dam safety expert 
contracted by the World Bank has reviewed the safety of the four existing dams and 
progress on the construction of the Zhougongzhai and has found them to satisfactory. The 
Zhejiang Provincial Bureau of Water Resources also conducts periodic Dam Safety Panel 
reviews of all major dams in the province. Because of the direct connection with the 
Project, Emergency Preparation Plans for Zhougongzhai and Jiaokou dams acceptable to 
Bank will be prepared and implemented during project implement
ation. The Bank task 
Page  9
9
team will review and document for the Project files the construction progress, 
commissioning, and the first filling of Zhougongzhai dam. The Bank task team will 
include a qualified dam safety expert to carry out this work. 
 
Cultural Property: 
Surveys indicate that project activities would not affect any above 
ground artifacts with archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique 
natural values as defined under 
OPN 11.03
.
However, most of the construction activity 
will involve excavation work and thus all contracts will include standard clauses which 
follow Chinese law and regulations regarding chance finds during construction.  
 
On important cultural relic is Tashan Weir which is located downstream of Jiaokou dam 
on the Zhangxi River. Built in the year 833, it is now an old cultural site under national 
preservation. It is 134.4 meters long, 10 meters high and 4.8 meters wide. Its surface is 
made of stones and its body made of wood and stones. Tashan Weir remains intact and is 
functioning to prevent salt water, store fresh water, channel water into the fields and 
sluice water elsewhere. The diversion of water from the Zhangxi River is not expected to 
have an impact on the structural integrity nor functioning of the Tashan weir. The weir 
was reinforced in 1995, and the Bank team confirmed that the weir appears to be in good 
structural condition. The cultural property safeguard is triggered in this instance as a 
recognition of the cultural importance of the Tashan weir, and not because of any 
expected negative impacts caused by the project. 
 
Resettlement: 
A
resettlement action plan (RAP) meeting 
the World Bank’s OP
/BP
4.12. has been prepared 
for the Ningbo Water Supply and Cixi Wastewater components.  Detailed surveys for all known 
resettlement and land acquisition have been completed. In the event there are additional resettlement needs, 
a
resettlement policy framework has been prepared. The surveys indicate that resettlement impacts are 
relatively small given the scope of the project. The ttable summarizes the impacts. 
 
The most significant impact is the temporary use of land during construction of the water 
supply pipes in Ningbo and the sewerage pipes in Cixi. The major permanent acquisition 
of land is for the Maojiaping water treatment plant. The detailed social-economic survey 
indicated there are no minority ethnic groups affected by land acquisition and house 
demolition.  
 
Summary of Resettlement Impacts
Permanent Land Acquisition: (ha)
60.3
Collective
16.2
State-Owned
44.1
Temporary Land Occupation (ha)
371.0
Collective
228.8
State-Owned
142.1
Building Demolition (m2)
3519
PrivateHouses--21 people affected
916
Enterprise House--58 people affected
620
Collective-Owned Buildings
350
State-Owned Buildings
1633
Population Affected (person)
5549
Permanent Land Acquisition
519
Tempoary Land Occupation
5030
Page  10
10
 
The Ningbo Water Supply Company (NWSC) and the Cixi Municipal Sewerage Company (CMSC) will be 
responsible for funding resettlement activities in coordination with local government officials. The PMO 
will establish a resettlement office, staffed with specialists from NWSC and CMSC, to manage and 
supervise resettlement. The resettlement funds will be channeled through the PMO-resettlement office 
directly to households and villages, thus reducing opportunities for delay or unauthorized commissions. 
Affected farmers (in particular affected women and surplus rural labor) will be encouraged to participate in 
the land restoration through broad consultation. Village committees will play an important role in 
monitoring resettlement and land acquisition activities. An independent monitoring institute will supervise 
resettlement activities twice a year according to the Bank requirement.
 
During preparation, the task team paid particular attention to the resettlement activities that have already 
been completed at the Zhougongzhai reservoir.  Approximately 967 households with 2,581 people have 
been successfully relocated from a poor, mountainous area to a developed area in Yinzhou District, and 
resettlement was completed in May, 2003. A World Bank team prepared a comprehensive due diligence 
report of the Zhougongzhai resettlement activities and concluded that all significant adverse impacts have 
been mitigated in a manner consistent with World Bank resettlement policies, and to the general 
satisfaction of the displaced persons.  
 
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area. 
 
Cixi Coastline Development:
 
The high suspended solids concentration in Hangzhou Bay, 
combined with the hydrological and tidal currents, results in sediment accretion along the 
northern Ningbo coastline, with accretion rates on the order of 50-100 meters per year. 
According to Cixi City’s Plan for Integrated Coastal Development (1997-2010), 
approximately 130 km
2
of land will be enclosed by sea-dikes between 2000-2010 .  The 
reclaimed land will be carefully planned and developed with agricultural and aquaculture 
areas, industrial estates, coastal tourism, and wetland conservation zones. The area 
outside of the sea dike is called the “beach area” and the width of the beach area varies 
depending on the tide but can extend hundreds of meters at low tide. Both the area inside 
and outside of the sea dike has rich benthos resources and vegetation, and provide an 
excellent habitat for migratory and indigenous water birds. In addition, there is 
considerable aquaculture in the near shore area (i.e. just outside the sea dikes) including 
snails, crabs, and fish. In contrast to most situations, wetland areas are actually being 
created in Cixi due to the sediment accretion along the coastline. 
 
The Cixi Government understands the importance of the coastal habitat and intends to 
conserve significant wetland areas and promote eco-tourism. A conceptual design for the 
wetland conservation program has already been developed and the Cixi Government 
intends to apply for GEF funds under the World Bank/GEF East Asia Seas Pollution 
Reduction Program (scheduled for FY06) to undertake more sophisticated eco-system 
planning. 
 
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant): 
Page  11
11
 
Location of Treatment Plants: 
A
comprehensive analysis was undertaken for the optimal 
location of the treatment plants. Three alternatives were considered for the Maojiaoping 
water treatment plant site. For the Cixi wastewater treatment plants, consideration was 
given to having one, two, or three plants. Comprehensive comparison among these 
options has been carried out with integrated consideration of technical, environmental, 
social and economic aspects. The final selection was made based on a set of criteria, e.g. 
avoidance of environmentally sensitive areas and cultural properties, less social 
interference, less land occupation, less environmental impact, shorter length of pipe 
network, safer operation, easy management, low cost, compatibility with local 
development planning, etc. 
 
Cixi Effluent Discharge: 
Consideration was given to constructing an outfall into 
Hangzhou Bay to dispose of the treated effluent. Given the shallow water in the Bay, 
large tidal fluctuations, and the low mixing rates, it was concluded that an outfall would 
be prohibitively expensive and environmentally risky. 
 
The selected alternative is to treat 
the wastewater to the highest possible standard and discharge into the Cixi canal network 
which has a large storage capacity and is used for agricultural and landscape irrigation.  
 
Ningbo Distribution System Layout: 
Different alternatives for the layout of the Ningbo 
City water distribution were examined. Since the city is essentially divided into three 
areas by rivers, consideration was given to maintaining the three independent distribution 
systems and upgrading the three existing associated water treatment plants. This 
alternative was rejected in favor of a ring main and two large treatment plants. The ring 
main-two plant option provides more flexibility and reliability, and the two new 
treatment plants are located outside of the core urban area in locations more convenient 
for receiving new raw water supplies. The long-term plan is to decommission the existing 
water treatment plants in the city, and release the land for higher value uses. 
 
Town Water Supply Systems: 
There are approximately 30 towns surrounding the core 
urban area in Ningbo City. Currently, these towns have their own water supply systems 
which rely on low-quality local surface water sources and inadequate treatment plants. 
One alternative would be to upgrade the existing town water systems and supply high 
quality untreated raw water. This alternative was rejected in favor of extending the 
NWSC service area to all towns in the future. The NWSC option was chosen because it 
would  ensure high quality water supplies for all City residents, lower costs (as the 
NWSC has clear economies of scale), and help equalize water supply tariffs throughout 
the City. 
 
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
Ningbo Municipality is a repeat borrower for the Bank with a high capacity to implement 
safeguards policies. The ongoing Zhejiang Urban Environmental Project includes four 
components in Ningbo City. Ningbo has developed a good understanding and experience 
implementing Wo
rld Bank safeguard policies. Specific measures to address safeguard 
Page  12
12
issues of this project during implementation are: 
 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP):  
The EMP specifies the appropriate 
environmental management and supervision mechanisms, mitigation measures, 
environmental monitoring plans, training plans and budget allocation necessary to 
implement the mitigation measures and strengthen the borrower’s capacity. There will be 
an environmental officer in the PMO to supervise the implementation of the EMP and 
both NWSC and CWSC will have environmental officers responsible for their 
components. The PMO, CMSC, and NWSC have sufficient capacity and funds to 
implement the EMP. 
 
Key environmental construction management issues include spoil reuse and/or proper 
planning of spoil disposal sites re-vegetation; using low noise equipment/techniques; 
restrictions on working hours and temporary sound barriers for sensitive sites; timely 
reclamation/re-vegetation of temporarily occupied land; use of coffer-dam and slope 
protection measures; and proper operational procedures of the contractors concerned for 
construction.  
 
Resettlement Action Plan: 
A
resettlement action plan (RAP) has been prepared for the 
Ningbo and Cixi components which meets the World Bank’s OP
/BP
4.12. Detailed 
surveys for all known resettlement and land acquisition have been completed. In the 
event there are additional resettlement needs, a resettlement policy framework has been 
prepared. The PMO will establish a resettlement office, staffed with specialists from 
NWSC and CMSC, to manage and supervise resettlement. The capacity of the 
implementing agencies and the PMO is considered adequate. 
 
Jiaokou and Zhougongzhi Dam-Emergency Preparedness Plan: 
This plan, which will be 
prepared during implementation, will specify the roles of responsible parties under 
imminent dam failure conditions, or when expected operational flow release threatens 
downstream life, property, or economic operations that depend on river flow levels.  It 
will include the following items: clear statements on the responsibility for dam operations 
decision making and for the related emergency communications; maps outlining 
inundation levels for various emergency conditions; flood warning system characteristics; 
and, procedures for evacuating threatened areas and mobilizing emergency forces and 
equipment. The Zhejiang Water Resources Conservancy Bureau will be responsible for 
preparation of the EPP. The Bureau is a well-established agency with significant 
technical expertise to undertake preparation of the EPP. 
 
Zhangxi River Environmental Flow Study: 
Environmental flows is a comprehensive term 
that incorporates all components of a river, is dynamic over time, takes cognizance of the 
need for a natural flow variability, and addresses social, economic issues and biophysical 
issues. Since a significant amount of water will be diverted from Jiaokou reservoir, it is 
necessary to study how to operate the reservoir to maintain eco-system functions of the 
Zhangxi river to the extent possible. A comprehensive study will be undertaken by 
following international best practice and under the Bank’s supervision. In addition, after 
the start of the diversion, Ningbo will establish a “Grievance 
Redress System
”
will 
Page  13
13
include notifying local authorities, posting signs along the river, and other appropriate 
notification methods, as well as establishing a system for recording, investigating, and 
where necessary, rectifying any adverse impacts. 
 
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The key project stakeholders are the Ningbo and Cixi City Governments, Ningbo Water 
Supply Company, Cixi Municipal Sewage Company, and local people who may lose land 
and livelihoods, villagers and communities that may be impacted because of the 
construction and operation of the project.  
 
EA Disclosure and Consultation
:
A
detailed Public Consultation Plan in accordance with 
Bank’s policies has been prepared for each of the two components.  This Plan outlines the 
overall consultation and information disclosure plan during EA preparation. 
Consultations were conducted in two rounds for the Water Supply component during 
March to October 2004 and in three rounds for Cixi Wastewater component during 
January to September 2004. More than 400 people were consulted, including project 
affected people and communities, local government agencies and experts.  The relevant 
information and documents were provided in the process of consultation. EIA reports 
have been disclosed in local libraries on September 3 and October 15, 2004 with notice 
announced via local newspapers. The draft EIA reports were also disclosed in the 
Infoshop on August 5, 2004, an updated version was submitted in November 2004,and 
the final version in January 2005. 
 
RAP Disclosure and Consultation: 
 During project preparation consultation has taken 
place through resettlement surveys and meetings with government officials and project-
affected people. These consultations influenced the design of the RAP. An information 
handbook was prepared for all project-affected people which outlines the project, 
resettlement policies and procedures. In addition, “land acquisition and building 
demolition” announcements have been provided to all affected parties. The full RAP was 
disclosed in Ningbo and Cixi libraries and government websites in October 2004. The 
draft RAP was disclosed in the World Bank Infoshop on August 5, 2004 and the final 
RAP was submitted in November 2004. 
 
Town Survey: 
Incorporation of the towns surrounding the core urban area in Ningbo City 
is one of the main objectives of the overall Ningbo City Water Supply Master Plan. 
Western Yinzhou District is facing the most critical water supply problems and seven 
towns are scheduled for rapid incorporation into NWSC. Surveys of these towns were 
undertaken to assess the demand for NWSC service, and the terms and conditions under 
which the towns would like to be incorporated. The survey included consultations with 
town and district officials, town water companies, and water users. Six of the seven  
towns strongly support the concept of NWSC service, although there are differences of 
views on how best to incorporate into NWSC. The Yinzhou District government is the 
primary decision maker for the towns. Currently, the Yinzhou government, Ningbo 
Municipal Government, and NWSC are in discussion on how best to provide NWSC 
Page  14
14
service to Yinzhou. 
Page  15
15
 
F. Disclosure Requirements  Date: November 23, 2004
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
     
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
09/03/04 and 10/15/04      
Date of submission to InfoShop 
August 2004; November, 2004; January 
2005 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the 
Executive Directors:  
January 26, 2005       
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
  August 2004; and November 2004 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
  October 2004     
Date of submission to InfoShop                                      August 2004; and November 
2004 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Not Applicable 
 
Pest Management Plan: 
Not Applicable
 
Dam Safety Management Plan: 
Not applicable
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain 
why. 
 
Section III 
–
Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:
 
Yes
No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report? 
X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and 
approve the EA report? 
X
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in 
the credit/loan? 
X
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats: 
Yes
No
Would the project result in any significant conversion  or 
degradation of critical natural habitats? 
 X 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation 
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include 
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
 
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property: 
Yes
No
Does the EA include adequate measures? 
X 
 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
N/A  
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement: 
Yes
No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy 
process been prepared? 
X
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and 
approve the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
X
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams: 
Yes
No
Page  16
16
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
—Dam Safety Audits 
Conducted 
X
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel 
of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?-Not 
necessary 
N/A  
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?-Will 
be prepared by December 31, 2006 
X
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: 
Yes
No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop? 
X
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
X
All Safeguard Policies: 
 
Yes
No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of the 
safeguard measures? 
X
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost? 
X 
 
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project 
implementation? 
X
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include 
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures? 
X
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with 
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project 
legal documents? 
X
Signed and submitted by:
 Name
Date
Task Team Leader: 
Greg Browder 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 1: 
John Morton 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 2: 
Chaohua Zhang 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 3: 
 
 
Approved by:
 Name
Date
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Glenn Morgan 
 
Comments: 
Sector Manager: 
Keshav Varma 
 
Comments: 
