Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/28/2005 
Report No.:  AC1751
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P096158 
Project Name:  China: Follow Up to CRESP Phase I 
Task Team Leader:  Noureddine Berrah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 31, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 27, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Renewable energy (100%) 
Theme:  Climate change (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
86.43 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
30.11 
 
BORROWING COUNTRY'S FIN. INTERMEDIARY/IES 
16.79
46.90 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to demonstrate early success in large-scale, renewable 
energy development with participating local developers in two provinces.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises two components: a 100MW wind farm in Inner Mongolia 
autonomous region and a bundle of small hydro construction and rehabilitation projects 
in Zhejiang province.  
 
Huitengxile Wind Farm, Inner Mongolia  
 
The proposed wind farm is at the Huitengxile site, about 120 km north east of Hohhot, 
and is currently home to approximately 70MW of wind generation capacity.The site has a 
potential for about 10,000 MW when fully developed and is well-established as one of 
the best sites in China for large-scale wind development.  
 
The Huitengxile wind farm will consist of wind turbines, associated electrical and civil 
works including a substation, switchyard and control room; a 15 km, 110 kV 
transmission line to Desheng town; and upgrading of the existing substation there.  The 
Page  2
power of the individual wind turbines will be in the range 0.75-1.5 MW, but their number 
and precise layout of the wind farm will be determined at procurement and will depend 
on the product offered by the winning bidder. Based on feasibility study calculations 
using 67, 1.5MW machines (considered to be the most likely configuration), permanent 
land acquisition including land for turbines, roads and substations, will total 23.65 
hectares within an area of about 11 km2.  The wind farm is expected to produce about 
245 GWh of electricity per year.  Power will be sold to the eastern Inner Mongolia grid, 
at 38.2 fen/kWh, a price based on competitive bidding by another wind farm at the same 
site.  
 
Inner Mongolia North Long Yuan Wind Power Company (NLYWPC) has also 
developed a proposal to sell carbon emissions reductions in the amount of 220,000 tons 
per year to the World Bank's Carbon Funds.  The additionality of the project (for carbon 
financing purposes) is based on (a) the dominance of coal in Inner Mongolia where 
typical power prices are around 25 fen/kWh; and (b) the demonstrated requirement for 
additional revenues to improve the financial viability of the project.  The Bank and PCF 
reviewed the proposal and are working with NLYWPC and concerned government 
agencies to prepare the Emissions Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA).  
 
Small Hydro Projects, Zhejiang  
 
In Zhejiang, the Bank will finance rehabilitation and development of selected small 
hydropower units.  The component will provide subloans to individual companies 
carrying out rehabilitation or new construction of small hydro projects not exceeding 
10MW with guarantees from county governments.  The projects are drawn from the list 
Zhejiang maintains of rehabilitation and new build projects requiring financing.  The 
preliminary list of projects will be agreed with Zhejiang at appraisal, but final decision 
will depend on projects meeting the requirements set out in the appraised framework. 
Thus some projects may drop out and be replaced by others from the list maintained by 
Zhejiang.  
 
The subcomponent falls into two parts: (a) rehabilitation of existing small hydro sites; 
and (b) development of new sites. Based on the appraised list of projects, the 
rehabilitation would consist of 11 projects with a total current capacity of 40 MW, which 
would be increased by a further 12 MW. Total costs would be US$17.87 million for 
which Bank financing of US$10.72 million is sought. Seven new build projects would 
have an aggregate capacity of 16 MW with a total cost of US$14.53 million for which 
Bank financing of US$8.71 million would be sought.  Project design permits either a 
fixed number of projects to be determined beforehand or a ceiling level of Bank financing 
to be agreed and projects financed until all the Bank funds have been committed.  
 
Institutional Development and Capacity Building Component  
 
Institutional and capacity building in Inner Mongolia and Zhejiang is financed under 
CRESP (P067625/P067828) and is a single national program implemented through a 
national PMO under the Energy Bureau of NDRC.  Support is programmed to assist in 
Page  3
building a strong pipeline of bankable renewable energy projects.  They will receive 
funds to carry out feasibility studies, resource assessments and other preinvestment 
activities on a cost-shared basis.  Training and capacity building, and access to 
international experience and best practice will also be eligible activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Huitengxile Wind Farm  
 
Huitengxile is about 120 km east north east of Huhhot, the capital of Inner Mongolia 
Autonomous Region.  Its latitude and longitude are 41 degrees 09 minutes north and 112 
degrees 32 minutes east.  The area has space sufficient for an estimated 1,000MW, on 
which about 47 MW of wind has already been developed, by IMWPC with a further 
22MW under construction and a further concession of 100MW under development in 
addition to the proposed project. The long term annual mean wind speed has been 
estimated at 8.4 m/s at 40 m above ground level.  The site elevation is approximately 
2100 m above sea level and consists of slightly rolling grassland, used for grazing.  It is 
owned by the county through a stud farm.  
 
Wulanchabu county has a population of about 215,000 spread over 4,200 sq km.  In 
2003, per capita income was $641, but rural people's income was considerably lower, at 
$206.  The wind farm is entirely situated on the land of the Huitengxile stud, which 
employs 131 people.  A total of 264 people live on the farm, which has an area of 29,000 
ha.  The area of the wind farm is representative of Inner Mongolia with sparse population 
relying mainly on animal husbandry, in this case horses and sheep. Population in the area 
is dominated by people from the Han ethnic group.  
 
Zhejiang Small Hydro Project  
 
The Zhejiang sub-component will take place entirely within the boundaries of Zhejiang 
province with work taking place on 18 sub-projects in six cities (Quzhou, Jinhua, Lishui, 
Huzhou and Taizhou and Wenzhou) and 10 counties/districts (Anji, Changshan, 
Dongyang, Jiangshan, Liandu, Pan'an, Songyang, Tiantai, Wencheng and Xianju) of 
which 13 are considered by the province to be less developed.  The sites are largely in 
mountainous areas.  
 
The province had a total population of 45 million in 2002, with an annual growth rate of 
3.8%.  Urban income is among the highest in China, at $1,415 per capita in 2002 while 
rural residents are also comparatively well off with an income of $597 per capita, also in 
2002.  Power shortages are a major constraint on growth and demand is growing by up to 
17% per year.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bernard Baratz (QAG) 
Mr Youxuan Zhu (EASEG) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental and social impact analysis has been carried out for Huitengxile and is 
presented in an environmental impact analysis (EIA) and resettlement action plan (RAP).  
The analysis has reviewed the project and the site, and identified the main impacts during 
construction and operation.  Project alternatives have been compared.  Participatory and 
awareness raising techniques have been employed during the process of preparing the 
EIA and RAP. In Zhejiang, environment (including safety of dams) and resettlement 
policy frameworks have been prepared and adopted by the provincial government.  
 
Huitengxile Wind Farm  
 
Potential local environment impacts during construction will be primarily loss of 
grassland.  Potential impacts associated with the transmission line routing are expected to 
be minor and will be evaluated in detail at appraisal.  To mitigate the grassland loss, the 
following mitigation measures are proposed:  
 
--  Soil and rocks will be removed manually;  
 
--  Machinery and equipment will be confined to designated places;  
 
--  Vehicles will run on specified roads and not on grassland;  
 
--  About half of the soil removed during construction will be backfilled into the wind 
turbine foundation and the remaining spoil will be removed to a designated site;  
 
--  After completion of the construction, both sides of the roads will be afforested.  
 
During operation, potential impacts will be noise, visual impacts, bird strike, and 
electromagnetic radiation.  Impacts and mitigation are as follows:  
 
--  The noise level of wind turbines is projected to be about 90 dBa at the machines. The 
nearest residential area is 3km away, and the operators will primarily work in the control 
room, limiting noise impact.  
Page  5
--  The site is not a route for migrant birds.  Based on the experience with the existing 
wind farms, operation of the wind farm is not expected to have impacts on indigenous 
species.  
 
--  Local residents believe that wind farm operation adds to the landscape.  The local 
authorities plan to use the wind farm as a tourist attraction, as are the existing ones.  
 
--  The intensity of the electromagnetic radiation during wind farm operation is expected 
to be much lower than the standard, resulting in no negative impacts on human health.  
The survey with local residents showed that existing wind farm operations do not 
interfere with local radio and television.  
 
Permanent land acquisition includes land for wind machines, roads and substations 
totaling 23.7 hectares, 0.4 hectares is required for the 110kV line, and a further 15.3 
hectares is required for temporary purposes during construction. All these land areas are 
grassland owned by Huitengxile State Farm, which has 130 staff. No individual farmers 
will be affected, nor are there indigenous people living in the State Farm. All 
compensation will be paid to the State Farm, at the rates determined by local regulations 
are adequate, and a grievance procedure is in place. Since the wind farm will occupy less 
than 1% of the land area of the State Farm, it will have little impact on its economic 
operations.  
 
Inner Mongolia Electric Power Survey and Design Institute prepared the EIA and RAP, 
which have been reviewed and revised to meet Bank's standards.  Wulanchabu 
Environment Research Institute will be responsible for implementing the EMP.  
 
The key stakeholders for the wind farm are the national, Inner Mongolia (provincial) 
and Wulanchabu (county) government, the project sponsors, the provincial power 
company (which will purchase the power), and local communities.  The project sponsors 
and county government solicited opinions from people in the affected areas and the State 
Farm.  During preparation of the EIA and RAP there have been extensive local 
consultations, including meetings and surveys in the surrounding villages.  The results 
demonstrated that local communities are quite supportive of the wind farm, which they 
believe will create local employment opportunities and tourist attractions.  The villagers, 
however, emphasized the need to protect grassland.  Their concerns have been taken into 
account in project design and implementation.  
 
Zhejiang Small Hydro  
 
The Zhejiang small hydro investment component consists of eleven rehabilitation and 
seven newly-built small hydro sub-projects. The Bank and the provincial government 
have reached an agreement on a framework approach that sets up the criteria and 
procedures for meeting the safeguards and fiduciary requirements for the small hydro 
projects.  The Provincial Project Office (PPO), staffed by Zhejiang Hydro Power 
Development Management Center (ZHPDMC) has prepared a framework for preparation 
of EIAs and RAPs, which has been reviewed and revised to meet the Bank's 
requirements.  
 
Page  6
EIA Framework.  Each sub-project should prepare its EIA in accordance with the agreed 
upon framework, which defines the contents, procedures and implementation 
responsibilities. The purpose is to ensure that the EIA of each sub-project will be in 
compliance with both the Chinese laws and regulations and the procedures required for 
Category B projects in the World Bank's OP/ BP 4.01.  
 
Project screening.  The sub-project company is responsible for preparing the initial EIA. 
Based on GoC's regulation, EIA is required for all newly-constructed sub-projects.  
EMPs will be based on the draft EIAs. The framework has defined the project screening 
criteria.  
 
Sub-project EIAs.  The EIA of each sub-project should comply with the Chinese 
regulations on "Code for Environmental Impact Assessment of Water Conservancy and 
Hydropower Project" HJ/T88-2003. The framework outlined an EMP format on 
environmental mitigation, supervision, and monitoring plans for both newly-built and 
rehabilitation projects.  
 
For newly-built small hydro projects (under 25 MW), potential local environment 
impacts during construction may be waste water, solid wastes, noise, dust, and soil 
erosion.  Potential impacts during operation include land occupation and losses from 
reservoir inundation, noise, sewage, low temperature water irrigation, and decreased 
water flow downstream.  Sponsors will be required to prepare an EIA and EMP.  
 
For rehabilitation projects, potential local environmental impacts during construction 
will be impacts on the consumers with lower water supply during reconstruction, waste 
water, solid wastes, noise, dust, and soil erosion. Potential impacts during operation 
include noise, and land losses from increased reservoir inundation. Sponsors will be 
required to prepare an EIA and EMP.  
 
EIA Review, Approval, and Disclosure.  The PPO will be responsible for approving the 
EMPs.  After being revised incorporating recommendations from the public consultation 
process, the EMPs will be submitted to the provincial project office for approval. The 
county/city/district project office is responsible for disclosing the approved EMP in the 
affected residential areas of the project or in the nearby villages.  
 
RAP Framework.  Each sub-project will prepare its RAP in accordance with this 
framework, which defines resettlement principles, implementing institutions and 
resettlement standards. The purpose is to ensure RAP of each subproject consistent with 
the Chinese laws and regulations as well as the requirements set in OP/BP4.12 of the 
World Bank.  
 
Project screening.  The resettlement survey will be organized jointly by the 
county/city/district project office and the design unit. The project company, the county 
department for resettlement and other relevant functional departments, township (town) 
people's government, representatives of villages and groups, resettlers and property 
Page  7
owners all should participate and jointly develop the project resettlement investigation 
materials.  
 
The Provincial Project Office decides whether an RAP is required based on the 
resettlement survey results and agreed upon criteria. For proposed new small hydropower 
projects, if there are more than 200 people subject to resettlement under the subproject a 
full RAP must be prepared. If the subproject would affect less than 200 people due to 
land acquisition or relocation, a simplified RAP is required.  For rehabilitation projects, if 
there are no relocations (including laid-off employees) and land acquisition, there is no 
need to prepare RAP. The framework gives an RAP format for each sub-project to 
follow.  
 
According to preliminary surveys, all the sub-projects of this project involve no 
households being moved, but only land acquisition.    
 
Resettlement standards and compensation criteria.  The design and construction of each 
sub-project should be consistent with the Chinese legislation for land acquisition 
compensation and resettlement. The compensation criteria and calculation method for 
affected areas and people (including land and property, etc.) are set out in the legal 
framework, which is demonstrated in the framework.  
 
Public Consultation.  Both EIA and RAP frameworks outlined the requirements for 
public consultation and disclosure. The environment divisions and resettlement team of 
the county/city/district project office are responsible for notifying, organizing, carrying 
out, and recording public consultations, in accordance with the criteria and procedure 
outlined in the frameworks.  
 
Dam Safety.  The Dam Safety safeguard policy (OP/BP 4.37) is expected to be triggered 
on 12 of the 18 sub-projects, as currently listed.  The framework requires that the 
measures set out in OP/BP 4.37 (safety inspections by an independent panel) should be 
met when appropriate. Chinese regulations on dam safety, which are triggered for dams 
with storage capacity exceeding one million cubic meters, have been reviewed and are 
considered to be consistent with OP/BP4.37.  Requirements for dam safety assessment 
and monitoring for dams exceeding either 15 meters in height or one million cubic meters 
in storage capacity, or both, are set out in the project implementation plan (PIP) prepared 
by ZHPDMC.  
 
The Bank has reviewed the terms of reference of the independent panel of experts, and 
the curriculum vitae of the proposed members. For each sub-project, the panel of experts 
will prepare an evaluation report on dam safety issues, including the basic conditions of 
the dam, the process of appraisal and the evaluation of safety issues.  The evaluation will 
also cover the operation and maintenance procedures and the emergency preparedness 
plan.  Satisfactory completion of the dam safety evaluation is part of the requirement for 
a
sub-project to complete its due diligence.   
 
Page  8
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Huitengxile Wind Farm  
 
Further wind farms are expected to be built in the area of the project, under other 
developers and financing arrangements.  
 
Zhejiang Small Hydro  
 
None expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Various options for assisting further development of renewable energy in China were 
considered.  Further investment activities following on from the successful pilot scale 
investment in wind under Renewable Energy Development Project (REDP Loan 4488-
CHA) were considered, but these alone would not overcome the barriers to broadening 
participation nor the inherent bias against renewable energy generation common to utility 
systems.  The GEF and World Bank supported China Renewable Energy Scale-up 
Program (CRESP Loan 4792-CHA) is underpinned by analysis which establishes that 
renewable energy can be the least economic cost solution for power production in China 
when environmental externalities are taken into consideration.  The projects are intended 
to demonstrate the scale up of renewables and their economic and environmental 
advantages over coal-fired electricity generation.  
 
For the pilot phase of CRESP, the government wished to select a limited number of 
provinces with good renewable energy resources and interest in developing them.  At the 
same time the government is interested in promoting those technologies which are at or 
approaching economic least cost for electricity generation.  A rigorous selection process 
which examined all 32 provinces and autonomous regions, resulted in the selection of the 
four pilot provinces: Fujian, Inner Mongolia, Jiangsu and Zhejiang not only for their 
interest in the project but also for the range of technologies that could be piloted.  
Projects in Inner Mongolia and Zhejiang have now been identified as described.  
 
Several other sites were considered by both provinces but rejected on grounds of 
resource availability and site suitability.  Sites chosen have been selected as the most 
promising for demonstration at this time.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has provided EIAs and RAPs as follows:  
 
Huitengxile wind farm.  An Environment Impact Assessment for 100MW Wind Power 
Project in Inner Mongolia prepared by the Institute of Power Exploration and Design of 
Inner Mongolia dated June 2004, which includes an EMP which has been reviewed for 
acceptability to the Bank.  A Resettlement Action Plan for 100MW Wind Power Project 
Page  9
in Inner Mongolia prepared by the Institute of Power Exploration and Design of Inner 
Mongolia dated June 2004 (November version) has been submitted.  Borrower capacity 
to plan and implement the measures is considered acceptable.  
 
Zhejiang small hydro.  An Environment Impact Assessment Framework and 
Resettlement Action Plan Framework, prepared by Zhejiang Hydropower Development 
Management Center and submitted to the Bank in November 2004 have been found to be 
acceptable.  A training plan for environment administration personnel was submitted at 
the same time.  Borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures is considered 
acceptable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Huitengxile Wind Farm  
 
The key stakeholders for the wind farm are the national, Inner Mongolia (provincial) 
and Wulanchabu (county) government, the project sponsors, the provincial power 
company (which will purchase the power), and local communities.  The project sponsors 
and county government solicited opinions from people in the affected areas and the State 
Farm.  During preparation of the EIA and RAP there have been extensive local 
consultations, including meetings and surveys in the surrounding villages.  The results 
demonstrated that local communities are quite supportive of the wind farm, which they 
believe will create local employment opportunities and tourist attractions.  The villagers, 
however, emphasized the need to protect grassland.  Their concerns have been taken into 
account in project design and implementation.  
 
Zhejiang Small Hydro  
 
Key stakeholders vary from project to project but will normally consist of local land 
holders and users, particularly those standing to lose use of land or other property, users 
of the water resource, and local and provincial government.  The EIA and RAP 
frameworks require identification and consultation with the affected parties, and public 
disclosure of both the framework and the resulting EIAs and RAPs.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/26/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/22/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/26/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2004 
 
Page  10
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/22/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/15/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/22/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/22/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Dam safety management plans may be required for sub-projects under the Zhejiang small 
hydro sub-component.  Requirements will be assessed based on the policy framework 
and requirements of OP4.37 including disclosure followed accordingly.  
 
Actual dates of "in-country" disclosure refer to disclosure under the China Renewable 
Energy Scale-up Program Phase 1 (P067828/P067625).   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
Yes 
Page  11
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Noureddine Berrah 
07/26/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bernard Baratz 
07/25/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Youxuan Zhu 
07/25/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
07/11/2005 
Comments:  Safeguard clearance delegated to Sector Manager 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
07/26/2005 
Comments:   
