Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1542 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/13/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P075613 
Project Name: Shaanxi Ankang Road Development 
Task Team Leader: Aurelio Menendez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 22, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (90%);Sub-national government administration (10%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Other public sector governance (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
575.00
575.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project aims to improve passenger and freight traffic flows in an efficient and safe manner 
along the corridor from Ankang to the Sichuan Border within the Ankang Prefecture.  To achieve 
that objective, the project will seek to: (a) enhance road infrastructure capacity and transport 
integration along the corridor; (b) increase accessibility to markets and social services by the 
lower-income rural areas of Ankang; and (c) strengthen the capacity of the Shaanxi Provincial 
Transport Department in managing the increasing number of kilometers of roads under its 
responsibility in the Shaanxi province and, in particular, within the Ankang region.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
To achieve the above-mentioned objective and results, the project will include:  
 
?
Construction of an expressway of about 105 km connecting Ankang and the border with the 
Sichuan Province (ASH).  The expressway would consist of four lanes and be designed for a 
speed of 80 km/hr, taking into account the mountainous terrain of the corridor. The design will 
include the necessary road safety audits to ensure that it incorporates the appropriate road safety 
features.  This component also contains the acquisition and installation of the pertinent E&M 
facilities.  
Page  2
?
Improvement of interconnecting provincial, county and village roads in the rural areas 
surrounding the corridor of the above-mentioned expressway.  A preliminary list of links has 
been identified including: one Class III segment of 73 kms; about 650 km of country and 
townships roads (largely Class IV); and about 810 km of village roads (largely substandard).  
The interventions will consist of rehabilitation of existing roadways, with adjustments to its 
width when necessary or upgrading existing non-motorized tracks to motorized substandard 
roadways when warranted by the number of beneficiaries and due consideration to 
environmental impacts.  
 
?
Carrying out surveys of road condition, towards revamping the information base of the 
Shaanxi Highway Bureau and establishing the baseline and future data for the effective use of 
the existing pavement management systems in supporting informed decisions on the 
maintenance of the Shaanxi road network.  
 
?
Supervision of the construction of the ASH?with a joint local/foreign supervision team?and of 
the improvements to the interconnecting roads.  
 
?
Provision of technical assistance for: (a) impact evaluation and monitoring studies to measure 
the impacts of the rural road component of the project in the Ankang region, establishing a 
knowledge base for future interventions on those types of roads across the Shaanxi Province; and 
(b) institutional strengthening through the training of staff of the agencies/institutions involved in 
highway research, planning, construction, operation and maintenance of highways and related 
social aspects, building on training carried out under previous Bank-financed projects.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The expressway to be constructed under the project connects the city of Ankang (in Yijiaying 
Village), about 200 kilometers South of Xi'an, the capital of the Shaanxi Province, with the 
border with the neighboring Sichuan Province, at Baiyangxi, over a distance of about 105 
kilometers.  
 
For the component on the improvement of interconnecting provincial, the provincial, county, 
and village roads will be located in the rural areas along the corridor of the expressway.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Shaanxi Provincial Transport Department (SPTD) has maintained good implementation 
track record for the Bank projects in transport sector with its very first project in 1985 to the one 
that was completed in December 2002.  Apart from the institutional capacity in high-grade-
highway development, including the proper application of environmental and social safeguards, 
the SPTD successfully implemented a provincial/rural road development program (involving 
about 4,000 km of those roads) that was considered a best practice program receiving study visits 
from colleagues in other developing countries.  The experience and practices will help reduce the 
preparation and implementation risks of the project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Ms Youlan Zou (EASSD) 
Mr Naoya Tsukamoto (EASEN) 
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Shaanxi Provincial Transport Department has prepared the Terms-of-reference (ToRs) 
for the preparation of the Environmental Impact Assessment and the Environmental 
Management Plan for the proposed Expressway and for the provincial/county/local road 
component, and has identified a reputable entity--ChangAn University--with experience in this 
type of assessment for carrying out the activities listed in the ToRs.  The ToRs were reviewed by 
the Bank team during the pre-identification and identification missions and the Team?s 
comments were discussed with the SPTD.  
 
The expressway alignment will traverse mountainous areas and cross reservoir systems in 
the Ankang area.  The expressway will comprise many tunnels, viaducts, and several 
interchanges, and will be complemented with a program of rehabilitation/improvement of 
provincial/county/local roads along the corridor.  While the determination of the final alignment 
and the design of the expressway will consider environmental issues, notwithstanding, 
significant adverse impacts are to be expected of any chosen alignment.  The possible 
environmental impacts of the local roads component will be more limited given the engineering 
characteristics of the related works, but the analysis will also include the environmental 
assessment of this component.  
 
The draft EIA/EMP for the main expressway component would be ready by August 31, 
2005, and the final package, including the assessment related to the local roads component and 
the executive summary would be ready by November 30, 2005.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Shaanxi Provincial Government established Ying Lake Wetland Nature Reserve in 2003.  As 
a
result, a few kilometers of the proposed ASH (whose alignment had been designed based on 
the provincial highway plan elaborated in the 1990's) would cut through the reserve and one 
smaller section would go through the core zone of the reserve.  The provincial government is 
now under adjustment of the zoning in order for the ASH to avoid its core zone.  The State 
Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) agreed to proceed with such an adjustment 
provided that the total area of core and buffer zones in the reserve will not decrease.  To address 
this issue, the following approach will be followed:  
 
?
The EIA will include the detailed alternative analyses with integral consideration of 
environmental and social aspects, and engineering and economic factors; and its elaboration will 
be undertaken with adequate consultation with local people, NGOs, forest authority, environment 
authority, and the nature reserve authority.  
 
?
The zoning adjustment procedures will be followed closely to ensure appropriate proof 
that that (a) the adjustments to the core and buffer zones are conducted in a transparent and 
accountable manner; (b) the construction of the highway is harmonized with the management 
plan of the nature reserve; and (c) the responsible environmental office has enough capacity to 
implement the management plan.  
 
?
The project would include a small compensation component for tree planting and 
environmental enhancements, which will positively support the nature reserve.  
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
In addition, the connecting sections at both the Southern and Northern ends of the proposed 
expressway are planned for construction around or during the implementation timeframe of the 
project.  The Northern section lies in Shaanxi Province while the Southern section lies in Sichuan 
Province.  The benefits of the proposed project however do not depend on the construction of 
those other segments, and therefore no linkage issues are present.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Chinese legal and regulatory framework on the protection of cultural relics fully meets the 
requirement of the World Bank policy. In this regard, Chinese policies and regulations will be 
strictly followed for any such impacts identified upfront or encountered during construction.  In 
the event of change findings of goods or sites that might appear of cultural significance are 
encountered during project implementation, works will be stopped and the relevant authorities 
called upon to investigate the site.  If these goods and sites are found of cultural significance, the 
area of the project around these goods or sites will be redesigned to avoid any harmful effects to 
such goods or sites.  Current policies and regulations would need to be summarized and reflected 
in project documents.  
 
The Cultural Relics Survey Report will be submitted to the Bank by August 31, 2005.  The 
proposed Terms-of-Reference include the identification of an old public community building 
established about a century ago.  The building will not be located in the right of the way and no 
impacts are expected.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
The SPTD will conduct a Social Assessment, which will allow to acknowledge the 
characteristics of the population along the corridor and to confirm the presence of ethnic 
minorities in the project area.  The SPTD is committed to applying the principles of OD 4.20 
where issues affecting ethnic minorities (should they exist in the project area) arise, and will 
prepare and submit to the Bank for approval an IPDP should it become necessary.  The first draft 
of the Social Assessment would be completed by July 31, 2005.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The project is expected to require land acquisition.  Resettlement action plans and 
resettlement policy framework will be prepared. The SPTD is firmly committed to apply the 
principles of OP4.12 where persons/communities are affected by resettlement not only for the 
expressway, but also for the interconnecting local roads.  Terms-of-reference for the RAPs and 
an RPF have been prepared by the SPTD.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/19/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Safeguards  
 
TORs of the EIA: prepared by SPTD and reviewed and approved by the Bank in March 
2005  
 
Draft EIA & EMP for main expressway: to be submitted by SPTD by August 31, 2005  
 
Revised EIA and EMP for all project components:to be submitted by SPTD by November 
30, 2005  
 
Social Safeguards:  
 
Social Assessment: TORs prepared by SPTD and reviewed and approved by the Bank in 
April 2005; draft report to be submitted to the Bank by July 31, 2005  
 
Indigenous Peoples: The social assessment will provide information on the characteristics 
of the population and confirm the presence of ethnic minorities.  If it becomes necessary the 
SPTD will prepare and submit to the Bank an IPDP ahead of the pre-appraisal mission in 
November 2005.  
 
Involutary Resettlement: TORs for the preparation of RAPs have been prepared and 
reviewed by the Bank.  The draft RAPs (for the expressway and for the first-year program of 
improvements to the provincial/county/local road network) will be submitted to the Bank by 
September 30, 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Aurelio Menendez 
05/03/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms KayeAnne J. Henry 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
