Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC385 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 5, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P081161 
Project Name: Chongqing Small Cities 
Infrastructure Improvement 
Task Team Leader: Thomas L. Zearley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 30, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2004 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Water supply (30%);Roads (30%);Sanitation 
(20%);Flood protection (10%);Sub-national 
government administration (10%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the poor 
(P);Municipal governance and institution building 
(S);Other urban development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Peishen Wang, Chaogang Wang  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 200 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [Updated following PCN review] 
 
The project objective is to improve basic infrastructure in secondary cities, districts, and counties 
to foster sustainable growth, enhance living conditions for its citizens, and facilitate urban 
employment creation through promoting the function and economic growth.  This objective 
would be achieved under a regional framework for urbanization, incorporating environmental 
protection and improvement of infrastructure and facilities.   
 
C.  Project Description  [Updated following PCN review] 
 
The project would support (i) 
investment in subprojects
 for the rehabilitation, improvement and expansion of urban 
infrastructure and services under local government responsibility including water supply systems, wastewater 
collection and treatment, flood control embankments and park areas, roads, bridges, solid waste collection and 
disposal, public transportation terminals, public markets, and public toilets; and (ii) 
project implementation and 
capacity building assistance
 for participating local governments and Chongqing Municipality to cover the costs of 
consultancies, small equipment purchases, and the preparation and delivery of training materials.  The Chongqing 
PMO in consultation with the main secondary cities, counties and districts, has already identified a number of 
investment subprojects aimed to meet their principal infrastructure needs in response to the expected urbanization 
and social development trends and policy priorities.  A preliminary list of about 40 subprojects in 15 different 
jurisdictions (located mainly in the western corridor of Chongqing) have been identified to-date.  Preparation work 
has already begun on about 12 of these subprojects in more than 7 geographic areas, which could comprise the 
initial set of investments to be appraised and implemented with Bank funding.  Other subprojects would be 
identified during project implementation, and once screened and appraised in accordance with criteria and 
procedures agreed with the Bank, would be eligible for Bank financing.  These criteria and procedures would be 
described in an 
operational manual
 that would be reviewed and approved by the Bank during appraisal. 
 
The project would include capacity building to strengthen the ability of local governments to prepare, operate and 
maintain subproject investments in an economically, financially, socially and environmentally sustainable manner.   
Page  2
 
 
The project would also explore opportunities for private sector participation in infrastructure provision.  The project 
would also strengthen the institutional and financial performance of participating public utilities entities. 
 
International and local consultants have been mobilized to prepare feasibility studies and draft subproject proposals.   
Resources have also been allocated for data collection.  As project preparation proceeds, criteria would be developed 
for prioritization of investments that would form the proposal and the menu of subprojects eligible for Bank 
financing. 
 
The project would differ from the traditional urban infrastructure operation funded by the Bank in China; it would 
help design and pilot a new multi-sectoral programming approach to support small-and medium-scale infrastructure 
investments that are of high priority to local governments.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The  target locations would be secondary cities, district and counties outside of Chongqing city, with special 
emphasis given to the western development corridor which has the potential for rapid urbanization.  Chongqing 
Municipality is located on the Upper Yangtze River in the west of China.  It is the country’s largest municipality in 
terms of area (82,400 sq. km.) and population (31 million).  It was created in 1997, having formerly been part of 
Sichuan Province, and is the fourth municipality with status equivalent of that of a province.  Approximately 80% of 
Chongqing’s population is agricultural or rurally-based.  There are significant differences in economic status 
between the rural and urban population.  While the urban population has an average annual GDP of US$1,300 (close 
to the average for the more developed eastern regions of China), the eastern and southeastern areas of Chongqing 
have an average GDP of US$361, well below that of the average for Eastern China.   
 
Infrastructure in most small cities and towns outside of Chongqing city are deficient, and environmental conditions 
are deteriorating.  Water supply systems are inadequate, sanitation is poor, untreated wastewater drains into nearby 
river courses, and insufficient drainage and flood control result in frequent flooding.  Transportation networks are 
substandard and public facilities like markets and bus terminals need improvements.  The topography and geology 
of Chongqing are complicated.  Most of the cities and towns are built against mountains or along rivers with deep 
slopes and sharp drops, making infrastructure improvements more costly and challenging than in other places in 
China. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Chongqing Municipality is familiar with the Bank’s safeguard requirements through the implementation of the 
ongoing Chongqing urban environment project.  For  the proposed project, the Chongqing PMO has contracted 
international and local consultants to assist in developing a framework for Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) 
and Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) consistent with Government of China and World Bank requirements that will 
be applied to all subprojects financed by the Bank loan.  Each individual subproject will be required to have its own 
EIA and RAP, prepared by the local project owner and approved by the PMO, before it is eligible for Bank funding.  
The PMO has retained CISDI Engineering Co. Ltd.—the former Chongqing Iron and Steel Design Institute in the 
Ministry of Metallury, with Class A EA certificate issued by SEPA—to prepare a summary EIA for the initial set of 
subprojects by appraisal to address overall safeguard issues.  International consultants from the  consortium of 
Group Huit/Sogreah have been mobilized with a grant from the French government to assist in the preparation of the 
individual EIA/RAPs for the initial set of subprojects, and the development of the EIA/RAP Framework for the 
project.  Another grant is expected from the Government of New Zealand to help evaluate the infrastructure  needs 
of lower-income groups, and to prepare social and resettlement action policies.  In September 2003, a Bank mission 
gave a short training course to the PMO and interested local governments on the Bank’s safeguard policies.  
Additional training and capacity building will be provided to the PMO and participating local government and their 
implementing agencies by Bank specialists and consultants during project preparation and execution.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
Page  3
 
 
 
 
[TBD ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The proposed environmental category for this project is category B.  A “B” category is justified on the basis that the 
investments will be small to medium-scale, and lead to improved environmental conditions.  Impacts will largely be 
localized, short-term (related mainly to construction activities) and manageable with known mitigation measures.  
This category is consistent with guidance provided in OP 4.01 and with similar projects recently approved in the 
region.  The cities and other areas involved in the project are unlikely to be significantly industrialized, and sludge 
from any wastewater treatment proposed should not be highly contaminated and its disposal therefore should not be 
problematic.  There will be some involuntary resettlement expected under the project, but not likely of a scale that 
would trigger an A rating.  During preparation the team will prepare a list/menu of possible subprojects eligible 
under the project and will identify specific environmental concerns associated with each subproject type. 
 
It is the intent of the project to fully integrate environmental considerations into project selection and review 
procedures.  Consistent with procedures adopted by other similar projects financed by the Bank, the project will 
integrate environmental criteria into the local planning process.  Simple guidelines for screening subprojects and 
mitigating possible environmental impacts will be developed during preparation.  A number of recent projects in the 
Region have developed similar guidelines, which will be reviewed and adapted for the needs of this project.  This 
approach is expected to generate a better understanding and local ownership of environmental management 
programs. 
 
The project is not expected to affect any critical natural habitats nor is it expected to trigger the Bank’s policy on 
pesticides, forestry or dam safety.  The possibility that these policies would be triggered will be fully reviewed 
during preparation, and specific review criteria to be used during implementation would be developed.  An 
inventory surveys will be carried out during preparation of the RAPs to determine if any cultural property will be 
affected and whether OD 4.20 is applicable.  Socioeconomic surveys will be conducted to determine if there any 
minority people will be affected and if OD 4.20 is applicable. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared.  
September 1, 2004 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
Environment
: 
(1) 
First draft EIA submitted to the Bank by May 2004. 
(2) 
Final EIA be submitted by September 2004. 
(3) 
Final EA Framework submitted by September 2004. 
(4) 
Disclosure in country in August 2004. 
(5) 
Disclosure in Bank’s Infoshop in September 2004. 
 
Resettlement
: 
(1)  First draft RAPs submitted to the Bank for comments by May 2004. 
(2)  Final draft RAPs submitted for review by August 2004. 
(3)  Final RAP Framework submitted by September 2004. 
(4)  Disclosure both in country and Bank’s Infoshop by September 2004. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Tom Zearley 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Glenn Morgan 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Keshav Varma 
Date 
Comments 
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
