Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1396 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/26/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P093906 
Project Name: Third Jiangxi Highway Project 
Task Team Leader: Christopher R. Bennett 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 3, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: June 22, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Other public sector governance (P);Export development 
and competitiveness (S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
532.00
532.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's development objective is to improve east-west passenger and freight flows in 
poorer areas of Jiangxi province through enhanced road infrastructure conditions and 
strengthened highway management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
EXPRESSWAY COMPONENT: RUIJIN - GANZHOU EXPRESSWAY (RGE)  
 
The RGE will be a 119 km long section of the Xiamen-Chengdu expressway (about US$660 
million), one of the seven east-west corridors of the NTHS. It will connect Ganzhou in the west 
with the Guangdong-Beijing expressway. In the east it will terminate at  Ruijin city. A 28 km, 
domestically financed, expressway will be built between Ruijin and the Fujian provincial border. 
With the completion of the expressway, and the link between the Fujian border and Xiamen 
(under construction), Ganzhou will have direct high quality access to Xiamen.  
 
The area crossed by RGE is a succession of three basins separated by mountains: the Ganzhou 
basin (100 m of altitude), the Yudu basin and the Ruijin basin (200 m of altitude). Between these 
basins the mountains are high, some exceeding 1,000 m of altitude. The main river between 
Page  2
Huichang and Ganzhou is the Gong. In Ganzhou, the Gong River becomes the Gan River. The 
Gong river links the Ganzhou basin with the Yudu basin via a narrow valley. The terrain is very 
challenging and will require careful route selection and designs so as to minimize the 
environmental and social impacts while providing adequate access to local communities.  
 
LOCAL ROAD IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM COMPONENT  
 
The Local Road Improvement Program (LRIP) of approximately US$70 million, will aim to 
improve access in poor areas of the province. The size of the LRIP will be at least 10% of the 
total project cost and the amount of the Bank financing shall be approximately US$ 10 million. 
Ganzhou, the largest prefecture in the province, is the priority area for the LRIP, and is where the 
expressway component will be built. Currently its road network density is about 23 km/100 km2, 
about 38% lower than the average road density (37 km/per 100 km2) in the province.  Among 
the total mileage of 11,544 km in Ganzhou City Prefecture,  8,901 km of roads are Class IV or 
unclassified, some 2% lower than the average technical standard in the province.  As one of the 
poorest prefectures with lowest densities of road network in the province, the LRIP component 
will support high priority needs of local access.  
 
INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING COMPONENT  
 
The institutional strengthening component (about US$2 million) is still under development but 
potential activities include:  
 
-
Traffic safety operations for tunnels. The JPCD has undertaken a number of safety activities 
on previous projects. Although they have not had major accidents in tunnels, they are acutely 
aware of the potential dangers they pose, especially as they may result in closure for an extended 
period. They would like to establish a systematic tunnel safety management plan and ensure that 
there are adequate resources to handle emergencies.  
 
-
Improved quality assurance techniques. There have been a number of quality issues with 
previous projects so the JPCD recognizes the need to improve their overall quality  
 
management.  
 
-
Extension of maintenance by contract to expressways. The JPCD recognizes that there are 
potential cost savings through improved efficiencies by extending maintenance by contract to 
expressways.  
 
-
HIV/AIDS. Discussions are under way to having a major component looking at HIV/AIDS 
education for all JPCD workers  
 
and their families. This would be funded in a large part by the Global HIV campaign.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The proposed 119 km Expressway starts from the Ganzhou City in the west and runs east to the 
Ruijin City, about 20 km from the border of Fujian Province. The Expressway crosses Ruijin city 
(0.60 million inhabitants), Huichang county (0.43 million inhabitants), Yudu county (0.90 
million inhabitants), Gan county (0.56 million inhabitants) and Zhanggong district (0.46 million 
inhabitants) of Ganzhou city (8.3 million inhabitants for the entire prefecture).  
 
Page  3
The Expressway is a succession of three river basins separated by mountains: the Ganzhou 
basin (altitude - 100 m), the Yudu basin and the Ruijin basin (altitude - 200 m). The mountains 
between these basins are high, some of them exceeding 1,000 m in altitude. The main river is the 
Gong river passing by Huichang and Ganzhou. In Ganzhou, the Gong River becomes the Gan 
River. The Gong River links the Ganzhou basin with the Yudu basin via a narrow valley.  
 
The geology of the area includes mudstone which may not be stable, limestone with presence of 
karst holes, red sandstone and metamorphic rock which do not raise major construction 
problems. The area is interspersed with non active faults.  
 
The feasibility study for the expressway compares two main alignment alternatives:  
 
-
the alternative in the north uses about the same corridor as the one used by NR323 or the 
Ganlong railway; between Ganzhou basin and Yudu basin, but does not use the narrow Gong 
river valley; and,  
 
-
the alternative in the south uses the narrow Gong river valley linking the Ganzhou and Yudu 
basins. The rest of the alignment mostly crosses the mountains.  
 
Both alternatives are rather similar in terms of cost (0.46 % difference). The alternative in the 
south includes more tunnels (1.6 km or about 24 % more). The alternative in the north requires 
slightly more farmland.  
 
The final route alignment (alternative three) will likely be a combination of the proposed two 
alternatives and will be developed following further feasibility investigation and analysis by 
early June 2005.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency which will be the Jiangxi Provincial Communications Department 
(JPCD), completed the bank funded Second Jiangxi Project construction in January 2004, which 
is part of the national expressway.  
 
The proposed project will provide additional Safeguards support to the JCPD  to ensure (i) 
increased environmental management performance of the civil works contractors during 
construction and (ii) involuntary resettlement due to local roads linked to the project are carried 
out in accordance with OP4.12.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Anil H. Somani (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This project is expected to be assigned an EA category A. The JPCD and its Environmental 
Consultant (the Highway Environmental Engineering Research Center (HEERC) of the Ministry 
of Communications (Beijing) prepared the TOR for the preparation of the EIA and EMP f
or the 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
proposed Expressway. The TOR was reviewed by the Bank team during the identification 
mission and the Team's comments were discussed with the JCPD. The TOR, which incorporates 
the first round of public consultation, was submitted to SEPA on December 30, 2004. By the end 
of April 2005, the JPCD will submit to the Bank for the purposes of record, the final revised 
TOR inclusive of the comments from SEPA, the Bank and the consultation. The mission held 
lengthy discussions with JPCD's EA Consultants, emphasizing the Banks requirements and 
expectations of the consideration of the environmental and resettlement issues in the 
comparisons and selection of the final alignment; meaningful consultations of all stakeholders 
(local government officials, potentially affected people, etc.) and the timely disclosure of the 
EIA, EMP and the Resettlement reports locally and in the Bank.  
 
JPCD and its Consultant has also agreed to prepare separate stand-alone EA reports 
(combined EIA/EMP reports) for all linked local roads 10 km and over in length. For roads 
under 10 km, the EIA/EMP will be consolidated in the main EA reports.  
 
The chosen alignment will generally pass through mountainous areas and cross river 
systems and valleys in Jiangxi Province. Therefore, the expressway will comprise of many 
tunnels, viaducts, large interchanges and many local roads. While the determination of the final 
alignment and the design is expected to consider environmental issues, notwithstanding, 
significant adverse impacts are to be expected of any chosen alignment.  
 
Construction related impacts are likely to include potential disturbance to the ecosystem, 
excavation and disposal of excess waste materials from tunnels and cuts, impacts on the water 
ecosystems due to bridge construction, impacts from excavation for fill material and aggregates, 
spoil transportation and disposal, slope stability, erosion and sedimentation flows, water quality, 
fuel and lubricants management, noise, dust, worker camps, etc.  
 
Impacts during operations of the expressway are expected to be mainly noise related, traffic 
and public safety, and air quality in tunnels.  
 
The EAs will investigate these issues and will identify suitable and tangible mitigation, 
monitoring, and institutional measures and estimate the budget to ensure effective 
implementation, management and monitoring of these impacts.  
 
The first Chinese draft of the EIA/EMP for the Expressway is expected by May 31, 2005. 
The second draft is expected on September 1, 2005.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Preliminary investigations along the alternative alignments indicate that the Natural Habitat 
OP will not be triggered. So far, the investigations have not identified any natural habitats, 
protected forests, sensitive habitats, nature reserves or parks along or in the vicinity of the 
proposed alignments. This will be studied in more detail during the preparation of the EIA.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The
JPCD will commission the Provincial Archeological and Cultural Relics Institute to 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
prepare a Cultural Relics report covering the proposed alignments, borrow and spoil  
 
disposal areas, link roads and access roads. The report is expected to be submitted to the 
Bank by June 1, 2005.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
The JCPD is conducting a Social Assessment, which will confirm the presence of ethnic 
minorities in the project area. The JCPD is committed to applying the principles of OD 4.20 
where issues affecting ethnic minorities (should they exist in the project area) arise, and will 
prepare and submit to the Bank for approval an EMDP should it become necessary.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Involuntary resettlement is expected. Among the many factors determining the choice of the 
final alignment, is the absolute need to minimize resettlement as much as possible.  
 
The JCPD is firmly committed to apply the principles of OP4.12 where 
persons/communities are affected by resettlement not only for the expressway, but also for all 
linked local roads.  
 
RAPs and an RPF are being prepared and will be submitted to the Bank in Chinese for 
approval by May 15, 2005. The draft RAP (in English)will be submitted to the Bank by July 1, 
2005.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/19/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Draft RAP (English) 
- 
July 1, 2005  
 
Draft EIA/EMP   
- 
September 1, 2005  
 
Final RAP for clearance - 
October 15, 2005  
 
Final EA for disclosure  - 
November 15, 2005   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher R. Bennett 
04/25/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
 
Comments:   
