Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1861 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/19/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P077752 
Project Name: SECOND SHANDONG ENVIRONMENT PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Shenhua Wang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 8, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (80%);Water supply (10%);Solid waste management (10%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
150.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
150.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the project would be to improve the environmental quality in 
selected cities/counties through improved wastewater collection and treatment, solid waste 
management, and water supply.  This objective will be achieved by (a) implementing sectoral 
policy reforms and capacity building, (b) priority investments in selected cities, and (c) 
innovative and demonstrative activities supported by GEF grant financing and the Bank’s carbon 
finance facility.  The GEF component would contribute to the gradual reduction of land based 
pollution into both the Yellow and Bohai Seas both directly and through its demonstration 
effects.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
An interactive selection process was adopted to ensure project ownership and agreement on its 
objectives.  A provincial task force selected the pipeline investment proposals from requests 
made by various municipalities, based on development priorities, needs, economic viability, and 
financial capacity.  The final list was determined based on comments from Bank missions, and 
approval by Shandong DRC.  
 
Page  2
The project is expected to have the following components:  
 
Component 1: Wastewater Management (US$245 million): Construction of wastewater 
collection system, treatment plants, and water re-use facilities in the following cities/counties: 
Gaomi, Huantai, Jining, Qixia, Weifang, Weihai, Yantai and Zaozhuang.  
 
Component 2. Solid Wastes Management (US$25 million):  Construction of sanitary landfills, 
transfer stations, and development of solid waste collection facilities in Heze and Rizhao; 
remediation and proper closure of exiting dump site in Zaozhuang.  
 
Component 3. Water Supply Management (US$22 million): Construction of (a) new 
waterworks and rehabilitation of existing water works, (b) raw and treated water transmission 
mains, and (c) distribution network, as well as upgrading the central control system in Gaomi 
and Huantai.  
 
Component 4. Sector Development and Capacity Building in the Wastewater and Solid Waste 
Management sectors (US$8 million): A selection of highest priority activities from (a) medium-
term sector policy development, (b) institutional reforms, including appropriate cost recovery, (c) 
enhancement of provincial and municipal EPB capacity, (d) establishing a role for the private 
sector, and (e) enhancing the capacity of key provincial agencies, such as DRC, EPB, Finance 
Bureau, and Construction Commission.  
 
Component 5.  A GEF component in Yantai, to contribute to reduction of land based pollution 
in the Bohai Sea.  
 
Component 6.  A Carbon Finance component for land fill gas recovery and sludge digestion in 
selected cities.  
 
The province has obtained approval from the central government for a Bank loan of $150 
million.  It is currently assumed that the Bank loan would finance about 50% of the project cost.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project’s 13 water supply, wastewater and solid waste components would be located in 
following 10 municipalities/cities of Shandong province: Gaomi, Heze, Huantai, Jining, Qixia, 
Rizhao, Weifang, Weihai, Yantai, and Zaozhuang.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Province has shown strong commitment to the project.  It has already established a 
Provincial Leading Group under the chairmanship of a Vice-Governor to give policy guidance to 
provincial agencies and municipal governments.  The Shandong Provincial Project Management 
Office (SPPMO), which has guided the preparation and successful implementation of the 
Shandong Environment Project and the Huai River Basin Pollution Control Project, has been 
given the responsibility to manage the preparation of the proposed project, and is being 
strengthened by additional professional staff.  The experience and knowledge accumulated will 
continue to support preparation of this project.  At the municipal/county level, Leading Groups, 
Project Management Offices, and Project Implementation Units have for the most part have been 
established already; in the few remaining instances, they are expected to be established shortly.  
Page  3
Based on national policy and requirements, every project component would prepare an EA 
report. The Shandong Research Academy of Environmental Sciences (SRAES) has been 
engaged to prepare them for all components, except for Yantai, for which the National Ocean 
University carries it out. These institutes possess EA certificate Class A; they have been involved 
in EA preparation for Bank funded projects and are familia
r
with Bank’s safeguards policies. In 
addition an international consulting firm to carry out design review and advisory assistance 
(DRA), supported by French Government, has been engaged to assist Shandong to prepare the 
project, including EA documents.  
 
The EA reports for the Yantai and Gaomi components have been completed and the EIA 
evaluation meetings organized by Shandong EPB were carried out in early September. The EAs 
for the remaining eight cities are still under preparation. On the information provided from each 
component EA report the DRA consultant will prepare (a) a consolidated EA report with a 
detailed evaluation covering all proposed project components; (b) EA summary; and (c) 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP).   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Chongwu Sun (EASEN) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project is a Category A, due to the complexity of the environmental issues associated 
with the landfills and wastewater treatment plants and the unusually complex issues of dump 
closure. 
 
EAs will be prepared for each of the 14 project sites and will be translated into one 
consolidated English language EA.  The GEF and carbon finance-related works will be included 
in these assessments.  Suggestions were made (comments from John Morton, attached below) on 
the contents of EAs of WWTPs and solid waste facilities including adequately mitigating the 
larger risks of the closure of the open dump and ensuring safety (i.e., from fires and explosions) 
of the methane facilities.  The task team agreed to incorporate these issues in the EAs. 
 
Under the Sector Development and Capacity Building component, an analysis is 
recommended of key environmental issues, such as pretreatment of industrial effluent, industrial 
and medical hazardous waste disposal, and closure of dumps.  The task team agreed to 
incorporate these recommendations into the EA documents. 
 
Conflict of Interest.  Project documents indicate that an international consulting firm 
supported by the French government is assisting with design review, providing advisory 
assistance, and preparing the project EA.  It is considered a conflict of interest when project 
design and EA work are carried out by the same firm.  The task team explained that local 
Chinese design institutes conducted the feasibility study and were responsible for project design.  
The French consulting firm was engaged by the client t
o
provide guidance, translate documents 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
into English, and summarize the work of the design institutes.  The French firm is not condutcing 
the EA work or write the EA document.  The task team will clarify the details in project 
documents to dispel the perception of conflict of interest.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Project activities may have impacts on local habitats.  The screening mechanism incorporated 
into the EA will be used to ensure that impacts on protected areas, known natural habitats, or 
established or proposed critical natural habitats as defined under the policy are identified and 
mitigated.  The need for further action under this policy is to be determined.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
The screening mechanism incorporated into the EA process will identify subprojects with 
archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values.  The safeguards 
team requests that an appropriate clause be included in all construction contracts regarding the 
procedures to be followed in the event of chance finds of culturally significant artifacts or sites.  
The need for further action under this policy remains to be determined.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
The project documents are unclear regarding the intended benefit to be extended to IPs if 
there are communities in the project area.   The task team will clarify this point in the PAD.  
While the feasibility study of the project area did not find Indigenous Peoples in the project area, 
a
screening mechanism will be included in the EA to determine if Indigenous Peoples are present 
in the project area and if they will be affected by project activities.  The need for further action 
under this policy remains to be determined.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
An individual RAP will be prepared in Chinese for each municipality with resettlement 
activities, and a Summary RAP will be prepared based on the individual RAPs following an 
outline prepared by the Bank.  The Summary RAP will be translated into English. So far three 
draft RAPs have been reviewed and comments were provided.  All individual RAPs will be 
disclosed in December 2005. 
 
Lessons Learned.  Implementation of the first Shandong Urban Environment was affected 
by resettlement issues.  The issues were in Jinan Municipality which is not included in this 
project.  These will be reviewed and the lessons learned from the earlier project will be applied 
to this project.  The supplementary information will be provided in the PAD stage ISDS. 
 
Linkage.  The task team has visited all project sites and reviewed the possibility of project 
linkages.  It was not certain if linked activities are present in the project areas.  The task team 
will review the situation again in the upcoming mission and provide supplemental information in 
the Aide Memoire. 
 
Clarify Project Activities.  The project documents are unclear regarding the number of 
project sites that will include land acquisition and resettlement activities.  The task team 
indicated that additional information on land acquisition and resettlement is available in the 
annex of the previous mission’s Aide Memoire, and it will be shared with the designated Social 
Specialist. Updated information on p
roject sites, types of activities, magnitude, monitoring 
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
agencies, etc., will be included in the Aide Memoire of the upcoming pre-appraisal mission in 
the form of a matrix.  The matrix will include the agencies with difficulties in earlier projects and 
the need to strengthen capacity in this project.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
X
Two subprojects will include water supply from two reservoirs.  The task team will 
investigate the dams to review maintenance records, safety plans, and the like.  The task team 
will inform the safeguards team of their findings.  The need for further action under this policy 
remains to be determined.   
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Timetable for EA preparation:  
 
•
Draft EA reports for project components 
 
 
Oct 31, 2005  
 
•
First draft consolidated EA report 
 
 
 
Nov 15, 2005  
 
•
Information disclosure  
 
 
 
 
Dec 2005   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Shenhua Wang 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
