Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC897 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 15, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P088964 
Project Name: Guangxi Integrated Forestry 
Development and Conservation (GIFDC) 
Task Team Leader: Jin Liu 
GEF Focal Area: B-Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID: P087318 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 20, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 31, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending  Instrument:  Specific  Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Forestry and Natural Resources 
Management 
Theme: Natural Resources Management 
and Biodiversity Conservation (P); Rural 
non-farm income generation (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Lin Zong-Cheng and Tony Whitten 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD:                                                                                                                               100 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
Global Environment Facility 
5
BioCarbon Fund 
2
GoC 100
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The overall development objective of the Guangxi Integrated Forestry Development and 
Conservation Project (GIFDC) would be to improve the management, sustainability, and 
environmental condition of Guangxi’s forest resources. This objective would be achieved by 
supporting: (a) the establishment of intensively managed timber plantations and the development 
of mechanisms that would better link timber production, marketing, and processing; (b) the 
demonstration of improved watershed management for environmental protection; (c) better 
management of nature reserves for the conservation of threatened ecosystems and biodiversity; 
and (d) a carbon sequestration and trade pilot program. 
 
C.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 
It is proposed that the project would finance the following four components:
 
Page  2
A.  Establishment of Timber Plantations (US$ 175.5  million)
This component would finance: (a) the establishment of about 200,000 ha of timber plantations; 
and (b) the expansion and improvement of existing nurseries to produce high quality planting 
materials through the introduction of superior genetic materials and management technologies. 
The above activities would enhance the productivity of forest resources and increase the supply 
of commercial timber. During preparation, the possibility of piloting forest certification of 
existing plantations established under previous WB-financed projects in Guangxi would be 
explored. 
As the plantation sites will likely be largely located in the remote mountainous areas and 
plantations need long gestation periods, it is expected that the project would effectively carry out 
its proposed planting activities and plantation management by engaging in the contractual 
arrangements between householders and planting and management entities. The plantation 
management arrangements proposed at this stage involve: (a) shareholding arrangement between 
households and an entity such as a village committee, village/township collective farm, state 
farm, or state forestry company; (b) beneficiary household groups representing their own 
interests; and (c) collective farms and state farms. The institutional incentives to benefit farmers 
more directly and promote private sector participation would be explored during the project 
preparation.   
 
B.  Strengthening of Watershed Management (US$ 20 million
)
This component would finance: (a) the establishment of about 20,000 ha of multiple-use 
protection forests; (b) the improved management of about 110,000 ha of existing degraded 
watershed areas; (c)
 where appropriate, the establishment of forest “corridors” between areas of 
natural forest to enhance biodiversity; and (d) the establishment of pilot plantations to 
demonstrate technical and methodological approaches to carbon sequestration and test the carbon 
trade process through afforestation activities. Further enhancement of biodiversity in the 
afforestation schemes and watershed management would be explored during preparation.  
 
C.  Improvement of  Nature Reserve Management (US$ 7.0  million)
This component would finance: (a) the development and implementation of effective 
management plans for pilot nature reserves; and (b) the introduction of community co-
management practices to the communities located around the pilot nature reserves.  These 
activities would enhance the protection of the threatened and globally significant biodiversity in 
Guangxi, especially in the province’s exceptional limestone ecosystems. The preliminary 
selection criteria for choosing pilot nature reserves, including the opportunity for integration with 
the plantation and watershed management components have been discussed, and a number of 
nature reserve clusters have been tentatively identified.  The detailed review, assessment, and 
selection of the sites will be carried out during project preparation.
 
Page  3
D.  Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 4.5 million)
This component would finance: (a) the capacity building of the provincial forestry department to 
plan and implement a sustainable provincial forest management strategy and plan (for 
production, ecological forests and biodiversity); (b) the staff training and new technology 
extension activities for plantation establishment, watershed management, biodiversity 
conservation and BioCarbon exchange practice at all levels; (c) the implementation of applied 
research programs to generate operationally usable technologies to improve forest resource 
management and biodiversity conservation; and (d) the establishment of a monitoring and 
evaluation system to monitor project performance, achievement of project objectives and assess 
the project’s environmental and socio-economic impacts. The team will assess the budget need 
for the project capacity building and monitoring during project preparation to ensure adequate 
funds will be allocated to this component. 
It is expected that the project would be financed through an IBRD loan of US$100 million, a 
GEF grant in the amount of US$5 million, and a BioCarbon Fund funding of US$2 million. 
Counterpart funding of US$100 million would come from provincial and local sources and 
project beneficiaries. The proposed project would be implemented over a 6-year period. 
 
D.  Project location  
 
Guangxi Autonomous Region is located in the poor southwestern part of China. The proposed 
sites for plantation establishment will be located in a number of counties across the province, 
covering almost the entire project area; the proposed watershed management areas will be 
located in the middle and upper reaches of the Pearl River in the north and northwest of 
Guangxi; and the preliminary nature reserve clusters proposed under the nature reserve 
management component will be located in the southwest and north of the Region. Selection of 
final sites will take place during project preparation. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The proposed project would build upon the Bank’s 20 years of highly successful involvement in 
the forest sector in China. Guangxi has participated in three previous Bank supported 
afforestation projects and the Guangxi Provincial Forestry Bureau has demonstrated excellent 
institutional capacity in the management of projects, including the strict implementation of the 
Bank’s safeguards policies. The existing “Planting and Environmental Protection Guidelines”, 
developed by the previous projects, have been proved to be effective tools in mitigating the 
negative impacts to the environment. These guidelines will be adopted and improved for the 
proposed GIFDC and will serve to mitigate adverse risks. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental  Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The project is designed to support the sustainable management of forest resources 
and biodiversity conservation. The pr
oject is expected to have a significant 
Page  4
positive impact on soil and water erosion control and biodiversity conservation 
through improved watershed and nature reserve management. The establishment 
of plantations will also release the pressure on the natural forests and decrease the 
demand for imports of forest products from neighboring counties. The planting 
sites are scatted across the province, are small in size and a variety of tree species 
will be used. However, the afforestation activities could have some minor 
environmental impacts, arising from activities such as earthworks in planting, 
small blocks of monocultures, pesticide use, etc. Therefore the  Environmental 
Assessment for Category B project would be carried out for optimizing the 
project’s positive impact on sustainable resources use and mitigating the potential 
negative impacts of planting activities.
 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04)     
The project will improve the nature reserve and watershed management, thereby 
enhancing the nature resource management capacity in Guangxi. The 
establishment of plantations will also alleviate demand pressure on the natural 
forests. A screening process will be conducted during project preparation and 
implementation to ensure that the project will have no negative impact on natural 
habitats.  
[x] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
As the timber plantation component may choose to use pesticides or herbicides, a 
Pest Management Plan will be developed. Where possible an integrated pest 
management approach will be incorporated into the project design during 
preparation.  
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
It is expected that there is no resettlement or land acquisition in the proposed 
project. However, there may be the issues of restricted access to certain forest 
resources within the nature reserves and watersheds. Mitigation measures for 
potential limitation of access to natural resources would be ensured through an 
appropriate project design and management process. If, in the course of the Social 
Assessment, it is found that any group will need to be relocated as a result of the 
extension of a nature reserve or any land acquisition may be undertaken during 
the project implementation, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or a Policy 
Framework for Land Acquisition would be prepared in consultation with the 
affected people.  
[x] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
Guangxi is known to include a number of ethnic minority groups. There are nine 
minority groups included in the proposed project areas at this stage. A Social 
Assessment will be undertaken to assess the project impact to the communities 
including the ethnic minorities and an Ethnic Minority Development Plan 
(EMDP) will be developed if necessary.  
[x] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
Project is consistent with the Bank forest policy goals. 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams as defined 
under this policy.   
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
(TBD) 
Page  5
The environmental protection guideline for plantations will screen out culturally 
significant sites from being eligible for financing if any. For the protected areas 
component, such screening will be included in the social assessment.   
 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
There are no known project components involving international waterways as 
defined under the policy.   
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the 
policy.   
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
The Safeguard studies will be launched around November 2004 and will be completed around 
May 2005. 
 
The Project Preparation Review is planned for May 2005. At this time all documentation related 
to the safeguard policies (EA, pest management plan, EMDP, Policy Framework), as well as the 
Social Assessment would be available in their draft stage. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jin Liu 
Date 
September 
15, 2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Glenn Morgan 
Date 
September 
20, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Rahul Raturi 
Date 
September 
20, 2004 
Comments 
WB178592 
C:\DOCUME~1\WB178592\LOCALS~1\Temp\k.Notes.Data\Guangxi Forestry ISDS --updated-09-15-04.doc 
September 17, 2004 9:45
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
