Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/29/2005 
Report No.:  31938
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P081161 
Project Name:  Chongqing Small Cities Infrastructure Improvement Project 
Task Team Leader:  Thomas L. Zearley 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 3, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (35%);Roads and highways (33%);Flood protection 
(21%);Sanitation (8%);Sub-national government administration (3%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (S);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
190.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
105.50
105.50 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to support emerging small cities to improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of infrastructure service delivery, to accommodate the rapid 
urban growth.   
 
3. Project Description 
Water Supply  
 
Dianjiang Water Supply.  Enhancement of water treatment, and network expansion in 
three areas of Diangjiang.  
 
Songji Regional Water Supply.  Supply of raw water to Yongchuan City (the first phase 
of a regional water supply scheme supplying 13 towns in water scarce areas in the 
planned western expansion area).  
 
Tongguanyi Regional Water Supply.  A raw water supply scheme supplying 16 towns in 
water scarce areas in the planned western development corridor.  
 
Tongnan Water Supply.  Enhancement of water treatment, and network expansion in 
three areas of Tongnan.  
Page  2
Yongchuan Water Supply.  Enhancement of water treatment, and network expansion in 
three small towns located close to Yongchuan city.    
 
Flood Protection  
 
Nanchuan:  Flood protection embankments provided to protect land for urban 
expansion.  
 
Rongchang:  Floor protection embankments to mitigate against serious flooding.  
 
Shizhu: Extension of existing flood protection embankment on south side of river.  
 
Roads  
 
Qianjiang: Spine road in new development area.  
 
Shizhu: Shizhu expressway link road.  
 
Tongnan: Link from Chongqing-Chengdu expressway to key secondary city of Tongba.  
 
Yubei: Access road to tourist site from Y-L expressway.  
 
Environmental Sanitation  
 
Public toilet upgrading and reconstruction in Chongqing City  
 
Solid waste management in Chongqing City  
 
Technical Assistance  
 
Technical assistance for capacity building and institutional strengthening   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Chongqing, originally under the jurisdiction of Sichuan Province, became a provincial 
level municipality in 1997.  It is  the fourth Municipality directly under the control of the 
Central Government. Chongqing is located in southwest China. It is the largest 
municipality of China, with an area of 82,400 km2 and a population of 31 million, among 
which 6 million live in large urban areas.  The Municipality includes 13 urban districts, 4 
cities and 23 counties. Based on its relative advantages of strategic location and economic 
strength, Chongqing has become the biggest economic center in the west of China, 
playing an increasingly important role not only in bridging  and linking West Chongqing 
(Yuxi) and Chengdu, a so-called Cheng-Yu Industrial and Economic Corridor in the 
west, but also in connecting the technology and economic development zones along the 
east coastal line of China through the Yangtze River via the Three Gorges in the east.  
 
The topography of Chongqing features mainly mountainous and hilly landscape.  Its 
climate belongs to sub-tropical humid area, with annual average temperature of 18-20oC 
and precipitation of 1200-1400 mm. The Municipality has various  river systems such as 
Jiangling, Wujiang, Fujiang which flow into the Yangtze River as their destination.  The 
proposed CSCP covers 10 cities/districts/counties throughout the  Municipality.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Andres Liebenthal (EASES) 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson (EASSD) 
Page  3
Mr Peishen Wang (EASEN) 
Mr Chaogang Wang (EASSD) 
Mr Lixin Gu (EASUR) 
Mr Dahong Li (EASTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.  
 
Environmental Assessment:  
 
Water Supply  
 
The impact of water intake on the reservoir, downstream hydrology, ecology and other 
water users were carefully assessed.  For Songgai and Tongguanyi subprojects which 
extract water from Yangtze, the water transfer amount (about 6 m3/s) is minor compared 
to the huge amount of water flow of Yangtze river (less than 0.08% of average flow), and 
therefore would have negligible impact on the hydrological and ecological situation of 
Yangtze.  For Tongnan subproject,  water will be extracted from Fujiang River and 
Yunhe River (a tributary of Fujiang) at the rates of  0.58 m3/s and 0.058m3/s, 
respectively, which  account for only 0.12% and 0.11% of the flow in dry season.  It will 
therefore, have little impact on downstream. For Qianjiang subproject,  water is from 
Hongqi reservoir and Yunwuzui reservoir, which are dedicated to drinking water 
resources.  Yongchuan will use water from Weixinghu, Lianglukou, Renmin reservoirs 
and Jiulonghe river.  Water balance calculation have been conducted and downstream 
environmental and social demand were analyzed. The analysis concluded that with 
consideration of downstream consumption (hydro, irrigation, water intake for 
downstream townships), the surplus water is enough to meet the water demand from the 
proposed projects without creating environmental and social problems.  
 
Page  4
The water supply will have indirect impact of increased wastewater in the supplied 
areas.  While promoted under the pollution control program for Three Gorges reservoir 
area, intensive waste water treatment plants are planned for overall Chongqing 
Municipality, and WWTPs for the project areas are/will be constructed and put into 
operation by latest 2008.  Due to the gradual increase of sewage network and treatment 
capacity, the surface water environment in Chongqing area will be improved.  
 
Sludge from waste water treatment plants is not hazardous and will be reused to enhance 
soils in farmlands.  
 
River Embankment  
 
River embankment subprojects will have significant positive impact by provision of 
flood control, improvement of landscaping, collection of sewage and better management 
of solid waste along the river banks. The environmental issues of river embankment 
subprojects are mainly construction related, including impact of construction activities on 
surface water environment, air quality, noise, solid waste and spoil management, labor 
health, safety, land acquisition and resettlement. These impacts are relatively minor and 
can be easily mitigation with know technology and construction practice.  
 
Dredging will be conducted for Wansheng and Nanchuan subprojects.  Leachate tests 
have been carried out in November 2004 for Wansheng and December 2004 for 
Nanchuan.  The results indicate that sediments have very low concentration of heavy 
metals, meeting standards for agricultural and landscaping purposes. Based on the 
monitoring data, the dredging silt will be reused as backfilling material in Wansheng, and 
for green space application in Nanchuan (as it complies with standard for agricultural use 
as well).  
 
Roads  
 
The road subprojects are relatively short local roads with low class, providing 
connection between townships and road networks. These roads will not go through any 
ecological or cultural sensitive areas. The main impacts would be construction related 
which can be minimized by known mitigation measures. Mitigation measures are planned 
in EMP, these include: less occupation of land, balanced design of excavation and 
backfilling, timely slope protection and reclamation/re-vegetation of temporarily 
occupied land, proper design of spoil disposal sites with proper drainage and re-
vegetation plan, rehabilitation plan for quarries, proper management of sewage and waste 
from camp sites, adequate tree planting plan along the roads, etc.  
 
Traffic noise will be a major issue during the operation stage. Noise modeling has been 
conducted to predict the impact scope. For the sensitive sites identified to be impacted, 
proper mitigation measures have been developed, including installation of noise barrier 
and tree planting.  
 
Public toilet  
Page  5
There will be 238 public toilets to be rehabilitated under the projects, and 94% of the 
existing septic tanks will be removed. Proper management of spoil and human waste is 
therefore a major issue during construction and rehabilitation. Special vehicles will be 
used to transport the human waste (both excavated from septic tank and from the 
temporary toilets established during rehabilitation) to dedicated human waste disposal 
sites for secure disposal or to existing waste water treatment plants. Construction spoil 
will be transported to municipal landfill.  
 
Most of the public toilets are connected to the municipal sewage network except  14 
toilets which can not be connected. They will be installed with Foaming Biological 
Treatment unit, which can adequately treat the wastes to the level thateffluent can meet 
the Grade I discharge standard. With proper sealing up design for all the toilets, the 
potential impact on soil and groundwater can be minimized.  
 
Odor is a major nuisance for the public during operation stage. Good design and 
facilities for ventilation, flushing and plumbing system will be provided, and most 
important, good management and maintenance (e.g. cleaning, adoption of chemical de-
odorants) will be strengthened during operation to minimize the potential nuisance.  
 
Adequate public consultation is important for public toilets rehabilitation.  Consultation 
have been conducted in March and August-October 2004 by means of public meetings 
and questionnaire surveys with total about 800 people participated. Broad support has 
been received from public for the project. The main concerns expressed include properly-
designed toilets and well-managed construction to minimize environmental impact and 
social disturbance, to which mitigation measures have been developed in EMP and 
communicated to the public.  
 
Resettlement:  
 
The project impacts of land  acquisition and house demolition of the proposed project 
will scattered in  about 89 villages in 39 rural (or urban) townships of 19 counties (cities 
or districts).  
 
There are about 13,744 persons in 3,290 households to be affected by land acquisition 
and house demolition, of which  1,841 persons in 480 households affected by both land 
acquisition and house demolition.  
 
In terms of land use, the total permanent land acquisition of the project is about 
4,050.2mu, of which, 3,916mu is collective-owned land (including 2,580mu of farmland 
and 123.5mu of house sites), 74.4mu is state-owned land and 46.2mu of land used by 
enterprises for construction. The total temporary land use is about 3,468mu, of which,  
2,561mu is farmland. The permanent acquisition of land will affect 8,366 persons in 2, 
266 households and the temporary occupation of land will affect 3,287 people in 887 
households.  
 
With regard to the impacts of structure demolition, the project will affect 603 rural 
households and 25 urban households, 27 enterprises and institutions and 19 shops. A total 
of 129,031m2 of structures  will be demolished, and 3,802 persons will be affected. This 
includes 90,063m2 of rural residences, 1,525m2 of urban residences,  35,655m2 of 
Page  6
enterprise or institution premises, 1,212m2 of shops,  421m2 of overdue temporary and 
illegal buildings,  and 155 m2 of other building.  
 
In addition, the project package will affect 58 types of ground attachments and public 
facilities.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
With the acceleration of urbanization in Chongqing, environmental protection is a major 
concern of the city.  To address this long-term issue, an overall framework for the 
development program of environmental infrastructure (environmental protection 
facilities) has been formulated: to improve the sustainable development capability in an 
all-around way; to accelerate the construction of infrastructure (e.g. traffic, 
communication, energy, water supply & drainage, landscaping, environmental protection, 
natural calamities prevention and fighting), scientific, educational and cultural facilities; 
to explore and use the resources in a rational and sustainable way; to strengthen 
ecological environmental construction and protection in towns and cities and try to create 
a
development pattern with growing production, well-being living and good ecological 
conditions, basically to provide towns and cities with complete functionalities meeting 
the needs of economic and social development.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives have been carefully analyzed in all individual EIAs. For roads subprojects, 
alternative alignments were assessed, including 2 alternatives for Shizhu road, 4 
alternatives for Tongjing, 2 alternatives for Tongnan, one bridge alternative for 
Zhenyang. For water supply subprojects, alternatives assessed include water resources (2 
for Tongnan,  2 for Dianjiang, 4 for Yongchuan, 2 for Tongguanyi and Songai 
respectively), location of water treatment plants (2 for Dianjiang, 4 for Yongchuan) and 
water transmission lines (2 for Tongguanyi and 2 for Songgai).  
 
Comprehensive comparison among these options has been carried out with integrated 
consideration of technical, environmental, social and economic aspects. The final 
selection was made based on a series of criteria, e.g. avoidance of environmentally 
sensitive areas and cultural properties, less social interference, less land occupation, less 
environmental impact, shorter length, safer operation, easy management, low cost, 
compatibility with local development planning, etc.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Chongqing Municipality is a repeat borrower for the Bank and has developed a good 
understanding and experience in implementing World Bank safeguard policies. As these 
sub-projects are scattered throughout 10 districts/counties, they will be implemented by 
local project owners. The capacity building and training has been planned for the project 
management staff, contractors and supervision engineers. Environmental safeguards 
supervision will be of importance for the Bank Team during implementation stage.  
 
Page  7
Specific measures to address safeguard issues of this project during implementation are:  
 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP): For all environmental issues addressed, 
mitigation measures are proposed and developed in the EMP. The EMP addressed in 
detail the environmental management and supervision organizations and responsibilities, 
mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting programs, budget estimates and capacity 
building requirement. Monitoring reports will be compiled at intervals of once every six 
months, summarizing the findings of the monitoring, and be submitted to the Bank. The 
EMP included provisions of integration of all mitigation measures into bidding document 
and contracts. Necessary budget is allocated within the project investment to ensure 
concrete implementation.  
 
Resettlement Action Plan:   In accordance with local laws, regulations and the World 
Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement,  14 component RAPs have been prepared for 
the different components in Chinese and one consolidated RAP was prepared in both 
English and Chinese.  The RAPs are based on detailed census of the affected people, 
inventory of affected assets, socioeconomic surveys and extensive consultations with the 
project affected people.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
EA Disclosure and Consultation: Public consultation has been conducted effectively 
throughout the EIA process, including social economic surveys, interviews with local 
authorities, environmental questionnaire surveys and public meetings. Totally more than 
2,700 people have been consulted and their concerns were incorporated into the project 
design and EMP. Draft EIA reports were locally disclosed during March and October 
2004 in accordance with the Bank requirement. The consolidated EAs have been received 
and will be given to the Infoshop on January 11, 2005.  
 
RAP Disclosure and Consultation:  consultation has been conducted effectively 
throughout the resettlement planning process, including inventory and socioeconomic 
surveys, interviews, and public meetings. The local people's participation process are 
provided in the RAPs.  All the RAPs have been locally disclosed in Chinese and publicly 
announced on local news paper. The consolidated RAP and summary report were 
received and have been given to the Infoshop around January 14, 2005   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/08/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Page  8
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/08/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/11/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/07/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/18/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  9
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Thomas L. Zearley 
03/25/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Peishen Wang 
03/10/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaogang Wang 
03/10/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Andres Liebenthal 
03/10/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/28/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments:   
