Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2005 
Report No.:  AC1245
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  China 
Project ID:  P084742 
Project Name:  Irrigated Agriculture Intensification Loan III 
Task Team Leader:  Qun Li 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 5, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 19, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (75%);Agricultural extension and research 
(19%);Forestry (6%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
266.00
266.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The principle development objectives of the project would be to increase water and 
agricultural productivity in low and medium farm land areas, raise farmers? income and 
reduce poverty, improve competitive capability of farmers under post-WTO conditions, 
and promote water saving and sustainable and participatory water resource management 
and agro-ecological environmental management in the Huang-Huai-Hai (3-H) 
Basin/North China Plain, which produces about 50% of China's grain.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Irrigated Agricultural Intensification Loan III Project (IAIL3) is the third in 
a
series of Bank-financed irrigated agricultural intensification operations in China.  It is 
designed as a ?repeater project? to continue and strengthen the successful activities 
started under IAIL2, but in addition includes substantial support for new activities and 
innovations which will enhance poverty impacts, water saving, non-polluting food 
production, farmer participation, market access for farmers, agro-ecological protection, 
and agricultural competitive capacity in the post-WTO environment.  
 
IAIL3 would finance sustainable development of modern irrigated agriculture in 107 
counties in 32 prefectures/cities in five provinces in the 3-H Basin -- Anhui, Hebei, 
Page  2
Henan, Jiangsu, and Shandong -- with a total project estimated cost of about US$454 
million (comprising an IBRD loan of US$200 million and counterpart funds of US$254 
million).  The Bank loan would finance about 42 percent of project costs, covering the 
Central Government's contribution.  Local governments would provide counterpart funds 
or 30 percent of costs to cover the remaining costs, in conjunction with farmers? own 
labor and cash contributions totaling 28 percent of costs.  
 
Project components are designed to enable an integrated approach to rural agricultural 
development, with combined economic, environmental and socio-institutional 
development outcomes.  Although the project is not specifically poverty-targeted, it 
would benefit low income rural areas which suffer from low yield land, lack of water or 
partial irrigation, by providing facilities for full irrigation and improved agriculture 
support services, which will raise incomes substantially.  The overall project benefits of 
increased farm income, increased production quality and output, and environmental 
sustainability would positively impact farmers in the project area as primary 
beneficiaries.  
 
Project provinces and proposed project scope and contents would be similar to those of 
IAIL2, but with several innovations and improvements added, including water-saving and 
productivity measures, pilot non-polluting/green food production, pilot specialized farmer 
associations/co-operatives and pilot farmer dragon-head enterprises to improve 
competitive capacity in the post WTO environment.  The five components of the project 
are summarized below:  
 
(i) 
Water-saving Irrigation and Drainage (USD 310.03 million).  The main activities 
of the component would be: (i) rehabilitation and upgrading of local irrigation and 
drainage systems at the tertiary level and on-farm, application of improved irrigation 
methods and technologies, and land improvement for about 500,000 ha of low-and 
medium-yield land; (ii) construction of water-saving irrigation facilities to demonstrate 
real water savings and increased agriculture production per unit of water through 
integrated irrigation engineering, agronomic and management methods for about 300,000 
ha; (iii) development and expansion of  SIDD/Water User Associations (WUAs) in the 
five provinces; (iv) establishment of  demonstration WUAs following a program 
approach in selected CAD areas outside the five provinces; and (v) implementation of 
water resource management plans in the 22 project counties in water-short Hebei 
province.  This component would aim in particular to improve the efficiency and 
economic value of water used in irrigated agriculture.  
 
(ii) 
Agriculture Modernization and Support (USD 64.20 million).  Activities to be 
financed would include: (i) strengthening and modernization of extension and support 
services; (ii) improvement in quality of agricultural products (e.g., high quality seed 
development and green food techniques); (iii) balanced fertilizer use; (iv) integrated pest 
management (IPM); ) (v) cropping pattern adjustment to build on local comparative 
advantages; (vi) improved farmer access to technical and market information; (vii) 
support for establishment of specialized Farmers Associations or Cooperatives (FAs) and 
improved ?non-polluting/green (organic) food? production, processing, certification and 
Page  3
marketing; and (viii) establishment of about 10 pilot demonstration sites for vertically-
integrated Farmer Dragon-head Enterprise Demonstration Bases (FDDBs) based on 
farmer participation in ownership and management through FAs, combined with vertical 
integration from production to market, to improve the farmers? share of the market 
revenues.  The component would aim to increase agriculture production, quality and 
value, and the farmers? share of the market value of production.  
 
(iii) 
Agro-ecological Environmental Protection and Management (USD 23.99 
million).  The main activities financed would include: (i) establishment of shelterbelt 
forest networks around farmlands; (ii) windbreaks for soil conservation  and protection; 
(iii) tree nurseries; (iv) soil, water and other environmental monitoring to track and 
manage ecological conditions; and (v) implementation of environmental management 
plans.  Forest coverage of farmland, mainly in shelterbelts around fields and along canals, 
would be increased but limited by the balance between their benefits in saving crop e-t 
and producing timber and fuel wood, compared to their own water use.  This component 
would provide ecological shelter for agricultural production, in order to reduce crop 
damage and evaporation due to wind, and would monitor the environmental and 
ecological impacts to help ensure sustainable agriculture.  
 
(iv) Institutional Development and Support (USD 33.13 million).  This would support 
institutional development and capacity building in SOCAD, POCADs and COCADS and 
would include: (i) training related to project implementation and management; (ii) local 
and overseas study tours; (iii) mobile expert teams and expert panels to provide expert 
technical guidance at all levels; (iv) monitoring and evaluation on project impacts and 
issues (e.g. groundwater) and operational research on scientific topics to enhance 
agricultural productivity and value; and (v) development and implementation of an 
upgraded computerized integrated project Management Information System (MIS) and 
M&E System (MES).  
 
(v) 
Project Survey, Design and Management (USD 22.87 million).   Primary 
activities would include (i) implementation and engineering supervision; (ii) engineering 
surveys and design  and surveys of geological and hydro-geological conditions as needed 
for design and construction; (iii) field surveys, preliminary design and construction 
mapping; and (iv) management of core activities such as disbursement, procurement and 
M&E.  These activities are essential to ensure smooth project implementation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Huang-Huai-Hai  river plain (or 3H basin), the location of the project, comprises 
portions of the provinces of Hebei, Henan, Shandong, Jiangsu, and Anhui and is China's 
major grain basket.  IAIL3 would finance sustainable development of modern irrigated 
agriculture in about 107 counties in 32 prefectures/cities in the above five provinces.  
 
Groundwater has been falling rapidly in specific areas of the 3H Basin (also known as 
the North China Plain) due to both surface water scarcity and over-extraction of available 
groundwater resources.  A thorough water balance analysis has been carried out for all 
Page  4
provinces, which vary in their respective situations: Jiangsu and Anhui provinces have 
overall surplus water resources, both surface and groundwater due to more abundant 
annual rainfall.  Both provinces have large reservoirs, major rivers flowing through the 
provinces, and large lakes.  Henan and Shandong Provinces have moderate surplus of 
surface and groundwater resources with seasonal shortages during the dry spell.  Henan 
and Shandong also have Yellow River diversion water (3.5 billion cu. m. in Henan and 
7.0 billion cu. m. in Shandong).  Hebei Province has less surface water, and its shallow 
aquifer groundwater has been over-exploited in the past resulting in falling groundwater 
levels.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin (EASSD) 
Mr Qingtao Xie (EASEG) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The IAIL3 project is focused on rehabilitation of existing sites, with limited construction 
and no major civil works.  The environmental and social impacts of activities would be 
minor and it has therefore been classified as a category B project.  
 
Environmental assessment:  As per Environmental Safeguard requirements (OP4.01), 
IAIL2 had a complete Environmental Impact review in its latter stages, based on the 
extensive project environmental monitoring database and analysis.  No adverse 
environmental impacts were found in implementation.  The proposed IAIL3 activities are 
very similar to IAIL2, with rehabilitation of existing works programmed, rather than new 
construction.  Therefore, at PCN review stage, it was agreed that a full EIA for IAIL3 
would not be necessary and that simplified ?repeater project? procedures would be 
followed.  The borrower and task team reviewed lessons from the preceding IAIL2, 
evaluated and reported on new sites to be included and developed  environment 
management plans for the new project.  Results are summarized in the IAIL3 PAD and 
reflected in a new EMP for each province under the project.  
Page  5
Pest management:  IAIL 3 does not finance the procurement of any pesticides.  
However, owing to the existing farming methods within the project area, it is expected 
that the Pest Management (OP4.09) Safeguard policy would apply. Under proposed 
project components, it is planned that agricultural activities would address the use of 
pesticides and promote reduction in use, with the widespread adoption of Integrated Pest 
Management (IPM) techniques and increased ?green food? production.  It was agreed 
with the Borrower that the responsible Bureaus would review the provincial IPM 
(pesticides) Impact Assessment Report for IAIL2, reflect lessons learned and include 
mitigation measures as necessary in the design of IAIL3 in their administrative area.  A 
pest management plan, building on IAIL2 experience with IPM, has been prepared for 
the new project, and reviewed by the task team and Safeguards Secretariat.  
 
Safety of dams:  IAIL 3 does not include any dam construction works, nor any financing 
related to dams.  However, in line with China?s national dam safety program, the task 
team has monitored the following issues, owing to the location of 17 existing reservoirs 
within the project area:  
 
Four of the five project provinces (Anhui, Henan, Shandong and Jiangsu) have listed 17 
reservoirs serving their sub-project areas. All the reservoirs are reported to be 
operationally ?safe? with respect to dam safety.  Dam safety in China is governed by the 
State Council Regulation No. 77 for ?Reservoirs and Major Dams Safety Management? 
and the Ministry Water Resource?s ?Methods of Determining Reservoirs and Major 
Dams Safety? issued in 1995.  These dams are monitored annually by the respective 
Reservoir Engineering Management Units under the Provincial Water Resources Bureaus 
for pre- and post-flood events, and special event (unprecedented rainstorm, landslide, 
earthquake, etc.) for safety based on the various technical parameters prescribed.  Safety 
remedial and strengthening works had been carried out on some of the dams over the 
years of operation since completion.  
 
During project preparation and appraisal, the safety aspects of these reservoirs has been 
reviewed in accordance with the Bank Safeguard Policy (OP 4.37).  Based on the 
information and documentary evidence provided and discussions held with each 
province, the task team was satisfied with operational conditions of these dams as 
reported, except for four dams ? Shizhiliang, Xiaotashen (Jiangsu), Ruanteng and 
Fengshuiling (Anhui) -  whose safety remedial and strengthening works are either still in 
progress or have been recently completed but not yet inspected and accepted.  
 
Specific supplementary information and actions relating to those reservoirs, including 
provision of final safety inspection and acceptance reports to the Bank, have been agreed 
and included in the legal covenants. On an annual basis, provinces will also furnish 
monitoring/status safety reports on pre-flood and post-flood, and special events 
(unprecedented rainstorm, landslide and earthquake) for all the seventeen reservoirs 
serving the sub-project areas.  
 
Page  6
Involuntary resettlement: No involuntary relocation or land acquisition is envisaged 
under the project, as project works are generally for replacement of existing irrigation 
structures in the lower branch/lateral system or construction of small on-farm works.  
However, the project might affect people through loss of crops on construction sites 
(though these cases would be few), and landscape leveling and amelioration might 
require farmland readjustment.  Mitigation measures would be taken to minimize any 
such potential impacts.  A Policy Framework for Resettlement and Land Acquisition has 
been prepared by SOCAD (the borrower?s implementing agency), which describes all 
these situations and avoidance/mitigation principles to be followed, in accordance with 
the Bank?s safeguard policy OP4.12.  In addition, consultation with farmers would be 
continued and impacts would be monitored and reported.  
 
Indigenous peoples:  The IP policy is not triggered by IAIL3, as there are no ethnic 
minority groups covered by the project area in the 5 3H basin provinces, as confirmed in 
the social impact review carried out by SOCAD.  Additional sites identified for 
expansion of Water User Associations, under the ?program approach?, outside of the five 
project provinces would follow Bank policies, including an assessment of any ethnic 
minority groups potentially affected by the project, and, if identified, develop plans to 
ensure equitable access to project benefits.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project is category B in nature, owing to the limited scope of construction and civil 
works, and the focus on rehabilitation of existing sites through a large number of small 
scale interventions. It is therefore anticipated that impacts will be limited.  This judgment 
is supported by experience under the preceding IAIL2 project, which utilized similar 
activities and approach and which, evidence from a detailed review shows, had no 
negative impacts.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Owing to the scope of IAIL3 and the limited impacts anticipated (see D2), it was not 
necessary to consider alternative options to address critical impacts.  During project 
preparation, a range of alternative design scenarios were considered.  It was felt that 
expanding coverage and consolidating inputs in existing IAIL2 provinces would enhance 
impact and build on the capacities developed within administrative units, thereby further 
strengthening the existing government program.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Following a comprehensive review of IAIL2 and a range of studies in specific technical 
areas in preparation for IAIL3, the borrower has prepared the following safeguard-related 
management plans:  
 
Environmental Management Plan (for each province)  
 
IPM Plan  
 
Resettlement Policy Framework  
Page  7
A
legal covenant will be included relating to Dam Safety, to ensure preparation of 
annual monitoring reports for all 17 dams in the project area, and provision to the Bank 
of inspection and acceptance documentation, relating to recent rehabilitation works 
completed on 4 of those dams.  
 
Under IAIL2, significant capacity has been developed within SOCAD and its local level 
implementing bodies.  Sustaining and further enhancing such capacity at national level 
and strengthening the local levels is a priority in IAIL3, with significant training and 
study options programmed under the component for institutional development.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Preparation for IAIL3 has been led by SOCAD and its supporting POCADs from each 
province.  Many experts and personnel from relevant line agencies, such as the 
Agricultural and Water Resource Bureaus, universities, etc, have been mobilized and 
involved in detailed preparation discussions.  
 
Key project beneficiaries will be farmers living and working in the project area.  During 
project preparation, extensive consultation with farmers was carried out and a 
questionnaire survey of 5,070 farm households shows that farmers are anticipating 
project activities in their area and would like to participate with their voluntary labor 
input.  Among the 107 project counties included, about one third have been chosen from 
poor areas, and the focus on development of low yield land has enabled more attention to 
poorer population and vulnerable groups in all project areas, in order to increase poor 
farmers and women?s share of project benefits.  During implementation, it is expected 
that such consultation will continue through the project?s monitoring and supervision 
activities, where direct feedback from stakeholder groups will be encouraged and 
documented.  
 
In accordance with the Pelosi amendment, the documentation outlined in D4 has been 
disclosed and made available in the Bank?s Infoshop (in DC and China), as well as 
through SOCAD, in line with the 120 day limit.  In addition, per the Bank?s internal 
requirements, this ISDS will also be disclosed in a timely manner.  Please see section F 
for further disclosure details.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/22/2005 
 
Page  8
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/04/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
No 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
No 
Page  9
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Qun Li 
03/17/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Qingtao Xie 
03/21/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Zong-Cheng Lin 
03/21/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/18/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
03/28/2005 
Comments:   
