Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
34575 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 6, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P095640 
Project Name:  Shanxi Qingshui Coal Mine 
Methane Project 
Task Team Leader: Jianping Zhao 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 16, 
2006 
Estimated ERPA Signing Date: May 26, 
2006 
Managing Unit: EASEG 
Lending Instrument: Emission Reduction 
Purchase through Italian Carbon Funds 
Sector: Energy (100%) 
Theme: Energy and Environment, Climate 
Change 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Peishen Wang, Youxuan Zhu,  
Loan/Credit amount (Euro, million): Carbon Funds: 32  
Other financing amounts by source ($m):  
  
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The objectives of the project are to: (i) create and trade GHG emission reduction (ER) 
credits under the CDM by reducing GHG emissions through capturing methane and use it 
as fuel by residential, industrial and commercial consumers; and (ii) reduce local air 
pollution through the reduction of coal use by industrial and commercial establishments 
and households. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The CMM project would consist of the following two components: (i) the 
construction of four gas collection stations, five storage tanks and 85 km of medium 
pressure transportation pipelines together with metering and SCADA system to collect 
and transport about 240 million cubic meters of coal mine methane (50% methane 
content) gas annually from four mines to one municipality and two county towns; (ii) the 
construction of four gas storage stations, four high pressure casing distribution stations, 
56 kilometers of medium pressure gas pipeline, 24 pressure stations, 413 pressure 
adjustment facilities, 30 kilometers of low pressure gas pipeline, 286 kilometers of in 
house pipelines, metering facilities and data acquisition and control system to distribute 
the CMM to 90,000 households and a large number of industrial and commercial 
establishments.   
Page  2
The total project cost is estimated at $72.54 million including the foreign 
exchange cost of $46 million and local currency cost of $26.54 million. An ADB loan of 
$46 million is to finance the direct foreign exchange cost and the remainder of the cost 
will be provided by an equity contribution of $17.54 million and a domestic loan of $8.8 
million from the Industrial Commercial Bank of China. The total production of Emission 
Reductions (ERs) during the first 5 years of the project (2007-2012) is projected to be 8.4 
million tons CO2 equivalent. Based on an indicative Certified Emission Reduction (CER) 
and Verified Emission Reduction (VER) price of Euro 4.25 per ton CO2, the total 
Emission Reduction Purchase Agreement (ERPA) value will be approximately Euro 35.7 
million in which CF will purchase around Euro 32 million value of the CER. 
 
Implementing Agency 
 
The implementing agencies of the project are Shanxi Energy Industrial Group 
Corporation (SEIG) and Jincheng Municipal Gas Distribution Company (JMGDC).  
SEIG is a corporatized entity fully owned by the Shanxi Provincial Government.  It has a 
large operation in developing coal mines, sale of coal, methane development, 
transportation and other downstream businesses. SEIG will establish an independent 
subsidiary for the construction and operation of the gas transportation project. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The proposed gas transmission and distribution project is located within the 
administrative jurisdiction of Jincheng municipality, in the south-western part of Shanxi 
province. It is about 500 km from Taiyuan, capital of Shanxi province, and 230 km from 
Zhengzhou, capital of Henan province. The Project spans across a total area of about 100 
km2. The project area is mainly hilly dry-land.  
 
The Jincheng area is dominated by heavy industries and coal mining business 
where environmental quality has deteriorated over the past several years. Currently, the 
Jincheng municipal government is implementing various environmental improvement 
activities with the objective to receive the Government’s designation of ‘environmental 
model city’. The
 
project is not located within or near any nature protection area. No 
critical habitats or cultural relics have been identified within or around the project area 
according to the draft EIA.  The proposed project will have significant net positive 
impact on environment by reducing greenhouse emission as well as local pollutants like 
SO2 and TSP. It will not produce any significant environmental impacts besides common 
issues anticipated during the construction and operational phase such as noise, dust and 
air emissions and water discharge which are site specific and can be mitigated with 
known measures and technologies. The EIA is currently being revised to reflect the latest 
changes in pipeline routing and gas station sitting. 
 
The construction of the gas stations and pipelines will involve a permanent land 
acquisition of about 13.5 ha and a temporary land acquisition of about 142.2 ha. A total 
of 108 households and 408 persons from 11 villages will be affected. As the amount of 
Page  3
land acquisition from each station is quite small and the income of villagers from planting 
is less than 30% of their total incomes, the economic impact of land loss will be very 
limited. There are no ethnic minority groups in the project affected areas and an 
Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP) will not be required. The implementing 
agency has a good understanding and practice of Bank requirements in terms of 
consultation and disclosure. A RAP has been prepared and information booklet was 
distributed to the affected villagers. To reflect the design change, an updated resettlement 
information booklet will be distributed by mid-December 2005.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Shanxi Energy Enterprise Group Co. Ltd (SEIG) is the implementing agency and 
responsible for safeguard policies. SEIG has basic capacity to implement the safeguard 
policies, as it has experience in conducting EA for other infrastructure projects such as 
coal mines, gas development and transmission projects. However, 
its 
experience of Bank’s 
safeguards policies is limited although EA regulations in China are fairly close to that of the 
Bank
.
Since the project is part of the proposed project to be financed by the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB), during the preparation of the project by ADB, external 
environmental and social consultants were hired to assist SEIG to implement the 
safeguard polices according to ADB/WB’s policies. 
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[
x
]
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The proposed project will have significant net positive impact on 
environment by reducing the emission of greenhouse gases and other 
pollutants. It will not produce any significant environmental impacts 
besides common issues anticipated during the construction and operational 
phase such as noise, dust and air emissions which are site specific and can 
be mitigated with well-known measures and technologies. 
The safety issue is the major concern for this project. While, risk 
analysis has been conducted in terms of gas leakage and explosion, 
geography and geology, earthquake, hydrology and engineering. Proper 
measures have been adopted in site/alignment selection to avoid sensitive 
sites, proper design of facility and detecting/alarm system, strict 
construction supervision, adequate operation maintenance, and also 
emergency response procedures. The task team includes international 
safety consultant to review the safety measures, and concluded that the 
project will be a safe operation, provided the measures be implemented. 
 
[
]
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
)
Page  4
[
x
]
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
The construction of the gas stations and pipelines will involve a permanent 
land acquisition of about 13.5 ha and a temporary land acquisition of 
about 142.2 ha. A total of 108 households and 408 persons from 11 
villages will be affected. As the amount of land acquisition from each 
station is quite small and the income of villagers from planting is less than 
30% of their total incomes, the economic impact of land loss will be very 
limited. There are no ethnic minority groups in the project affected areas 
and an Indigenous People Development Plan (IPDP) will not be required. 
The implementing agency has a good understanding and practice of Bank 
requirements in terms of consultation and disclosure. A RAP has been 
prepared and information booklet was distributed to the affected villagers. 
To reflect the design change, an updated resettlement information booklet 
will be distributed by mid-December 2005. 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests (
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[] A   [X ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The potential impact from the proposed project, installation of gas collection stations and 
transmission/distribution pipelines, will be site-specific, temporary and not irreversible, 
and mitigatory measures can be designed readily with known technology and good 
management.
 
For the concern of safety issues, current Chinese laws/regulations and guidelines cover 
all aspects of safe design and operation. Proper measures have been adopted for project 
design, construction and implementation with mature knowledge and management 
experience of coal mine and gas company.  
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  5
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-
stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the 
PAD-stage ISDS    
 
January 20, 2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS. 
 
EA Processing Schedule
.
The following schedule is aimed: 
 
·
First draft EA report (English) 
 
 
 
June 20, 2005 
·
Revised 
EA 
report 
     December 
30, 
2005 
·
Information 
disclosure 
     October 
18, 
2005 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jianping Zhao 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Glenn Morgan 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Junhui Wu 
Date 
Comments 
wb12009 
C:\Documents and Settings\WB12009\My Documents\34575.doc 
12/06/2005 9:34:00 AM
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at 
the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to 
potentially affected persons.
 
Page  6
