Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1025 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 14, 2004/November 3, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: China 
Project ID: P086515 
Project Name: China:  Third National 
Railway Project 
Task Team Leader: Graham Smith 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June/July, 2005 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Peishen Wang, Chaohua Zhang  
Loan amount ($m.):  IBRD: 200 
Other financing amounts by source ($m): Domestic funding: 864 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
China has expressed interest in World Bank financing of components of the realignment and 
double-tracking of the existing single-track, electrified railway line between Liupanshui in 
Guizhou Province and Zhanyi in Yunnan Province (Liu-Zhan line) and the associated 
remodelling of the Liupanshui terminal area. 
The potential development objective of the Project is to improve services provided to the 
customers of the Liu-Zhan railway line. 
This would be achieved, once the project is completed, by cutting two hours from the travel time 
for express passenger trains and taking an extra 10 million tons of bulk freight that would 
otherwise have to go by road at a substantially higher cost, or not at all. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
In 2002 the Liu-Zhan line carried 10 pairs of passenger trains per day and 26 million tons of 
freight per year.  It is working close to capacity (86% based on MOR standards) and cannot cater 
for the forecast traffic, as the western China economy continues to grow. 
In order to expand China Railway’s capacity to transport passengers and freight to and from 
Yunnan, the MOR plans to: (i) realign to allow higher speeds, (ii) double-track the remaining 
single-track sections between  Liupanshui and Zhanyi (254 km), and (iii) remodel the Liupanshui 
terminal area. As the section is part of the strategic Kunming to Shanghai corridor, it will be built 
Page  2
2
to standards which allow 160 km/h passenger operations, 25-ton axle loads and 6.5 m vertical 
clearance (to enable double-stacked container services). 
The new line broadly follows the existing corridor but, to enable the running speed to be 
increased, the alignment will be straightened.  Soil conditions are generally difficult and, as 
tunnel clearances need to be increased for double-stacked containers, several new and much 
longer tunnels will be constructed which, besides allowing higher speeds, will also reduce the 
route length significantly.  Commercial speeds (i.e. the average speed from one end to the other, 
including stops and local speed restrictions) will be approximately doubled, cutting end-to-end 
trip times by nearly two hours.  The pre-feasibility study proposes 21 km of bridges and 79 km 
of tunnels, the longest of which is 11 km.  Thus, 44 percent of the line will be either over bridges 
or in tunnels.  (While high by international standards, this is not exceptional for China Railways 
in such terrain).  The feasibility study currently being undertaken is still examining alternative 
alignments in a number of critical locations. 
The total estimated Project cost, based upon the pre-feasibility study engineering, is 
approximately RMB 8.8 billion (US$ 1.1 billion).  MOR seeks Bank financing of at least 
US$200 million toward the Project cost for civil works and goods. 
 
D.  Project location  
 
The Liu-Zhan line (254 km) is at the western end of the Shanghai-Kunming corridor and crosses 
the watershed between the Yangtze and Zhu (Pearl) rivers.  Although the ends of the section 
(Liupanshui and Zhanyi) are at similar elevations (1,800-1,900 meters), the line crosses three 
intermediate summits at between 2,000 and 2,100 meters, as well as passing through 102 tunnels 
with an aggregate length of about 44 km.  It was built as a single track in 1966 and electrified in 
1988.  It remains single-track apart from 10 km at the western end and 24 km at the eastern end. 
Its capacity is currently constrained by the demanding alignment (35% of the line is on curves of 
under 800m), long tunnels and intermittent steep grades (up to two fifths of the length is steeper 
than 6‰). 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The proposed project will be the 10
th
 World Bank project to be implemented by the borrower 
Ministry of Railway.  Previous experience indicates strong commitment from MOR on the 
Bank’s safeguards policies and a good record on implementation. It has developed in-house 
capacity to implement, supervise and monitor both the EMP and the RAP.  For EA preparation, 
MOR has retained the Second Survey & Design Institute of China Railways (SSDI), which was 
the EIA consultant for the last National Railway II project, approved the Board in June 2004.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
The project will include large volume of civil works for the construction of the 
railway line, hence shall be classified as Category A project. The borrower will 
Page  3
3
conduct full environmental impact assessment. EIA, EMP and EA Summary will 
be submitted to the Bank prior to appraisal. Bank’s Policy on Information 
Disclosure will also be followed.  
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
A
new alignment will be constructed for the second rail track through “green-
field”, even though it is generally within the existing railway corridor. Further 
field investigation will be conducted during EA preparation to determine whether 
any natural habitat exists in the project area or not.   
[
]
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
The proposed project is expected to require land acquisition and possibly 
relocation of some houses.  Chengdu Railway Bureau will mobilize a team of 
experts from both the railway design institute and Jiaotong University for the 
resettlement planning. 
[TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
The project area is not known to have ethnic minority autonomous administrative 
areas.   However, there are ethnic minority people in the project areas.  A socio-
economic survey will be carried out to determine if the project will affect ethnic 
minority communities and whether an ethnic minority peoples development 
action plan will need to be prepared. 
[
]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
A
survey will be conducted during EA preparation on existing cultural property 
within the project area to determine whether this policy is triggered or not. 
For the chance-find during excavation works, the usual precautions will be 
followed. 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60) 
[
]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP
 
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] to be determined 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
Page  4
4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
Environment:  
(1) EIA TORs to be submitted in November 2004 
(2) First draft EIAs to be submitted in December 2004 
(3) Final EIA/EMP/EA Summary to be submitted in February 2005 
(4) Disclosure in country in January 2005. 
(5) Disclosure in Bank’s Infoshop in February 2005. 
 
Social:
(1) Socio-economic survey to be completed December 2004 
(2) Draft resettlement action plans to be completed and submitted February 2005 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Graham Smith 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Glenn Morgan 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Jitendra Bajpai 
Date 
Comments 
