                               Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                Report No: AC1107
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/26/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: COLOMBIA                                               Project ID: P088752
Project: Rio Frio Carbon Offset Project                         Task Team Leader: Walter Vergara
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 9, 2004                   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: February 14, 2005                                IDA Amount ($m):
                                                                Global Supplemental Amount ($m):
                                                                Prototype Carbon Fund ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSEN                                            Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)              sector (100%)
Status: Lending                                                 Theme: Climate change (P); Water resource
                                                                management (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Project development objective is to contribute to reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from the
wastewater treatment sector in Colombia through the modernization of the Rio Frio wastewater treatment
plant (UASB; Up-flow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket), located in Giron (metropolitan area of Bucaramanga),
Colombia, that will result in abatements of CO2, CH4 and N2O emissions of about 38.19 kton CO2
eq/year and in an improved effluent quality from the plant. A share of the revenues from the emission
reductions will be used to support a health program earmarked for vulnerable populations in the
neighbouring Giron municipality.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project has two components:

GHG abatement at the waste water treatment plant. The project will support improvements in the
existing wastewater treatment plant that will result in elimination of CH4 emissions from the primary,
secondary treatment units, and sludge drying beds and a substantial reduction of N20 emissions resulting
from operational and design modifications to the existing facultative lagoons and improvements in the
quality of the effluent. The use of methane for electricity generation will further displace CO2 from
grid-connected power plants.

Social program for the poorest youth in the Municipality of Giron. A social program will be supported
with 15% of the net revenues from carbon emission reductions. The program will address overall health
conditions (including STD and HIV/AIDS), and employment among the poorest youth. It will do so
through an educational strategy (with community participation) on health and the environment, technical
training and organization for micro enterprise management.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Rio Frio wastewater treatment plant is located in the metropolitan area of Bucaramanga, which is the
most important urban area of the north-east of the country (5.5 % of the GDP of the country).

                                                        2
                                                                                                       ISDS




B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No   TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No   TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No   TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No   TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No   TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No   TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No   TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No   TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No   TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No   TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

From the point of view of the quality of wastewater treatment, the Rio Frio plant meets the normative
requirements established by Article 72 of the Law 1594 of 1984. This regulates the percentage of the
removal of suspended organic and solid charge. With the CDM project the minimum required removal of
organic charge will be widely surpassed and it will reduce the discharge of reactive forms of nitrogen
(NH4+, N-Norg), which are not regulated on a national level and which can cause considerable impacts on
receptive water bodies and the global balance of nitrogen. With the CDM project the discharge
concentrations of those reactive forms of nitrogen, will be substantially reduced (65% removal against the
baseline).


l Reduction of local emissions (SO2 and VOCs) and offensive odors and corrosive environment.
l Improvements in the effluent quality of the treatment plant. In particular, the effluent concentrations of
    ammoniacal and organic nitrogen will be reduced and this will contribute to improvements in the
    quality of the receiving waters (Rio Frio and Rio Oro Rivers) with positive impacts in the aquatic
    biota.
l Reductions in BOD and DSS as a result of more effective secondary treatment.
l Improvements in the management of solid subproducts (sludges, solid waste) which will eventually
    result in reduced operational costs and possibly in the recovery of materials.
UASB treatment systems may gain in financial viability and acceptance as a technology of choice in
secondary wastewater treatment

Global environmental benefits:

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS




l Reduction of the emission of GHG (N2O and CH4) from wastewater operations.
l Use of biogas from wastewater treatment and consequent displacement of fossil fuels.
l The use of carbon finance in wastewater treatment, may contribute to the financial viability of
    secondary wastewater treatment in developing countries and thus the project has a significant
    replication potential. The project has likewise, the potential of reducing net treatment costs for
    wastewater treatment.
The monitoring of N20 reductions will be based on kinetic modelling and direct measurements and thus
represent an innovative approach with significant potential for replication.

Some negative impacts might occur during construction of the plant (access road construction, increased
traffic, disposal of construction materials, noise, etc.), but these will be mitigated by good construction
practices.

An EIA has been commissioned and will be completed by October 2004. The review will be done by the
MOE.

The project includes a social component "An opportunity of improved quality of life for poor adolescents in
the municipality Giron". The draft proposal has been reviewed and a final version is expected by end of
May, 2004.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None anticipated.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
      No adverse impacts are expected as a direct consequence of the project. On the other hand, the project
      will contribute in the long term to the ecological restoration of the Rio Frio, through sustained
      reductions in the organic load from the treatment plant. This will allow natural processes to improve
      river quality over time. In addition, the reduction in VOCs will improve air quality in the surrounding
      area. The project also supports a social (health) program benefiting the local communities on a long
      term basis and will result in the reduction of greenhouse gases.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)



II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
      Compliance with the provisions of the EIA and EMP will be reviewed as part of the monitoring and
      validation protocol.
      The project sponsor will manage directly the implementation of the health program.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      A public consultation has already been undertaken and will continue during project preparation.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

                                                      4
                                                                                                           ISDS




[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Walter Vergara                                        05/07/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Alonso Zarzar                                         05/07/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                   Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Maria Isabel Junqueira Braga                               05/18/04
Sector Manager/Director               Abel Mejia                                            05/25/04

