Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/22/2005 
Report No.:  AC1465
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Colombia 
Project ID:  P082167 
Project Name:  Agricultural Transition 
Task Team Leader:  Matthew A. McMahon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural non-farm income generation 
(S);Rural policies and institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00 
 
LOCAL SOURCES OF BORROWING COUNTRY 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project aims to increase the competitiveness of Colombian agriculture in the ongoing 
period of transition by (i) optimizing the provision of scientific and technological 
innovations and (ii) improving the accessibility of export-potential products by 
strengthening the National Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures System.  
 
This Project will have national coverage and benefit those agents linked to the 
production chains on which public policy will focus the instruments financed through this 
operation.  
 
The main project indicators are:  
 
Component 1:  Results will be evaluated using the following key performance 
indicators:  (i) 20 R&D agendas developed  in a participatory and decentralized manner 
among production chains actors; (ii) no. of agendas being co-financed by the competitive 
fund;  (iii) % increase in the percentage of co-financing of the R&D agenda by the 
production chain participants; (iv) no. of subprojects being co-financed by the 
competitive fund; and (v) no. of  introduced innovations which have satisfactorily and 
timely reached their economic, institutional, social and environmental goals; and (vi) 
creation of a unit within the Ministry of Agriculture responsible for the continued 
Page  2
implementation of  a public R&D agenda for the agriculture sector and co-financed with 
the private sector.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening of the National Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures 
System, will be measured by:  (i) the number of staff trained (538 staff trained) in animal 
and plant health and food safety, in handling of SPS information systems, and in handling 
of the authorization method; (ii) a first phase of a SPS information system is under 
operation; (iii) authorization system in operation; (iv) achievement of conditions required 
for international recognition of meat chain-specific product admissibility (beef); (v) 
fulfillment of conditions required for international recognition of fruit and vegetable 
specific product chain admissibility (uchuva) and (vi) no. of  small farmers trained in 
Good Agriculture Practices (GAPs) and Good Management Practices (GMP) knowledge.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Knowledge Generation and Innovation (US $ 22.2 million)  
 
The aim of Component 1 is to strengthen the provision of technology and innovation 
through the strengthening of agricultural production chain actors in the definition, co- 
financing and implementation of R&D, as well as the preparation of participatory and 
demand driven R&D agendas around certain production chains and the implementation 
and co-financing of these agendas through a Competitive Fund. The activities to be 
financed in each of the chains will reflect its expressed demand and capacity to 
implement and co-finance its own R&D agenda. The result will be to optimize the 
allocation of resources for technology and innovation, and through co-financing 
mechanisms to foster increased private sector investment as well as increased 
participation of para-fiscal funds and territorial governments to support scientific and 
technological innovation, and technology transfer activities in the agricultural sector.  
 
To achieve this objective the component will finance:  (i) the development of R&D 
agendas for twenty production chains, which will entail the carrying out of the 
background studies for these agendas as well as the evaluation and strengthening of the 
capacity of these chains to develop, co-finance and implement these agendas; (ii) the 
operation of a Competitive Fund that will co-finance production chains? R&D 
subprojects which are consistent with the agendas defined; (iii) the design and 
implementation of a unit fully adopted within the Ministry of Agriculture (MADR) 
responsible for the  allocation of public resources to the agendas already defined and to 
the development and implementation of new production chains? R&D agendas; and (iv) 
the corresponding administrative costs for this component.  
 
Chain research agendas will be complemented with an agenda that, at the national level 
will deal with cross-sectoral issues, to be jointly defined with the Agricultural Sector-
related National Science and Technology System actors, under the leadership of the 
MADR and the National Agricultural Science and Technology Program Council 
(CPNCTA) attached to COLCIENCIAS, which will provide financial support.  
 
The resulting agendas will be the basis for the implementation of the Competitive Fund 
which will be focused on those production chains prioritized by the GOC. Among the 
criteria used for allocating resources to the various subprojects in the Competitive Fund 
will be projected economic and social benefits, target populations, environmental 
sustainability, complementarity with other ongoing initiatives, and the impact in terms of 
Page  3
scientific and technological capacity building. The Operational Manual for the project 
will specify in detail the implementation of the Fund.  
 
Since research subprojects to be financed through this component will take up to three 
years to be carried out, implementation of subprojects chosen through years 3 and 4 calls 
to be financed should be extended to years 5 and 6; that is, they will go beyond the 
deadline set for implementation of this operation with World Bank loan resources.  
Therefore, the GOC will be responsible for financing activities to be carried out during 
the latter years.  Additionally, once the World Bank loan resources have been fully 
executed, the GOC will continue to provide resources for the Fund.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening of the National Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures 
System (US $ 7.7 million)  
 
The aim of Component 2 is to strengthen the Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures 
System. The result will be a SPS system that will be able to respond to the sanitary 
standards of international markets and thereby ensure the admissibility of agricultural 
products to these markets.  
 
To achieve this objective the component will finance the following activities: (i) training 
professionals and technicians attached to the SPS systems; (ii) capacity strengthening (i.e. 
training, development of procedures, equipment, infrastructure) to mitigate the chains-
specific sanitary barriers to beef products; (iii) capacity strengthening (i.e. training, 
development of procedures, equipment, infrastructure) to mitigate the chains-specific 
sanitary barriers to fruits and vegetables; (iv) designing and implementing a national SPS 
information network; (v) designing and implementing an authorization system allowing 
for Audit and/or Test and Diagnosis Laboratory activities to be delegated to a third party; 
(vi) technology transfer to small farmers on best practices to improve the sanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions of agricultural production and (vii) the corresponding 
administrative costs for this component.  
 
To improve the impact of this project, needs identified in the SPS system were 
prioritized vis-?-vis requirements of three production chains (beef, dairy products and 
uchuva-Physalis) showing a competitive potential particularly in the US market and 
which would have a spill-over effect to other chains.  The beef and dairy chains were 
chosen within the livestock sector because their products are highly complex in sanitary 
terms, not only because they face not only zoo-sanitary barriers but also other food 
safety-related barriers. Although the investment plan may have been designed on the 
basis of overcoming barriers for a particular fruit (uchuva) [Physalis peruviana], its range 
to a great extent covers the needs being faced by a large share of the fruit and vegetables 
chain to successfully access international markets.  
 
This component will have the following products:  (i) staff of institutions attached to the 
SPS duly trained in the different subcomponent areas; (ii) first phase of the SPS national 
information network in operation; (iii) authorization system in operation; (iv) 
achievement of conditions required for international recognition of meat chain-specific 
product admissibility (beef); (v) fulfillment of conditions required for international 
recognition of fruit and vegetable specific product chain admissibility (uchuva);and (vi) 
small farmers trained in GAPs and GMP  techniques.  
 
The implementation of this component will take advantage of the achievements 
provided by other initiatives. Such is the case for the Support to Productive Partnership 
Page  4
project, currently under operation, whose producer organizations will be targeted as 
potential beneficiaries of technology transfer on Good Agricultural Practice.  
 
Component 3:  Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US $ 1.9 million)  
 
The aim of this component is to ensure proper project management and execution. This 
component will finance a Project Coordination Unit which will be attached to the 
MADR?s Technology Development and Sanitary Protection Directorate (TDSP) and be 
responsible of the general management of the project. Those responsibilities will include 
the following: (i) implementation and monitoring of the Project at the national level; (ii) 
to be the principal contact with the World Bank in project supervision; (iii) to coordinate 
the monitoring and evaluation system and project audit; (iv) maintain the project?s 
Operational Manual up-to-date; (v) supervision of the fiduciary entity that will be 
contracted for project resource management; (vi) to consolidate and update annual plans; 
(vii) to consolidate physical and financial progress reports to the Bank and other 
institutions; and  (viii) to manage the Special Account and prepare credit disbursement 
requirements.  
 
The PCU will consist of a general coordinator, a financial specialist, a procurement 
specialist, an M&E specialist, two knowledge and innovation specialists, a SPS specialist 
and a secretary.  This component will finance the PCU?s operational costs and fees, 
office equipment, workshops, information system, financial auditing, design of base-line 
for monitoring and evaluation and the fiduciary contract.  
 
A
Board of Directors will be appointed to the project to provide strategic guidance on 
implementation, and to ensure it conforms to national policies.  Board members will be 
the Deputy Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, who will be chair; the 
Deputy Director to the National Department of Planning; the Director of the Colombian 
Institute for the Development of Science and Technology (COLCIENCIAS); the Director 
of the ICA; Chairman of the National Council of Agriculture Secretaries on behalf of the 
regions; and a private sector representative, selected by the Government out of three 
candidates proposed by SAC (Sociedad de Agricultores de Colombia).   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will have national coverage and potentially may trigger OP/BP 4.01 
Environmental Policy through which particularly the OP 4.09 Pest Management Policy. It 
may also affect OD 4.20 Indigenous Peoples Policy to a lesser degree in some of the 
project implementation areas.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Indira Janaki Ekanayake (LCSER) 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (ESDQC) 
Ms Elena Correa (LCSEO) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Section D.4 on Social, Section D.5 on Environment, and Section D.6 on Safeguard 
policies of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) and Annex 10 gives the summary of 
the Environmental Assessment (EA) and the Social Assessment  conducted during the 
project preparation phase and the proposed Action Plans to mitigate potential triggers of 
this project on: OP/BP 4.01 Environmental policy and OP 4.09 on Pest management.  
 
No potential large scale or irreversible impacts on either the environment or through the 
use of pesticides and negative social impacts are expected from this project.  
 
During the mid-term review and according to the proposed plans appropriate monitoring 
will be done with the help of specialists to ensure due diligence of safeguards and any 
necessary modifications of the implementation plans.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
By following good practices on safe environmental management practices as described in 
the (i) environmental risk mitigation plan and (ii) pest management plan, minimal 
negative impact is anticipated due to the Project and its activities/subprojects.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
1. 
The borrower in collaboration with the project preparation team (including 
consultants) has prepared the appropriate Action plan documents, that will be discussed 
and finalized during the appraisal period, therefater it is expected to implement the 
recommended activities.  Those documents include:  
Page  6
a. 
Environmental Risk Mitigation Action Plan  
 
b.
Pest Management Plan  
 
2.   The project management unit has drafted the Operational Manual that describes in 
detail the approach to implementation of such plans. The team is expected to have the 
capacity to screen subprojects at the calls for proposal stage, mid-term, and and post 
implementation stage in line with the safeguard policies of the Bank.  The project 
component 3 is set up to  monitoring and evaluation of compliance and coordinate 
training activities related to safeguards when needed.  The project would actively support 
integrated pest management strategies in both the overall Project and subprojects 
implementation using appropriate good practices. When needed the project would draw 
on local and international expertise.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The action plans mentioned above are disclosed at the Ministry of Agriculture offices and 
web disseminated.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/21/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
The Environmental risk mitigation plan,and the Pest management frameowrk and plan 
will be disclosed in the country through the web site of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
notice boards.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  7
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthew A. McMahon 
04/21/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Indira Janaki Ekanayake 
04/21/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Elena Correa 
04/21/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Abdelaziz Lagnaoui 
04/21/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
04/21/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
04/21/2005 
Comments:   
