                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/07/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: COLOMBIA                                            Project ID: P086455
Project: CO-FURATENA AGROINDUSTRY CARBON Task Team Leader: Walter Vergara
OFFSET
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 15, 2004                   IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: October 19, 2004                              IDA Amount ($m):
                                                             Global Supplemental Amount ($m):
                                                             Prototype Carbon Fund ($m):
Managing Unit: LCSEN                                         Sector: Agro-industry (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Theme: Climate change (P); Biodiversity (S)
Status: Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project development objective is to contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
from the industrial sector in Colombia, specifically from the manufacturing of "panela", (whole brown
sugar), the second largest source of rural employment in the country. The project would make viable
improvements in energy efficiency, quality, health, social indicators (poverty alleviation), and overall
environmental performance of this agro-industry. Once in operation, the project is expected to displace an
estimated 114,700 metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2e) over an initial period of 7 years, an
estimated 333,700 ton CO2e over 14 years, and 553,000 ton CO2e until 2025. The project main activities
are:


Panela Manufacturing:
         In-farm improvements, geared towards the introduction of better production and quality practices
for the production of molasses, including the adoption of "organic" practices and the creation of a
cooperative approach to manufacturing, at about 100 small, family owned, traditional, manufacturing
farms in the Utica region of Cundinamarca.

        Central Facility for the production of Panela, to be commissioned on a turnkey basis, that includes
an environmental management plan and marketing strategy. The central facility will transform molasses
into high quality panela products, advance the environmental performance of the overall process, further
improve the use of energy (basically enabling small farmers facilities to rely solely on bagasse; avoiding
entirely the use of supplemental fuels), and upgrade the quality and value of the product, therefore raising
the net income of local farmers. Marketing will focus on national chain stores and new international
markets.

Environmental program. This consists of enabling activities to support "sustainable organic agricultural
production" in the area. Project promoters and leaders from the small producers association have
committed resources to support the implementation of a municipal environmental plan, already embraced
by the local government. The plan calls for the adoption of sustainable agricultural practices (land set
asides and elimination of biocides). The project will support the implementation of the plan amongst the
participating farmers.

                                                         2
                                                                                                          ISDS


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

The process has two steps:
(a)      at the farm level, cane production will switch from traditional practices to "organic" processes.
Molasses (50-60 degrees Brix) will be produced. Investments at this level are geared to assure the adequate
quality and handling of the molasses. Existing facilities will be modified to include pre-cleaning processes,
handling and storage. Adjustments will be made to improve energy efficiency.
(b) An industrial, state of the art, plant will be built, where Molasses will be dehydrated into high quality
panela products.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is located in the municipality of Utica in Colombia. The municipality of Utica is a small rural
community, with a total population, of 5,500 inhabitants. Around 84% of the rural population has unmeet
basic needs and 43.5 % are below the poverty line.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The regional environmental authority has indicated that the project does not require an
environmental license. The regional environmental authority, CAR, is developing environmental good practices
guidelines for panela production, and the project has agreed to follow those guidelines. Nevertheless, the
project will focus on certified "organic" production, exceeding the expected environmental guidelines for
traditional panela manufacturing.

Under the due diligence of the Bank, an assessment of possible environmental impacts is being undertaken.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No     TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No     TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No     TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No     TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No     TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes      No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

                                                         3
                                                                                                          ISDS


         This project will invest in in-farm improvement by introducing better production (improved energy
         efficiency) and quality practices for the production of molasses, including the implementation of
         "organic" production and the creation of a cooperative approach to manufacturing. On the other
         hand the project will invest in a central facility for the production of Panela, from molasses.
         The net environmental benefits of these project activities are expected to be positive, since the
         project will reduce the pollution levels in the local air-shed, will avoid the use of firewood from
         conservation and protection areas, and will implement soil and water conservation practices, as
         elements of the "organic" production process. On a global level, the project will reduce an
         estimated amount of 12,000 tons of CO2 equivalent per year.

         Some negative impacts might occur during construction of the plant, but these will be mitigated by
         good construction practices.

         An environmental management plan will be in place prior to start up of the unit. An annual
         environmental summary will be available for the plant on the implementation of the plan.
         Corrective actions would be tracked on an annual basis.

         Resettlement: The project won't imply any resettlement.




II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not anticipated

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
     No adverse impacts are expected as a direct consequence of the project. On the other hand, the project
     supports an environmental program. This consists of enabling activities to support "sustainable
     organic agricultural production" in the area. Project promoters and leaders from the small producers
     association have committed resources to support the implementation of a municipal environmental
     plan, already embraced by the local government. The plan calls for the adoption of sustainable
     agricultural practices (land set asides and elimination of biocides). The project will support the
     implementation of the plan amongst the participating farmers.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)


II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
     Compliance with the provisions of the EIA and EMP will be reviewed as part of the monitoring and
     validation protocol.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     The project developer CORPOANDINA is a local NGO of local farmers. Its objective is to facilitate
     sustainable development in the rural sector in Colombia, with emphasis on the Utica region. To this
     end they developed a general framework under the name of "Comunidades Constructoras de Paz"
     (Peace Building Communities). Based on solidarity principles, community participation,
     environmental sustainability and respect for individual rights, the program seeks to develop new

                                                      4
                                                                                                           ISDS


     models for rural productive activities that specifically benefit the poor and improve the well-being of
     the community as a whole. Within this program the Furatena project represents their largest initiative.
     Several small and medium projects are underway, building social capital and bringing new
     technologies and business opportunities to the rural sector.
    CORPOANDINA, ASOPANELA and the township of Utica have joined to create Procesadora de
    Mieles Furatena, a new owner/operator company to manage the panela processing plant.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

                                                5
                                                                 ISDS


Signed and submitted by           Name                 Date
Task Team Leader:                 Walter Vergara       06/05/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: Alonso Zarzar        06/05/04
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                      Name                 Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Juan Quintero         06/05/04
Sector Manager/Director           Susan G. Goldmark    06/05/04

