Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2005 
Report No.:  AC1313
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Congo, Democratic Republic of 
Project ID:  P088751 
Project Name:  DRC Health Rehabilitation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Eva Jarawan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 11, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTH3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Child health (P);Other communicable diseases 
(P);Population and reproductive health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to ensure that the target population of 
selected health zones has access to, and utilize a well-defined package of quality essential 
health services (EHS).  A total of ten districts comprising 83 health zones (population of 
about 10 million people) have been selected because they have: (i) some of the worst 
health indicators in the country; and (ii) very little or no Government and donor support. 
Given the precarious state of child and maternal health in the country (as described 
above), the pre-defined package of EHS includes in large part, an integrated set of 
maternal, and child health services, thus allowing a focus on these two population groups 
(detailed description in component 1 below). Key indicators have been identified to 
measure, within the selected health zones, improvement in geographical access, reduction 
of financial barriers to utilization, and enhancement of quality of care.  Specific targets 
(measured as ?change?) will be established locally through a participative process. The 
project will strengthen the capacity of local communities, implementing partners and 
government officials at all levels in planning, monitoring and evidence-based 
management.  
 
2.
Higher Level Objectives  
 
Poverty focus:  The proposed project is fully consistent with the Interim Poverty 
Reduction Strategy (I-PRSP May 2002). Enabling the poor to have access to primary 
Page  2
health care is one of the objectives of the I-PRSP (a full PRSP is expected to be 
completed by early 2006) and Government?s strategy that focuses on ensuring that an 
increasing percentage of the population has access to a package of  essential primary and 
first-referral health services (EHS) is sound.  The EHS package is defined in the MOH 
strategic documents and successfully applied in several health zones that are supported by 
donors. It is consistent with international practice and targets the most important health 
problems of the poor.  
 
Relevance to objectives of the TSS, Bank HNP strategy and Africa HNP Strategic 
Priorities.  Social Development is one of the strategic elements of the Transitional 
Support Strategy (TSS) (February 2004) with an accent put on HIV/AIDS, health, 
education, water supply, improvements of living conditions and social protection. The 
TSS recommends additional resources for health activities through both advisory and 
investment operations. The project, as described below, is also in conformity with the 
Bank?s Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) strategy, the Bank?s malaria strategy, 
and the HNP strategic priorities as outlined by the Africa Region.   
 
3. Project Description 
A.3. Project Description  
 
Strategic Approach: The project fits within the strategic framework of the 
Government?s November 2004 Minimum Partnership Program for Transition and 
Recovery, which has the objective of revitalizing the health care system in order to 
achieve progress toward the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  The 
Government?s strategy to achieve this objective is twofold:  i) improve coverage of 
essential health services through decentralized support at the Health Zone level and close 
partnerships with non-governmental actors;  and ii)  strengthen capacities at all levels, 
focusing on the main MDG targets (reduce malnutrition, child mortality, and maternal 
mortality, and combat HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, and other priority diseases).  
 
The Project builds on the experience of the health component of the Emergency 
Multisector Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Project, which became effective in 2002 
and is ongoing.  The health component (IDA contribution of about US$ 44 million) 
supports the development of essential health services in 67 Health Zones, as well as 
technical training institutions and regional drug distribution systems.  Implementation is 
contracted to eight non-governmental agencies working in close collaboration with 
Ministry of Health structures. It also builds on the experience of other humanitarian and 
development partners working in the country.  
 
Component 1 (US$ 104 million):  Expand Access  and Utilization of a Proven Package 
of Essential Health Services to Selected Districts and Health Zones.  
 
The Project will support the implementation of the Ministry of Health?s (MOH) 
Package of Essential Health Services (EHS) in selected Health Zones.  As the burden of 
disease falls largely on women and children, the project will support Government efforts 
to ensure the provision of  the following package of  EHS:  
 
Page  3
(i)  Child preventive health interventions:  As DRC has a five-year total grant 
commitment from the Global Alliance for Vaccines Initiative (GAVI) of US$46,230,500, 
this Project does not propose to fund vaccines.  However, it is clear that the national 
vaccination program is experiencing significant difficulties in ensuring the delivery of 
vaccines to the Provinces and from there to the Health Zones.  In addition, when 
available, existing cold chain equipment is inadequate. Vaccinations are given as part of 
pre-school consultation visits to the PHC facilities for prevention services that also 
include vitamin A supplementation and the distribution of insecticide-treated bed nets 
(ITNs) for the prevention of malaria.  Both of these are essential functions of the health 
system, and massive increases in the coverage of all three of these interventions will be 
required if the objectives of this Project are to be reached.  
 
(ii)  Maternal and neonatal health services: A second package of preventive services to 
reduce the heavy burden of maternal mortality involves: (1) family planning as a crucial 
service for prevention of unintended pregnancies and its devastating consequences on 
mothers and children health. While globally promoting knowledge on family planning 
and reproductive health (FP/RH) to women, men and adolescents, the project will make 
quality FP/RH services available at both community level and at existing services 
delivery points. A particular emphasis will be made on ensuring availability of 
commodities at all times to reduce huge unmet needs; (2) neonatal care which will benefit 
both mothers and children, will ensure that skilled provider attends every birth. 
Furthermore, every first level hospital should be able to provide financially and 
geographically accessible emergency obstetrical services.  
 
(iii)  Integrated Management of Childhood Illnesses (IMCI): Generic WHO protocols 
for the treatment of acute respiratory infections, diarrhea, fever/malaria, measles, and 
malnutrition have been adapted for use at first-level health centers and at referral 
hospitals. IMCI is being implemented, albeit slowly, in Health Zones which enjoy 
external support.  This Project would strongly support a vigorously accelerated expansion 
of these services.  To do this, training programs will have to be well planned and 
adequately funded. The project will also support the implementation of the new policy for 
the treatment of diarrhea, and the incorporation of new national malaria treatment 
policies into IMCI guidelines. Finally, it will encourage bringing preventive and curative 
care as close as possible to communities, such as antibiotic treatment for pneumonia at 
the community level.  
 
(iv)  Community-level activities: In DRC, most childhood mortality occurs not at the 
hospital or even at the Health Center, but within the community. The Project will support 
the development of Community Health Workers CHWs (relais communautaires) whose 
functions will include the treatment of diarrhea, pneumonia, malaria, the promotion of 
family planning acceptance, of the 12 key behaviors included in the Community-IMCI 
package, and the identification and referral of obstetrical complications to the Health 
Center or directly to the first-referral hospital.  Because CHWs will be volunteer workers, 
adequate training and supervision, as well as their supply of basic drugs and equipment 
need to be provided from the Health Center and the Central Health Zone Office. Finally, 
Page  4
a
system of performance incentives for the competent delivery of health services at the 
community level will be considered.    
 
The proper management of childhood illnesses and delivery complications cannot be 
successfully implemented without the presence of strong referral-level facilities. The 
project will support the development of such a system.  
 
Improving Utilization of Basic Health Services: In addition to restoring the availability 
of priority primary health care and minimum referral services in target Health Zones, the 
project will contribute to reducing financial barriers to utilization, particularly for 
maternal and child health services.  In line with Government?s strategy which involves a 
partnership between Government, external donors, and the population in financing of 
basic health services, the project will leave flexibility to implementing partners, in 
consultation with local authorities, to adopt consultation fees and drug price policies most 
appropriate to their situation. At the same time, the Project will support improvement in 
financial management, transparency, and accountability, at the facility and Health Zone 
levels, as well as improve exemption programs for the poorest.  Finally, the Project will 
include reforms at the National, Provincial, and District levels to increase Government 
funding for the system ? particularly health staff remuneration ? and eliminate the current 
practice of ?taxation? of lower levels of the system by the intermediary levels.  In 
addition to cost, issues such as waiting time, the quality of the reception, and the respect 
accorded to the patient may be barriers to utilization. The project will support activities 
aimed at improving service quality and health seeking behavior of households.  
 
At the same time as supporting basic health services to address the urgent needs of the 
population, progressively more attention and resources should be devoted to developing 
the capacities of the system.  The Project will strengthen coordination and supervisory 
capacities of district and health zone administration by providing training in key areas 
such as program coordination, financial and personnel management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The Project will also focus on improving the technical capacity of front-line 
health workers, including CHWs, through training and technical assistance.  
 
The above set of activities - though seemingly complex in the Congolese setting - is 
being successfully implemented in a number of health zones (as documented in the DRC 
Country Status Report/Health).  Positive results are attributed to a number of factors: (i) 
Government?s commitment to the health zone model; (ii) close integration of private 
non-profit service providers; and (iii) successful performance-based partnerships between 
NGOs (serving as implementing partners and ?catalysts?), and service providers (public, 
NGOs, and private). Implementing partners (IPs) that have been most successful have 
effectively associated local authorities and found ways to motivate them to play the role 
that they are expected to play, i.e planning, resource allocation, supervision and evidence-
based management.  
 
This Project builds on this experience and expands it to 83 more health zones.This 
component has been costed on the basis of experience in programs supported by the Bank 
and other donors in DRC which has shown that the package of essential health services 
Page  5
can be provided at a per capita cost in the range of US$2-3 annually. The project will 
finance performance-based partnership agreements (PPAs) between the MOH and 
Implementing Partners (IPs) as well as between the IPs and local authorities and service 
providers. Implementing partners, mostly (but not exclusively) NGOs are expected to 
support the existing health system - they will not provide services directly. The basic 
thrust of this component is to allow IPs and their MOH partners at the District and Health 
Zone levels the flexibility to design and implement programs most adapted to local 
circumstances, while closely monitoring their performance in achieving project 
objectives.  A number of IPs have already responded to the notice of expression of 
interest and terms of reference highlighting the above activities have been drafted in 
preparation for the competitive selection process.  
 
Component 2 (US$ 12 million):  Strengthen Capacity for Oversight and Evidence-based 
Management of the Health System  
 
(i) 
Monitoring and Evaluation. The design of the Project requires an important focus 
on monitoring and evaluation to assess the performance of the IPs as well as provide 
constructive feedback and share best practices.  Performance-based Agreements between 
IPs and the MOH will set out the broad goals and strategic directions of the Project (such 
as described in the sections above), leaving Implementing Partners flexibility in 
achieving them according to the specific contexts they are working in.  This strategy fits 
well with DRC?s focus on results, its decentralized health system, and avoids 
inefficiencies of overly-directive project design. An independent External Evaluation 
Agency (EEA) will be contracted to measure the performance of the IPs on the basis of a 
set of agreed indicators, and a financial incentive (bonus) will be tied to their 
performance. The project will support a baseline study in the target areas as well as a 
number of M&E activities.  
 
(ii) 
Building capacity for stewardship and strategy development. A major long-term 
benefit of the performance-based design of the Project is anticipated to be the 
strengthening of MOH ownership and capacity in terms of stewardship of the health 
system.  M & E findings will be regularly shared and discussed, under the leadership of 
the MOH, during regular ?Health Forums? (at least annual) involving the IPs and other 
sector partners.  The Health Forum will be an important accountability mechanism to 
disseminate findings, lessons, and best practices relevant to implementation of health 
activities.  This component of the Project is designed to provide the tools to the MOH to 
strengthen its coordination and supervision of IPs (which should also spill-over into 
better management of the implementing partners of other donor programs).  In addition, 
capacity will be strengthened for the MOH to effectively initiate and analyze specific 
studies of policy importance, such as household out-of-pocket health expenditures, the 
functioning of user fee exemption systems, and human resources and health labor 
markets, and to improve budget execution.  
 
Component 3  (US$ 4 million): Project Coordination  
 
Page  6
The project will strengthen project coordination with an increment in resources required 
to track progress, and carry out (or contract-out) procurement and financial management 
activities directly associated with project activities. The Project Coordination Unit will be 
responsible for convening periodic ?health forums? to which will be invited all health 
development partners in the country, particularly those involved in implementation.  The 
PCU will primarily rely on existing MOH staff and avoid the creation of external and 
parallel structures. External technical support will be contracted on an occasional basis to 
address the capacity needs of the Unit as well as other parts of the Ministry in areas 
important to the Project objectives.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
In addition to Kinshasa, the project will target selected districts in the following 
provinces: Equateur, Bandundu, Katanga, and Maniema.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
None   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
While the project is less likely to generate adverse environmental effects, its 
implementation will cause an  
 
increase in the volume of hazardous medical waste generated. Inappropriate handling 
and disposal of  
 
medical waste and inadequate management of the respective disposal sites in urban or 
peri-urban areas can  
 
be
serious threat if left unchecked.   
Page  7
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In accordance with World Bank guidelines, a Medical Waste Management Plan 
(MWMP) had been  
 
prepared during the MAP preparation, in close collaboration with the Ministry of 
Health, national  
 
institutions and agencies involved in monitoring environmental protection, 
representatives of civil society  
 
and grassroots communities. Analysis of the findings of the study yielded a number of 
recommendations,  
 
which served as guiding principles in the formulation of a Work Plan for the 
management of a health care  
 
waste management plan for the DRC. This plan has started in November 2004 at MAP 
effectiveness and  
 
will be executed for an initial period of five years covering the project#s duration. The 
MAP is currently  
 
financing training of health care professionals, traditional birth attendants/traditional 
healers, and  
 
community workers on the handling and management of medical waste (including on 
separation, transport  
 
and disposal of hazardous medical waste). The MAP also finances the revision of 
existing health sector  
 
guidelines on appropriate management of medical waste at medical facilities and at 
disposal sites to include  
 
the relevant sections regarding HIV/AIDS. The MWMP will be presented to the new 
Project implementing  
 
agencies and their contract will include an article on implementing MWMP#s 
recommendations.  
 
Experience to date, however, has been satisfactory with the MSP taking the necessary 
steps to ensure  
 
compliance with World Bank safeguards.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
All stakeholders including municipal authorities, Parliament, Health Facility authorities, 
both at national and provincial levels, Private health practitioners, civil society 
associations and NGOs were consulted during the MAP preparation in 2003. Additional  
 
consultations have been held including consultative workshops on medical waste 
management problems. During these workshops, a draft copy of the environment 
assessment on the medical waste management plan has been presented to all stakeholders  
Page  8
for comments, which have been incorporated in the final draft. The above-mentioned 
document has been disclosed in the Democratic Republic of Congo on December 23, 
2003 and re-disclosed in DRC in December, 2004 as well as at the Bank's Infoshop on 
January 6th, 2005.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/08/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/08/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/06/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
Yes 
Page  9
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
04/20/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
04/20/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Eva Jarawan 
04/22/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Laura Frigenti 
05/04/2005 
Comments:   
