Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 30, 2004           Report No.: AC 1201 [OPCS2]
A. Basic Project Data
A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of   Project ID: P088619
Project Name: Emergency Living Conditions  Task Team Leader: Xavier Devictor
Improvement
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2004  Estimated Board Date: February 2005
Managing Unit: AFTU2                     Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan
Sector: General energy sector (1 5%);General  Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict
transportation sector (45%);General water,  reconstruction (P);Access to urban services for
sanitation and flood protection sector   the poor (S);Infrastructure services for private
(20%);Health (10%);General education sector  sector development (S)
(10%)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Kristine Ivarsdotter
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IDA: 71
Other financing amounts by source:                            Not applicable
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency  Yes? [x ]       No?   [}
recovery?
Environmental Category: B               i Safeguard Classification: S2
A.2. Project Objectives
The Project aims to assist the Government in responding to multi-sector emergency needs in
urban areas - including large cities (other than Kinshasa), as well as key medium and small
urban centers. In the context of the Government's response to the recovery and reunification
challenges, of the existing consensus and burden-sharing among donors, and of the overall Bank
strategy in DRC, such response is expected to include: (i) support to restoring State authority
throughout the country; (ii) complement to actions currently underway to address urgent needs in
urban areas; and (iii) contribution to restoring key transport links to isolated areas.
Such support is essential to help mitigate the ongoing social and humanitarian crisis and to
facilitate the continued implementation of the economic reforrn program - and hence to contribute
to the stabilization of DRC. It is also key to prevent a further degradation of the situation, which
could significantly undermine the ongoing transition process.
The Project is designed as a scaling-up and geographical expansion of activities currently
financed under the Emergency Economic and Social Reunification Support Project (EESRSP).
Activities which are being successfully implemented in the reunified provinces will be expanded
to the rest of the country. Implementation arrangements will be identical to those under the
EESRSP (which have proven effective). The Project is expected to complement earlier support
by IDA and interventions by other donors (including in the form of humanitarian assistance,
contributions to the MONUC, and political support), to help ensure a successful process of
transition and recovery.



A.3. Project Description
The Project includes four components as described below:
. Component A: Small-scale, urgent support to urban centers ($9.5 million). This
component will be a geographical expansion of similar activities successfully
implemented under the EESRSP (component 4) - with a focus on the Western and
Southern parts of the country. It will provide resources to respond to emergency needs
(for infrastructure rehabilitation, social services delivery, and economic revitalization
activities) in small and medium cities.
* Component B: Medium-scale urban rehabilitation works ($24 million). This component
will be a geographical expansion of similar activities successfully implemented under the
EESRSP (component 4) - with a focus on the Western and Southern parts of the country.
It will finance quick-impact investments in seven target cities (including infrastructure
rehabilitation, social services delivery, and economic revitalization activities with a
particular focus on labor-intensive activities).
*  Component C. Large-scale infrastructure rehabilitation ($25 million). This component
will be a scale-up of similar activities successfully implemented under the EESRSP
(component 3), with a focus on re-connecting isolated areas in the Western and Southern
parts of the country through the re-opening or rehabilitation of major roads, and on the
basis of priorities identified in the PMPTR.
* Component D: Support to provincial institutions ($7 million). This component will be a
scale up of similar activities successfully implemented with financing from the EESRSP
(components 2 and 4), the European commission, and bilateral donors. It will support the
rehabilitation and strengthening of key public entities in all provinces on the basis of a
pre-approved, institution-specific, needs assessment.
Financing
The following breakdown is proposed:
BORROWER:                  US$0.00
IDA:                       US$71 million
Total Project Cost:        US$71 million
Table: Emergency Living Conditions Improvement Project - Cost Breakdown
Component                      Estimated cost     Percent of total
(US$ million)
Small-scale, urgent support to urban centers       9.5                 13
Medium-scale urban rehabilitation works             24                 34
Large-scale infrastructure rehabilitation          25                  35
Support to provincial institutions                  7                  10
Project management                                  3                   4
Contingencies                                      2.5                  3
Total                                               71                 100
2



It is recommended that IDA contribution includes a grant element, in view of the nature of the
activities financed under the Project.
Implementation
Implementation arrangements will replicate those successfully used under the EESRSP - and will
rest on three existing and well-functioning entities:
*  The Interministerial Steering Committee ("Comite Interministeriel de Suivi", CIS), which
oversees implementation of the EESRSP, will provide overall supervision and guidance;
*  The Project Coordination Unit ("Unite de Coordination du Projet", UCOP), set for the
EESRSP, will be responsible for ensuring a proper overall implementation of the project
and liaison with Congolese authorities and the Bank; this Unit will in particular be
responsible for disbursement and financial management;
*  The Central Coordination Office ("Bureau Central de Coordination", BCECO), which
plays an active role in implementation of several Bank-financed projects, will be
responsible for procurement of all major contracts.
1 .   Specific arrangements for each component will be as follows:
*  Component A: Small-scale, urgent support to urban centers. The component will be
implemented by BCECO, under a service contract between UCOP and BCECO. BCECO
will be responsible for all aspects of implementation (including procurement and
financial management) and will report to UCOP.
*  Component B: Medium-scale urban rehabilitation. The component will be implemented
through a services contract between UCOP and a specialized firm, the Urban
Rehabilitation Management Firm. This firm will be recruited through a competitive
process managed by BCECO (in its capacity of procurement agent for the Project), on the
basis of terms of reference identical to those successfully used under the EESRSP. The
firm will act on behalf of the Government. It will contract private enterprises for the
execution of the activities supported under the component and will be responsible for all
aspects of implementation (except for the identification of priority activities, which has
been carried out by UCOP).
*  Component C: Large-scale infrastructure rehabilitation. The component will be
implemented under UCOP's responsibility, with BCECO acting as procurement agent.
Contracts will be signed by UCOP, which will be responsible for monitoring the
execution of the contracts on behalf of the Government, for ensuring the payment of the
contractors, and for managing the related financial management tasks.
*  Component D: Support to provincial institutions. This component will be implemented
under the same arrangements as component B - i.e., through the service contract with the
Urban Rehabilitation Management Firm (and possibly with the similar firm which is
implementing activities under the EESRSP in the four Eastern provinces). This firm will
act on behalf of the Govemment and will be responsible for all aspects of implementation
as described above.
3



A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The location of specific activities is expected to be as follows:
*  Component A: Activities will be implemented in, or in the immediate vicinity of, the
following eighteen target cities: Mbanzangungu Luozi and Moanda (Bas-Congo); Inongo,
Kenge and Bulungu (Bandundu); Lisala, Ingenge and Bikoro (Equateur); Tshikapa, Luiza
and Mweka (Kasai Occidental); Mweneditu, Kabeyakamwanga, and Tshilenge (Kasai
Oriental); Kasenga, Kamina and Kolwezi (Katanga).
*  Component B: Activities will be implemented in, or in the immediate vicinity of, the
following seven cities: Bandudu, Kananga, Kikwit, Lubumbashi, Matadi, Mbandaka, and
Mbuji-Mayi.
*  Component C: Road rehabilitation activities will be implemented in the Katanga province
(Lubumbashi - Kasomeno - Kasenga, 220 km) and in the Equateur province (Zongo -
Boyabo - Bari - Gemena - Akula, 383 km don't 19 km Libenge - Boyabo).
*  Component D: Activities will be implemented in each of the ten provincial capitals
(other than Kinshasa).
B. Check Environmental Category A [],B [X], C [],FI []
Comments:
The Project is classified as environmental category B because activities financed under the
Project are not expected to have significant negative environmental impacts. No new major
construction is envisaged (rather the Project will support the rehabilitation and-reconstruction of
deteriorated infrastructure). The Project is an emergency operation processed under OP8.50. As
has been the practice with emergency projects in post-conflict countries (processed uder OP 8.500
both in DRC and elsewhere), safeguard studies will be prepared within one year of effectiveness.
The Project requires an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the road
rehabilitation component, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the
three other components (urban rehabilitation and support to provincial institutions), and a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for all four components.
As an emergency project, the project can be presented before the required safeguard policies and
studies have been conducted. However, these studies must be carried out and the requisite
policies adopted within a year of project approval as per OP 8.50.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered                  Yes_              No
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _Y es  N o
Environmental Assessment (P/BP/GP 4.01)           [x]               I I
Natural Habitats (2/BP 4.04)                      []                [x]
Pest Manazement (OP 4.09)                         [I               [x]
Cultural Propert (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-)     [ ]               [xI
Involuntary Resettlement (QP/BP 4.12)             [x]               []
4



Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                       []               [xI
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                               []               [x]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                        [[X
Proiects in Disputed Areas (OP/_P/GP 7.60)         [[] x]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP                       [ ]x]
7 .50 )                                     _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D. 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No significant or irreversible impacts are expected.
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Activities financed under all components are expected
to include some rehabilitation activities. These activities, however, are expected to remain
limited in nature and scope and to focus on repairs of existing infrastructure (rather than new
construction). Environmental assessment safeguard is therefore triggered.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04): Not applicable. Activities under the Project are not expected to
have an impact on natural habitats.
Pest Management (OP 4.09) : Not applicable. The Project is not expected to finance pesticides
or activities which could affect agricultural or public health.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): Some activities financed under Components A, B, and C
may require the resettlement of limited groups of people. Involuntary resettlement safeguard is
therefore triggered.
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20): Not applicable. The Project is not expected to include activities
in areas inhabited by indigenous peoples.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36): Not applicable. The Project is not expected to include activities related to
forest or forest management.
Safety ofDams (OP/BP 4.37): Not applicable. The Project is not expected to include activities
related to dams.
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11. 03): Not applicable. No activity financed under the
Project is expected to affect cultural property.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60): Not applicable. No activity financed under the
Project is expected to be located in disputed areas.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50): Not applicable. No activity financed
under the Project is expected to be located in international waters.
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area.
5



The project is expected to provide net environmental benefits in the long run, derived from the
stabilizing of the situation after a conflict with has caused large population movements, with
significant environmental consequences.
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
N/A.
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The capacity of the Borrower's institutions has been compromised by years of conflict - and local
institutions do not have the capacity to proceed to the type of assessment that may be needed, nor
are existing rules and regulations sufficient to ensure a proper respect of World Bank safeguard
policies. Experience to date, however, has been satisfactory with the Borrower taking the
necessary steps to ensure compliance with World Bank safeguards.
Compliance with safeguards for activities financed under the project will require that studies be
carried out as soon as possible so that the recommendations can be included in the design ofo the
civil works. The studies may result in identifying affected people. If that is the case mitigation
measures will be defined and a RFP will be prepared. The ESIA ESMF and RFP findings will be
reflected in the Operation Manual of the Project.
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders will be the communities living in cities that will benefit from the investments
and in areas along the itineraries to be rehabilitated. Consultation and disclosure mechanisms are
expected to part of the recommendations under the Social and Environmental Assessment for
component C and of the disclosure of a Environmental and Social Management Framework under
components A B and D. Disclosure of the ESIA, ESMF and RPF when relevant will be in-
country and in the Bank's Infoshop in Washington, DC as soon as available and at the latest
within a year of effectiveness.
6



F. Disclosure Requirements  Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank              December 31, 2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure          March 15, 2006
Date of submission to InfoShop           March 15, 2006
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors                                Not Applicable
Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank              December 31, 2005
Date of "in-country" disclosure          March 15, 2006
Date of submission to InfoShop           March 15, 2006
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop           Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop           Not Applicable.
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop           Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by.                   NN                          Date
Task Team Leader:             Xavier Devictor  I  |              December 16, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:  Kristine M. Ivars cter '
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:  Robert A. Robelus
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:
Approved by:                                Name                       Date
Regional Safeguards           Thomas    U   lt                          i
Coordinator:                     omSi. Y4aton,y,
Comments:
Sector Manager:               Inger Arfrsen
Comments:
7



