Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC630 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 15, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Costa Rica 
Project ID: P082974 
Project Name: Water Sector Modernization 
Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Menahem Libhaber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2004 
Managing Unit: LCSFW 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL) 
Sector: Water supply (50%);Sewerage 
(50%) 
Theme: Pollution Management and 
Environmental Health (P); Access to Urban 
Services for the Poor (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Marco Zambrano, Environment. 
Assessment; Elena Correa, Social Assessment 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 60 
Other financing amounts by source:  JAPAN: JAPAN BANK FOR 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION (JBIC) 
($m) 
100 
 
 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The proposed development objectives of the project are: (i) to initiate the modernization process 
of the water and sanitation sector in Costa Rica; and (ii) to complete the construction of the 
sewage collection, conveyance and treatment system of the metropolitan area of San Jose. 
 
The modernization process would be initiated by: (i) improving the commercial performance of 
AyA and reducing the level of its Unaccounted for Water by contracting out the relevant 
functions to the private sector; (ii) separating the policy-maker and service-provider functions in 
the sector, both currently undertaken by AyA; (iii) the corporatization of AyA service provider; 
(iv) developing and implementing a sustainable model for water and sanitation services provision 
in rural areas, in the context of separation of policy-maker and service provider functions; (v) 
undertaking a pilot program incorporating the private sector in the provision of water and 
sanitation services in 4-5 medium-size cities; and (vi) developing and implementing a Design 
Build Operate (DBO) contract by a private operator for collection, treatment and disposal of the 
wastewater of the metropolitan area of San Jose. 
 
Page  2
 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
Based on project preparation activities and current understandings and agreements with AyA, it 
is proposed that the project would be composed of the following components: 
(A) 
Collection, Conveyance and Treatment of the Wastewater of the Metropolitan Area 
of San Jose
 
(US$ 160 million)
 through the development and implementation of a Design 
Build Operate (DBO) contract to be managed by a private operator. This component 
includes: (i) construction of the remaining sewage network in the Metropolitan Area of 
San Jose; (ii) rehabilitation of deteriorated pipes in the existing system; (iii) construction 
of secondary networks in areas where they do not exist; and (iv) construction of principal 
sewage collectors and a preliminary level wastewater treatment plant. The underlying 
idea is to devote the main efforts to complete the sewerage and main collection systems 
so as to evacuate the wastewater from the city and discharge it downstream of the city’s 
drainage basin, while constructing the wastewater treatment plant in stages, in 
accordance with the financial capacity of AyA. Under the current project, this plant will 
consist of preliminary treatment only, while higher level treatment installations will be 
added in subsequent stages. Simulation studies of the water quality in the Rio Grande de 
Tarcoles Basin (Basin 24), into which the city’s effluent is discharged, demonstrate that, 
due to the high auto-purification capacity of Rio Virilla and Rio Grande de Tarcoles, a 
preliminary level treatment is sufficient to prevent environmental nuisance in the basin as 
a result to the discharge of the effluent into it. It is believed that the utilization of a DBO 
scheme under which the design, construction and operation of the sewerage system in the 
Metropolitan area of San Jose will be the responsibility of one specialized operator, 
would ensure the completion and adequate operation of the complex San Jose sewerage 
works. DBO contracts are normally awarded for a period of five to ten years. The 
possibility of using the national banking system to finance network connections for all 
those properties which currently have septic tanks at the back of their properties is under 
investigation. 
(B) 
Improvement of AyA’s Commercial Operations including Reduction of 
Unaccounted for Water (US$ 11 million)
 through the development and implementation 
of a contract for hiring a specialized private operator to manage the commercial 
operations of AyA and reduce Unaccounted for Water. The responsibility of the operator 
would include, among others: (i) billing and collection, reading and installation of 
domestic meters, management of relations with customers and customer complains, and 
perhaps operation and maintenance of small diameter distribution networks; and also (ii) 
reduction of UFW, including measurement of bulk water production and implementation 
of activities targeted to reducing the physical and commercial water losses; 
(C) 
Modernization of Financing Mechanisms for Water Supply and Sanitation
 
Services 
in the Rural Sector
 
(US$ 20 million)
  this component will support the appropriate way 
for AyA to relinquish its current responsibilities for rural water and sanitation services 
and assign them to a separate government entity responsible for providing funds and 
technical assistance to the rural communities. This new framework for rural areas will 
contribute to the sustainability of services in the rural sector and will facilitate the 
Page  3
 
 
financial participation of municipalities. A rotating fund may be implemented for the 
financing of this component; 
(D) 
Pilot Program for Incorporating Specialized Operators in the provision of the water 
and sanitation services in
 
4-5 Medium Size Cities
 
(US$ 30 million)
  this component 
consists of development and implementation of the model, contracts and bidding 
documents for incorporating specialized private operators in the provision of water and 
sanitation services in 4-5 medium size cities, based on the concept of minimum subsidies. 
Experience gained with similar operations, which have already been implemented in 
Colombia, will help to implement this component. The cities to be supported under this 
component would not be cities served by AyA. The implementation of this component 
will require the government’s consent to provide subsidies to the participating cities, i.e., 
the proceeds of the subsidies involved in this component will be lent to the government, 
which would pass them on to the participating cities as subsidies to the corresponding 
water and sanitation utilities. Contacts have been made with the Mayors of several cities 
that expressed interest in the program and their cities are candidates for participating in it; 
those are : (i) Cartago (with about 150,000 inhabitants); and (ii) Belen, Alajuela, Grecia 
and Turialba (with populations ranging between 20,000 and 30,000 each). About US$ 10 
million of the cost of this component will be contributed by the private operators and by 
the municipalities; 
(E) 
Developing a Long Term Strategy for Water Supply in the Metropolitan Area of 
San Jose (US$ 5 million)  
under
 
this component the long term strategy for the provision 
of water to the metropolitan area of San Jose will be defined. For this purpose, a 
comprehensive study of the current situation and future alternatives will be undertaken, 
which will lead to the definition and approval of the water supply strategy in the San Jose 
Metropolitan Area. This component may include the construction of several wells and the 
incorporation of their production into the existing supply system, if the need for resolving 
urgent supply problems arises; 
(F) 
Initiation of the Institutional Reform of the Sector and of AyA (US$ 3 million)
  this 
component will initiate the institutional reform of the sector and AyA, which includes (i) 
separation of AyA’s functions of policy-maker and service-provider; (ii) corporatization 
of AyA service provider; and (iii) elaboration of a strategy and action plan according to 
the proposed national policy
1
 for the provision of water and sanitation in the country.  
The implementation of the institutional reform will mostly depend on the modifications 
required to the legal framework for service provision, which will be promoted during the 
implementation of this component; 
(G) 
Strengthening of Environmental Management in the Water and Sanitation Sector 
(US$ 5 million)
  this component is closely related to the components of institutional 
reforms.  It will place emphasis on strengthening the capacity of AyA for supervision, 
promotion, socialization and institutional coordination of environmental management 
issues inherent in the project. The strengthening of environmental supervision will 
include: (i) acquisition of required software and hardware (for example, Qual 2, 
WaterCad, SewerCad, GISs) for use by the environmental unit of AyA the by the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU); (ii) carrying out diagnosis and management of river basins, 
regulatory plans for the municipalities, etc; and (iii) training on planning, management 
and use of natural resources, solid and liquid waste management, planning and 
                                                
 
1
 AyA, Agua Potable y Saneamiento de Costa Rica – Análisis Sectorial, Julio de 2002. 
Page  4
 
 
management of water resources, aquifer contamination, environmental assessments, 
sampling and monitoring techniques, and use of economic instruments for agricultural 
and industrial pollution control. This component will be in line with national 
environmental policies and norms for water resources management; and 
(H) 
Project Management and Technical Assistance (US$ 6 million)
  this component will 
provide the funding and framework for managing the implementation of the project and 
carrying out the required studies and TA activities. 
 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The proposed operation would support the government’s national water and sanitation 
investment program which includes infrastructure investment and institutional and policy reform 
throughout Costa Rica. The operation would include investments in San Jose and in other 
municipalities, both urban and rural, nationwide. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The project triggers two safeguard policies: (i) environmental assessment; and (ii) involuntary 
resettlement (land acquisition). None of them is expected to pose special risks, as they will be 
managed systematically within the project, using to the extent possible local experience and local 
standards, after determining that they are acceptable to the Bank or, if necessary, after 
introducing in them the required modifications. Costa Rica is known as a country especially 
sensitive to environmental protection. AyA has established an environmental division many 
years ago, has a track record in environmental management and is incorporating environmental 
consideration in all its activities. AyA staff participated in Bank safeguard policies training and 
is familiar with the Bank policy. In addition, capacity improvement activities will be undertaken 
as part vof the implementation of component G of the project (Strengthening of Environmental 
Management in the Water and Sanitation Sector). 
 
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
Page  5
 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[X] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category   (OP/BP 4.01
) 
 
Component A of the project represent large scale works of collection and treatment of the 
wastewater of San Jose. A complete and detailed Environmental Assessment (EA) of this 
component will be undertaken during project preparation, including modeling of the quality of 
the water in the rivers in the drainage basin of Rio Grande de Tarcoles, in which San Jose is 
located, to determine the required level of wastewater treatment. 
 
Component D is another component under which water and sewerage works will be undertaken. 
However, those will be works in small and medium size cities, of scale much smaller than the 
works of component A. Unlike the case of component A, the specific works which would be 
undertaken under this component will not be yet be defined during the preparation stage, so it 
will be impossible to carry out a detailed EA during preparation. Consequently, only a general 
assessment of possible impacts will be undertaken during project preparation, while a more 
detailed assessment for each participating city will be carried out during project implementation. 
Since the water utilities of the cities participating in this component would be managed by 
private operators, the specialized private sector operators would manage safeguard compliance in 
these cities, with oversight from the Ministries of the Environment and Health. The management 
of safeguards by the privates sector under specific responsibilities well defined in a binding 
contract will provide a higher degree of reliability for compliance of the safeguards. 
 
Each subproject under component D will require obtaining an environmental license issued by 
the Ministry of the Environment. To ensure that O.P. 4.01 requirements are met, the project’s 
Operational Manual acceptable to the Bank would contain specific guidelines for subproject EA 
in accordance with the Costa Rican legislation. Potential negative impacts generally associated 
with water supply, sewerage, and wastewater projects could be: 
 
• 
Impacts due to construction practices, e.g. noise, dust. 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
 
 
• 
Degradation of sensitive environments due to discharge of wastewater. 
• 
Degradation of neighborhoods or receiving water body quality from sewer overflows, 
treatment works bypasses, or treatment process failures. 
• 
Public health hazards in the vicinity of discharges. 
• 
Odors, noise and emission of volatile organics from treatment processes. 
• 
Sludge disposal issues. 
 
The rest of the project’s components are institutional strengthening components and are not 
expected to have specific environmental implications. Nevertheless, during preparation, the 
possibility of secondary minor impacts will be explored. 
 
Overall, the project is expected to have significant
 positive environmental impacts which relate 
to: (i) improvements in public health through better water supply service quality, sewerage, and 
wastewater management and (ii) improved environmental conditions as a result of more reliable 
sewerage systems and wastewater treatment. 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
For water supply installations, sewerage, and wastewater treatment plants, the San Jose project 
and the medium cities projects might require land purchase for pumping stations and treatment 
installations as well as acquisition for rights-of-way for laying and maintenance of pipes. It is 
possible that some subprojects may require the resettlement of individual households. However, 
it is not expected that the project would trigger large scale involuntary resettlement. The land for 
the wastewater treatment of San Jose has already been purchased and no resettlement was 
involved. The other projects are of small scale, and it is reasonable to assume that respective 
involuntary resettlement, if any, will be minimal. In fact, it will be attempted to avoid any 
involuntary resettlement. Costa Rican land acquisition procedures will be provided to the Bank 
for review during Project preparation. The Bank team will review the Government’s policy 
framework, covering procedures for notification, consultation and compensation. These 
procedures will also be described in detail in the Program Operational Manual. It will be ensured 
that any involuntary resettlement triggered by the project will be consistent with the 
requirements of OP/BP 4.12. 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 – OPN 11.03) 
 
The cultural Property Policy is considered applicable because of the nature of the works 
supported by the project.  Although it is not considered that the project would affect culturally 
important sites, as part of the EA study this issue will be evaluated, and if found warranted, 
adequate mitigation measures such as “chance finding” procedures for construction, will be 
incorporated in all the construction contracts. 
 
Social Assessment 
 
Social Assessments will also be required mainly for components A and D, and perhaps for other 
components. The social assessment will be carried out during project preparation. 
 
Page  7
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
   
  
[ X ] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [ ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ X ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
During preparation, the work related to safeguards would be the articulation of a policy 
framework for the safeguard issues identified above. The core activities to be undertaken during 
Project preparation include: 
 
\01fi
Assessment of national procedures for safeguard management and confirmation of their 
applicability to the operation. 
\01fi
Confirmation of the institutional capacity for safeguard issues management. 
\01fi
The preparation of an Operational Manual which addresses analysis methodology to be 
applied to all project investments as well as detailed safeguard management procedures 
for subprojects. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
During preparation, work will focus on the design of the overarching public relations and 
consultation mechanism. Public consultation procedures will be detailed in the Operational 
Manual. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Menahem Libhaber 
March 15 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Juan David Quintero 
March 15 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
John Henry Stein 
March 15 
Comments 
 
