Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  03/31/2005 
Report No.:  AC1405
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Croatia 
Project ID:  P069937 
Project Name:  Croatia:  Social Welfare Development  Project 
Task Team Leader:  Philip S. Goldman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (100%) 
Theme:  Social safety nets (P);Social risk mitigation (P);Other social protection and risk 
management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
39.40 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
18.40 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  2.00
20.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Social Welfare Development Project will strengthen the quality, targeting and 
administration of social benefits and services being provided to those most in need.   
 
3. Project Description 
The SWDP will be implemented around three components:  
 
Component 1: Improving Social Service Delivery  
 
Component 2.  Strengthening of the Social Welfare Management Information  
 
Component 3.  Upgrading of Existing Social Services Facilities  
 
The proposed project would be financed through a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) of 
US$ 39.4 million and by a Government contribution of US$ 18.4 million.  The project 
would finance civil works, goods, consultant services and training, incremental operating 
costs and an innovation grant facility.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will take place throughout the country. Renovation works are planned for all 
115 Centers for Social Welfare in the country in order to restructure the internal working 
Page  2
environment.  Renovations are also planned for several residential care institutions.  The 
selection of these institutions will be based on an assessment underway by the Ministry of 
Health and Social Welfare.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Under the SWDP the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare will use a portion of the loan 
to renovate the Centers for Social Work and upgrade residential care facilities to ensure 
that they meet minimum standards.  In order to ensure that there are no adverse 
environmental impacts from this work, an Environmental Management Plan has been 
prepared.  
 
The Centers for Social Work are the main point of delivery of social benefits and social 
welfare assistance in Croatia.  Under the project the administration of the CSWs is being 
reformed and the functioning of the offices will change.  As a result it is necessary to 
make some changes to the layout of the CSWs to better serve the population.  In addition, 
some of the buildings need additional renovations to address general maintenance issues. 
The works concentrate on the re-figuring of the internal configuration of offices in order 
to provide better services.  Other rehabilitation includes repair of roofs and upgrading of 
plumbing and installation of accommodations for disabled clients.  A portion of the 
residential care facilities (institutions for disabled, elderly, and children) will also be 
renovated to upgrade the sanitary and hygienic conditions and to facilitate new services 
through internal reconfigurations.  
 
The planned civil works at the Centers for Social Welfare and residential institutions 
will not involve any land acquisition and/or physical relocation; existing facilities will be 
renovated and upgraded.  
Page  3
Possible safeguard impacts relate to environmental issues for the disposal of possible 
hazardous materials in the buildings and disposal of construction waste.  No large scale, 
significant and/or irreversible impacts will occur.  
 
The planned civil works at the Centers for Social Welfare and residential institutions 
will not involve any land acquisition and/or physical relocation; existing facilities will be 
renovated and upgraded.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None. The planned civil works at the Centers for Social Welfare and residential 
institutions will not involve any land acquisition and/or physical relocation; existing 
facilities will be renovated and upgraded.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives would be to leave the buildings in their current state.  This would not allow 
the CSWs to improve the services to the population and the improvement of facilities for 
those in residential care.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower has prepared an EMP to address the potential impact of the project and the 
proposed mitigating measures.  This was completed by the staff of the investment section 
for social welfare in the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare.  This section is 
responsible for all investment works (including capital repairs) in the social welfare area.  
It oversees about 2000 contracts per year on minor renovations at the facilities.  The 
assessment is that there are no significant additional duties for the staff related to the 
proposed activities under the project.  They will oversee the contracting of the work and 
ensure that the work is done according to regulations.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders and primary potentially affected people are the staff and 
populations served by the CSWs and residential institutions.  Throughout the preparation 
process, representatives of these facilities were consulted on the project design, including 
the inclusion of civil works.  They were supportive of the work being done to improve 
their work environment.  They will make necessary arrangements to ensure that all 
services are provided during the construction phase.  The EMP will be available at all 
CSWs and residential facilities in the country in the Croatian language.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/18/2005 
 
Page  4
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/31/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/31/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Philip S. Goldman 
03/30/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Karin Shepardson 
03/30/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Paula F. Lytle 
03/30/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
03/31/2005 
Comments:  This is cleared for Safeguards;but the Task Team should clarify that all answers to "All 
Safeguard policie" above are "Yes". 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hermann A. von Gersdorff 
03/31/2005 
Comments:  The ISDS form is cleared for negotiations 
