INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS [wi]DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC855[oPcs2]
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 4, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Djibouti                     Project ID: P086994
Project Name: Second School Access and  Task Team Leader: Ousmane Diagana
Improvement
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15,  Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2004
2004
Managing Unit: MNSHD                  Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program
Loan
Sector: Secondary education           Theme: Education for all (P);Gender
(40%);Primary education (40%);Central  (P);Rural services and infrastructure
government administration (20%)       (P);Participation and civic engagement (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Mr. El Houcine Haichour (social); Mr.
Hany Shalaby (environment)
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IDA[s3]: 10
Other financing amounts by source:                              5.2 ($m)
B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]
The Project would support the Government's long-term education sector development strategy as
defined in the " schema directeur". The objective of the second phase of the Schools Access
Improvement Project is to expand coverage of quality basic education through targeted activities
which contribute to increase access and retention rates of the system and to reduce repetition and
drop-out rates. The specific objective of this phase is to increase the enrollment to 70% by 2008
with special emphasis on girls education.
C. Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]
The phase II of the APL will continue to support classroom expansion, with greater attention
paid to middle schools to take into account the number of places needed for the new nine-year
compulsory education and the increased flow of students from primary to middle schools. This
is a consequence of the elimination of the "entree en eeme [entry into sixth form]. Improving the
quality of schooling will remain a priority of the second phase, and the project will also assess
the outcomes of the studies, currently being financed under a Project Preparation Facility (PPF),
and their subsequent implementation, so as to improve the efficiency of the sector. The studies
are expected to be completed by October 2004. The proposed project will comprise three main
components:
(i) Increase access to and equity of basic education: The trend in school enrolment is
positive. The GER for primary increased from 39% to 52% over the last 3 years. Despite



these gains, too many children remain out of school and lack of access to education is
particularly affecting certain groups (girls, children from poor and/or rural families,
orphans and vulnerable children). Consequently, this component will continue to finance
the construction and rehabilitation of schools in the four Districts of the Country:
Djibouti, Tajourah, Ali Sabieh and Obock. In addition to expanding the school system,
this component will include measures to attract more female teachers and it will pay
special attention to students with special needs. Studies financed by the PPF are
underway to identify appropriate activities to be included in this component.
(ii) Improve quality: The quality of primary education is poor, largely due to insufficient
in-service teacher training and shortage of teaching and learning materials. While
primary school curricula has been updated, textbooks procured, and in-service teacher
training expanded during Phase I of the project, Djibouti's education sector still needs
support to enhance overall quality. This component addresses the following quality
elements: (i) availability of textbooks and learning resources, (ii) time on task, (iii) initial
and in-service teacher training, (iv) school supervision, (v) relevancy of the curriculum,
and (vi) role of communities.
(iii) Improve efficiency and build capacity: Among the problems faced by Djibouti's
education system are: high unit cost, low internal and external efficiency, and inefficient
use of resources. The MOE lacks qualified staff to address these issues in a proper way.
It is also obvious that the historically centralized management of the system is an obstacle
to the delivery of quality services. The MOE therefore wants to strengthen capacity
building in areas of planning, management, and monitoring and evaluation, as strategic
priorities. This component will: (i) strengthen the capacity of the MOE through provision
of staff training, technical assistance and equipment, (ii) support the MOE in introducing
or implementing policies that aim at reducing unit costs of school construction,
textbooks, and teachers, (iii) enhance monitoring and evaluation functions within the
MOE, and (iv) improve intra- and inter-sectoral coordination.
D. Project location (if known)
The project will be located in the Ministry of National Education and Higher Education
(MNEHE) in Djibouti-Ville. The project will be implemented in Djibouti-Ville as well as the
other districts of Ali-Sabieh, Dikhil, Tadjourah, and Obock.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCNJ
The Ministry of National Education and Higher Education (MNEHE) is the executing agency,
and was responsible for the Phase I of the Adaptable Program Lending (APL) upon which this
project is based as the second phase of the APL. The MNEHE has been assessed as having
satisfactorily carried the Phase I of the APL, and has fully carried out the Environmental
Management Plan prepared under the Phase I. It is expected that the MNEHE will continue to
proceed in the same manner and focusing more on the maintenance of the infrastructure during
this second phase, as well as improvements to the sanitary facilities.



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?   Safeguard Policy
Applicable?_ If Applicable, How Might It Apply?[oPcs4]
IX I      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
II       Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
1 ]      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
I[]      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
I[J      Indigenoys Peoples (OD 4.20)
[ ]      Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
1 ]      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
[1       Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN _    1.03
I ]      Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
Projects on International Waterwavs (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category[w5]:
[ ] A [X] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be deternined)
The resettlement safeguard will not be triggered by this project since construction of new
classroom and renovation works will be conducted on existing school sites.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. This is a simple project (Phase II of the APL), and the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS is October 30, 2004.
IV. APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:                               ,,/(Z '
Task Team Leader:                Ousmane Diagana     /                     August 19, 2004
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Hocine Chalal, Acting Region lFEirontal  August 19, 2004
and Safeguards Advisor l
Comments received by Ms. Brackmann during the Concept R g.4i    g.a  an  obtained.
Sector Manager:                  Linda English, Acting Sector Manager t      gu  19, 2004
Comments - no comments. Clearance provided during Concept Review Meeting
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determnination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas



