Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1546 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P094229 
Project Name: EG-ALEXANDRIA GROWTH POLE 
Task Team Leader: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 22, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: October 26, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (30%);Water supply (20%);Sanitation (20%);Sub-national 
government administration (15%);Micro- and SME finance (15%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Access to urban 
services and housing (P);Other financial and private sector development (P);Municipal 
governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed Project is to support Alexandria Governorate, within the 
framework of the City Development Strategy (CDS), to improve economic infrastructure for 
private sector development, improve local business environment, address high priority 
investment needs in squatter settlements, and redevelopment of Lake Marriout area.  
 
The Project's overarching goal is to contribute towards attracting private investment and 
strengthening the management of existing local assets, particularly land and property that can be 
leased, sold or revitalized into more productive use.  Specifically, the project aims at:  
 
i) 
Rehabilitating and extending enabling infrastructure for private sector development and 
growth; thus supporting the Governorate's most competitive economic sectors;  
 
ii) 
Improving the local business environment, including streamlining and automating 
business regulatory procedures;  
Page  2
iii) 
Upgrading of squatter settlements, including facilitating the creation of economic 
opportunities for the unemployed residents and providing business development/support 
services;  and  
 
iv) 
Redevelopment of Lake Marriout area through the conversion of vacant and underutilized 
land into more productive uses with the private sector participation.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Improve Enabling Infrastructure for Private Sector Development  
 
This component aims to support the rehabilitation and extension of economic infrastructure 
(especially water, sanitation, traffic and roads), which is essential for private sector and business 
productivity.  Consultation with the government officials and the private sector identified several 
infrastructure weaknesses as major impediments to productivity, including:  
 
-
Inadequate infrastructure in the Burg Al Arab Industrial Zone, which benefits from Qualified 
Industrial Zone (QIZ) status that allows for tariff/quota-free exports to the US market;  
 
-
Poor connectivity links between the various transport hubs, i.e. Port of Alexandria, Port of El 
Dekheila, railway stations, Burg Al Arab Airport, El Nozha Airport, and the city?s Free Zone 
and Industrial Estates; and  
 
-
Frequent sewage breakdowns, resulting in damaging roads and interrupting traffic.  
 
The Alexandria competitiveness overview report analyzed the following economic 
sectors/clusters: 1) Textile and Garments (in light of the recently approved QIZ agreement and 
the projected impact on Alexandria?s economy), 2) Food Processing, 3) Petrochemicals, 4) 
Furniture, 5) Culture Heritage and Tourism, and 6) Maritime and Shipping.  These sectors and 
clusters were selected in accordance to their current importance, contribution to the local 
economy and potentials for growth.  The competitiveness overview has paved the way for further 
in-depth cluster examination, thereby providing the necessary depth for strategy formulation and 
implementation.  Other sectors/clusters in Alexandria that will be studied to investigate their 
potential for growth include the Information, Communication and Technology (ICT) and 
Services.  
 
The LED strategic planning process produced a specific set of objectives and programs that will 
be further scrutinized during project preparation, leading to the identification of specific 
subproject investment needs to be financed under the Project.  All investments would be geared 
to harnessing the growth-enhancing potential of a vibrant private sector in Alexandria.  
 
Component 2: Improve Local Business Environment  
 
This component aims to improve the regulatory processes and procedures to which businesses 
are subjected by the local administration, including lowering transaction time and cost for 
business licensing, property registration and post-licensing operation.  This would include 
measures to simplify and streamline the burdensome and bureaucratic rules and procedures 
governing business start, ownership, operation and management.  Investments would target 
improvements in the following business climate blocks:  
 
-
Land, property and development planning (identified as a critical target for improvement in 
Egypt);  
Page  3
-
Business registration and licensing, including administrative modernization, automation and 
improving the performance of the city's one-stop-shop in order to reduce the time, steps and cost 
of regulatory procedures; and  
 
-
Investment promotion and marketing.  
 
Discussion with the Ministry of Investment as well as the Investment Climate Assessment 
(ICA) team identified four specific benchmarks related to lowering transactions costs for 
operating businesses in Egypt to be piloted in Alexandria under the framework of this Project.  
These have been included in the CAS update and Results Framework Matrix, as outcomes 
indicators:  
 
1- Average number of days needed to register private companies to be reduced from 43 days in 
2004 by 50% by year 2009 in Alexandria;  
 
2-
Reduce average time to register land/property by 50% by 2009 in Alexandria;  
 
3-
Reform the industrial land market, including access to land, pricing and land development 
procedures; and  
 
4-
Private participation in management/operation of industrial zones.  
 
The scope of these indicators and Government?s commitment to achieve them will be further 
scrutinized as preparation proceeds.  
 
Component 3: Urban Upgrading  
 
This component aims to assist the Governorate in improving the living conditions, tenure 
security and economic opportunities in squatter/informal settlements in Alexandria.  Egypt?s 
goals to achieve the MDGs include improved access to water and sanitation, tenure security and 
reduction in the number of slum/squatter dwellers.  
 
Infrastructure and Services: According to Participatory Rapid Appraisal Surveys conducted in 
20 squatter/ informal settlements in consultation with community representatives and local 
officials, the total cost of basic infrastructure needed is about $30.00 million, of which about 
50% would be allocated from local/national investment programs as well as other donors.  There 
is also a need to construct 15 new schools, 14 healthcare centers, 10 public markets, and 15 
youth centers at a total estimated cost of $25. 00 million, of which about 30% would be allocated 
from local/national investment programs and other donors support.  Provision of infrastructure 
and municipal services would be made through direct investments, public-private partnership, 
local area initiatives and community-based approaches.  
 
Tenure Security: Applying the new and more favorable urban regulations to deal with squatter 
settlements, remodeling plans are now under preparation in four pilot squatter settlements (Naja 
El-Arab, Al-Hadara Al-Jadida, Airport settlements and El-Amrawy).  The key principle 
underlying the remodeling plans is the preservation, to the extent possible, of the existing fabric 
and characteristics of each area and to address community needs identified in the surveys.  Land 
would be priced in line with squatters' affordability.  A local branch of the Property Department 
(Idarat Al Amlak) would be opened in each area and simplified procedures would be adopted for 
obtaining building permits.  The process is led by the Governorate's officials, in collaboration 
with the General Organization of Physical Planning (GOPP), the Social Fund (which will also 
contribute to the upgrading cost of El-Amrawy settlement), GTZ, UN-Habitat and Barcelona city 
(which is considering co-funding the upgrading cost of the Airport settlements).  
Page  4
Creating Economic Opportunities: The following three activities aim to assist unemployed 
people, especially in squatter/informal settlements, to enter the labor force, and will be further 
scrutinized during preparation:  
 
-
Explore opportunities to support existing viable micro-credit programs, e.g. the micro-credit 
scheme operated by Alexandria Businessmen Association (ABA), with the aim of supporting the 
establishment and expansion of small/micro-enterprises, including home-based activities, and 
contributing to enhanced income generation.  
 
-
Business support through improving existing business incubators and supply of advisory 
services to enable new business startups.  
 
-
Support to existing SMEs and vocational training centers/programs to support the 
development of skills needed by the Governorate's growing economic clusters.  
 
Component 4: Development of Lake Marriout  
 
This component aims to implement an integrated redevelopment plan for the land area located 
in the southern side of the Lake. The new development would release about 200 hectares of land 
to be developed for public, commercial, residential, and recreational activities. The development 
will be undertaken in conformity with the Governorate's Spatial Plan. Through phases of 
implementation, the Project would finance the construction of basic off-site infrastructure 
networks and facilities, while land development would be made through concessional 
agreements with private sector developers on competitive basis. The component would also 
implement cost-effective measures to reduce wastewater pollution in the lake through a 
combination of aeration, biological and chemical treatments.  
 
The design of this component is made in close coordination with the Environment Pollution 
Abatement Project II (EPAPII), which aims to reduce industrial pollution from factories and 
petrochemical establishments located in the northern side of the Lake.  A joint GEF application 
has been submitted, which would assist to put together a long-term sustainable environment 
development vision of the Lake and its surrounding land, including an environmental impact 
assessment and environment management plan of all proposed development.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project involves various locations in Alexandria Governorate, Egypt. The first component, 
enabling infrastructure, will include the Qualified Industrial Zone in Borg Al Arab city, Ports of 
Alexandria and El Dekheila, El Nozha Airport, Alexandria city's Free Zone and Industrial 
Estates. The upgrading component will include some of the Alexandria squatter settlements 
which are distributed as follows: 9 in Al Montazah district, 5 in East district, 2 in Central district, 
5
in West district, 8 in Amriya district, and 1 in Borg Al Arab Markaz and City.  The names of 
these settlements are:  
 
1.
Montazah District: Khorshid, Mohsin, Al Mohagareen, El-Amrawy, Al Haramain, Al 
Mamoura al Balad, Tchakous, El-Mahid Al Deeny area and East Mandara.  
 
2. 
East District: Airport settlement, Ganayoti, Sakeena, Al Zaheeryya, Dana & Al 
Mahrousa.  
 
3. 
West District: Naja El-Arab, Mawa Al Sayyadeen, Al Tobgayya Wabour El Gaz, Haram 
Al Seka Al Hadeed and Koum Al Malh.  
Page  5
4. 
Amriya District: Al Dekheela Al Gabalyya, Zawyat Abdelkader, Old  Amriya, Al 
Daraysa & Allam, West Hanoufeel, Al Gezam & Mourgham, Naja Abdulraouf and South King 
Marriout.  
 
5. 
Central District: Nadi Alsaid, Al-Hadara Al-Jadida, small area from Bourg AlArab city.  
 
Interventions will be first piloted in Naja El-Arab, Al-Hadara Al-Jadida, Airport settlements 
and El-Amrawy.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Egypt has a reasonably good legal and regulatory framework related to environmental and social 
protection, including requirements for environmental assessments and mitigation. The 
Operations Manual will provide the framework for designing the detailed environmental and 
social mitigation measures, as needed, to be undertaken for each related sub-projects.  
 
The PIU will responsible for the preparation of all EIA and EMP, as well as any social policy 
framework triggered. Training will be supplied.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
A
framework Environmental and Social Assessment will be prepared for the appraisal 
decision meeting. This framework will contain an analysis of the current legal and institutional 
context; it will also examine the various interrelations between the project component and with 
other projects in the area (EPAP2, GEF) and assess the likely impacts on the environment 
including the socio-cultural and socio-economic spheres. The FESA will determine the 
mitigating measures to be built in the project or the screening mechanism when the precise 
activities are not known, their implementation cost, the monitoring system and responsible 
parties.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
It is not yet clear whether the remodeling plans of squatter settlements will necessitate any 
relocation or large scale land acquisition. During preparation, and before appraisal, a policy 
framework will be developed to address any emerging relocation and land acquisition issues 
under the land tenure security subcomponent of urban upgrading.  If the policy is later triggered, 
a
RAP will be prepared and the Operational Manual will include a section on social safeguard 
screening and instructions for dealing with anticipated mitigation measures to ensure compliance 
with World Bank policies.  So far, there is a central and local government?s commitment to 
pursue the policy framework. It is understood that Alexandria Governorate would bear the cost 
of any compensation from its own housing fund. However, if for any reason the task team 
observed reversed changes in government?s commitment during preparation, the entire 
subcomponent would be dropped. The Task Team includes a Sr. Social Scientist.   
Page  6
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  05/15/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
PHRD grant will be activated in July 2005, which will be immediately used to complete all 
the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  All studies will be completed before QER, 
scheduled for May 15, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ahmed A. R. Eiweida 
06/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
06/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Zoubida Allaoua 
06/22/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
