Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1674 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/21/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P094311 
Project Name: Integrated Sanitation& Sewerage Infrastructure Project 
Task Team Leader: Ayat Soliman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2007 
Managing Unit: MNSRE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (50%);Sewerage (30%);Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Municipal governance and institution 
building (P);Water resource management (P);Access to urban services and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.00 
 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
40.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The main objective of the proposed project is to contribute to the improvement of the water 
quality in the selected drainage basins and health conditions of the resident communities through 
the provision of improved sanitation and sewerage services within the served areas.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The following preliminary project components are envisaged to achieve the above objective:  
 
Component 1: Provision of sustainable sanitation infrastructure within selected drainage basins  
 
This component aims to plan, design and construct sustainable sanitation solutions for all 
households within the selected command areas. The implementation will utilize a community 
participation framework that involves the local water and sanitation company, local government 
administration, private sector contractors, consulting firms and local communities. The main 
principles guiding implementation are use of low cost appropriate technology, local level 
implementation and demand-responsiveness. Subcomponents include: (i) sewerage system 
Page  2
construction; (ii) on-site sanitation system construction/ rehabilitation; (iii) pilot solid waste 
management systems.  
 
Component 2: Establishment of a local continuous performance measurement and monitoring 
network  
 
This component will establish a local monitoring system and help local organizations (e.g. 
water boards) to develop the capacity to continually monitor water quality and health conditions 
and to share results regularly with selective stakeholders. The component will cover the selection 
of performance indicators, development of data collection system, identification of monitoring 
sites, data collection and analysis, results review and finalization, and communication/ disclosure 
of results. The monitoring network aims at: (i) fostering integration across sectors and with 
communities by combining input and outcome data from various sources towards overall 
common improvement goals, (ii) prioritizing interventions based on desired results, and (iii) 
monitoring outcomes and impacts of the implemented project activities.  
 
Component 3: Local institutional development and capacity building  
 
This component aims at promoting institutional development within the local public agents 
responsible for sanitation and solid waste management to enhance their capacity to plan, design, 
construct and operate rural sanitation services based on the new integrated approach. It will focus 
on enhancing the ability of the different local actors to interact for integrated planning and 
prioritization, as well as on the individual institutional capacity to manage sanitation/ solid waste 
management infrastructure design, implementation and O&M based on sustainable financial and 
operational systems.  
 
Component 4: Community hygiene education and awareness  
 
For the health improvement benefits of improved sanitation and solid waste management 
systems to be achieved, it is critical that community and personal hygiene practices are 
improved. The activities within this component will address the social aspects of the program 
implementation through working in parallel with the technical teams to establishing local 
community understanding of the proposed sanitation solutions and solid waste management 
systems as well as improved hygiene practices in the utilization of the new systems.  
 
Estimated Project Cost: the total estimated cost of the project is US$ 180 million. Of this 
amount the Bank would finance around US$ 120 million and the Government of Egypt about 
US$ 20 million. Strong bilateral donor interest in co-financing has been expressed by the 
Government of Netherlands and KfW. Additional grant financing will also be sought from the 
Carbon Fund for potential carbon credits resulting from improved sludge and solid waste 
management. The feasibility study for this project in the approximate amount of US$ 900,000 
will be financed by the Government of Netherlands within the framework of the IIIMP project.  
 
Institutional Arrangements: The Government is currently setting up a Steering Committee for 
the project preparation. At the central level, the MOHUC (main counterpart agency for the 
infrastructure investment) will be represented through the Holding Company for Water and 
Waste Water and NOPWASD, while MWRI (providing input on overall water resources 
planning and monitoring) will be represented through the Irrigation/ Drainage Departments, 
Water Quality Management Unit and IIIMP central unit. At the local level, the relevant water 
Page  3
and sanitation companies (Beheira, Gharbeya and Kafr El Sheikh) and active water boards will 
assume central role in project preparation and implementation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Geographic locations: The project will cover complete drainage basins in the western Delta 
region within the Governorates of Beheira, Kafr El Sheikh and Gharbeya (see attached map). 
These areas coincide with IIIMP interventions, and correspond to the Government priorities for 
downstream reuse and high population concentration. An estimated 1.2 million inhabitants live 
in each of the two command areas, with a total of about 300 villages and hamlets each.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Egypt has a reasonably good legal and regulatory framework (Law 04/1994 and related EEAA 
guidelines on EIA preparation) related to environmental and social protection, including clearly 
defined requirements for environmental assessment and mitigation. The EMP and Operations 
manual will provide the framework for designing detailed environmental and soial mitigaiton 
measures, to be undertaken for each of the sanitation, sewerage or solid waste management sub-
projects. The PIU will be equipped with a cadre of technical and social experts to assist with 
project implementation, including the preparation of all relevant EIAs/ EAs and will be 
supported through needed training.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSRE) 
Ms Wendy E. Wakeman (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The overall environmental impact of ISSIP, as defined by its goals and development 
objective, are expected to be highly positive, leading to the improvement in water quality and 
environmental conditions in the areas serviced with improved sanitation and sewerage systems. 
The implementation of integrated planning, implementation and monitoring across responsible 
sectors with strong community involvement will ensure that high priority areas and drainage 
basins are addressed, while demand responsiveness and health and hygiene education will 
strengthen community readiness for improved outcomes.  
 
Overall, the project proposed project is classified as category B, given that no significant, 
irreversible or long-term adverse environmental impacts are anticipated and that any identified 
adverse impacts can be effectively addressed through appropriate preventive actions or 
mitigation measures. The anticipated infrastructure investments in sanitation and sewerage 
systems are expected to serve individual or clusters of villages with improved on-site sanitation 
or small-scale treatment capacities. A preliminary plan for the serviced areas will be finalized 
during preparation, while individual treatment options, clustering and locations will be agreed 
with the communities during project implementation. The possibility of some identified sub-
projects requiring more detailed EIA's will be guided by criteria outlined during the EA process.  
 
An overall Environmental Assessment will be undertaken during preparation, and an EMP 
and Operations Manual will be prepared. During implementation, sub
-
project EA/ EIA and 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
EMP's for individual investments will be prepared by the PIU according to guidelines to be 
detailed in the Operations Manual. The level of detail of the individual sub-project EA/ EIA will 
be determined according to criteria (such as the nature of the technology, volume, location) to be 
determined during preparation. Given that the geographic areas coincide with IIIMP project, 
many of the EA background studies thereof concerning current situation in the selected 
command areas will be useful and complemented with information on existing and potential 
sanitation options and their individual (and cumulative) impacts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The extent of need for additional land for treatment facilities, depending on the choice of 
technologies and available options, is to be determined. The current policy concerning land 
acquisition for the establishment of waste water treatment plants relies on Government-owned 
land or alternatively, voluntary contributions from communities. During preparation, and prior to 
appraisal, a policy framework will be developed to address any land acquisition issues under the 
sanitation infrastructure component. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared and the 
Operations Manual will include guidelines on social safeguards screening and instructions for 
dealing with the anticipated mitigation measures to ensure compliance with WB policies.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  07/31/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The feasibility study for the project, including all safeguard related studies is expected to be 
launched within the coming 3 months. Terms of Reference for the EA and RAP preparation 
will be prepared and reviewed with the regional safeguard team prior to initiation.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Ayat Soliman 
09/19/2005 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
 
Comments:   
