Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1474 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/11/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID: P091694 
Project Name: Egypt - Port Sector Development 
Task Team Leader: Michel Bellier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Trade facilitation and 
market access (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
135.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
58.00
58.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed Port Sector Development Project's (PSDP) development objectives are to enhance 
the port sector's contribution to economic development through institutional reforms, capacity 
and efficiency improvements, and trade facilitation measures.  These objectives would be 
achieved by fully implementing the Landlord Model, devising master plans to guide future 
developments at key ports and exploring opportunities for developing value added activities, 
expanding capacity, primarily at the Ports of Alexandria and El Dekheila, and strengthening the 
capacity of the port authorities.  Key indicators might include: (i) percentage of port services 
provided by private operators; (ii) efficiency indicators on container handling and container 
dwell times; (iii) traffic at Alexandria and El Dekheila Ports; and (iv) the number of jobs created 
in port hinterlands, or alternative indicators measuring economic activity generated as a result of 
the project.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Government counterparts have expressed interest in a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) because of 
its flexibility to finance both economic infrastructure and support for on going reforms in the 
sector.  
Page  2
The proposed PSDP would advance institutional reforms in the sector generally, as well as 
address challenges at individual ports. The investment component of the project would include 
expanding capacity at the Ports of Alexandria and El Dekheila, and extending an existing 
breakwater and berth at the Port of El Dekheila.  Support for institutional issues would address 
the development of a framework and action plan for implementing the Landlord model, master 
planning initiatives, trade facilitation measures within ports, and capacity strengthening and 
training activities to administer and implement the new scheme.  
 
Component 1 - Infrastructure Improvements at Alexandria and El Dekheila.  There might be 
scope for expanding capacity at the Port of Alexandria under the PSDP.The decision to do so 
would be based on an updated assessment of expected growth in traffic over the coming twenty 
years.  Due to present layouts and the protection by respective breakwaters, the Port of El 
Dekheila is, at times, subject to high waves and/or wave penetration into the port basins.  In 
2003, for instance, the Port of El Dekheila was closed for around 35 days, as a result of adverse 
weather conditions.  To diminish these negative effects, the Alexandria Port Authority devised 
plans to construct a "branch" of the western breakwater in a southeastern direction at the Port of 
El Dekheila. Consideration is also being given to building a berth and terminals at the same port.  
 
Component 2 - Institutional Development (ID).  The ID component would generally seek to 
firm up and support the implementation of sector reforms launched by the Government.  It is 
expected that this support would include: (i) evaluating port assets and devising a framework and 
implementation plan of the Landlord Port Model, as well as measures to strengthen the 
administrative, planning and regulatory capacity of port authorities; (ii) creating action plans and 
measures to facilitate trade, develop logistics services and reduce logistics costs in a coordinated 
fashion with customs and other port users; (iii) developing master plans for ports under the 
jurisdictions of the Port Said Port Authority (PSE and PSW) and the Red Sea Port Authority (a 
cluster of more than a dozen ports), including the development of value added activities (i.e., 
Free Zones in Port Said East); and (iv) training activities and technical assistance to strengthen 
the abilities of port staff to manage and administer ports using contemporary methods.  
 
The PSDP's estimated cost is US$193 million.  Of this amount, the Bank would finance around 
US$135 million, and the Government would fund the balance of US$58 million.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The physical investments associated with the PSDP will be implemented at the Ports of 
Alexandria and El Dekheila, which are located on the Mediterranean Coast.  The works proposed 
under the PSDP have been determined to be Category A.  However, the acquisition of rights-of-
way, expropriation of property, and resettlement of project-affected persons is not anticipated.  
The land on which the PSDP will be developed is completely in the public domain.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Because the Borrower is not familiar with Bank guidelines pertaining to environmental 
safeguards, a Senior Environmental and Safeguards Bank Specialist (ES) joined the team early in 
the preparation of the PSDP.  The ES has already met with key counterparts and representatives 
from the likely implementing agency to outline Bank requirements and expectations.  The ES, 
Page  3
who has proposed terms of reference, public consultations and disclosure associated with the 
Environmental Impact Assessment, will supervise the preparation of studies that will be carried 
out by local consultants, will participate in the pre-appraisal, appraisal missions, and be available 
during negotiations.  Through preparation (and implementation), the ES will provide advice on 
the formulation of Bank documents, and the kinds of mitigation and monitoring measures to be 
taken to be in compliance with Bank safeguards.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The PSDP has been designated as a Category A.  To address any potential social impacts, an 
integrated Environmental and Social Assessment will be undertaken for the works components.  
 
In the unlikely event that resettlement becomes necessary, appropriate measures, including 
Resettlement Action Plans and Resettlement Policy Frameworks, would be prepared.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  12/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
TORs for ESA Completed:  April 20, 2005  
 
Start of Assignment:  May 1, 2005  
 
Draft ESA:  October 31, 2005  
 
Disclosure:  December 31, 2005   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Michel Bellier 
04/07/2005 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
04/07/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
04/08/2005 
Comments:   
