Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/23/2005 
Report No.:  AC1859
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Egypt, Arab Republic of 
Project ID:  P090073 
Project Name:  Egypt Pollution Abatement 2 
Task Team Leader:  Hocine Chalal 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 23, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2006 
Managing Unit:  MNSRE 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Other industry (100%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
7.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
50.00 
 
FINLAND: MINISTRY FOR FOREIGN AFFAIRS 
1.10 
 
JAPAN: JAPAN BANK FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION (JBIC)
 40.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
21.90
120.00 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project’s main development objective is to demonstrate, in the Egyptian 
context, the applicability of market-based financial/technical approaches in order to be 
able to achieve significant pollution abatement in selected hot spots areas in and around 
the Alexandria and Greater Cairo areas.  The development objective outcome will be 
measured by the decrease in pollution loads in the selected hot-spot areas. The target for 
this indicator will be the achievement of at least 75% reduction of in the quantity of 
pollutants emitted by the companies in each of the targeted hot spots.  
 
The proposed project will be also a vehicle for supporting the GoE take advantage of the 
opportunities offered by the emerging carbon market established after the entry into force 
of the Kyoto Protocol in February 2005.  
 
The intermediate outcome indicators of success proposed are:  
 
-A well-functioning monitoring and evaluation (M & E) system within EEAA that 
incorporates appropriate incentives for polluters to adhere to GoE environmental 
Page  2
regulatory standards and guidelines. The target for this indicator is that a computerized M 
&
E
systems is in place in Alexandria and Qalubya by end of year one.  
 
-The EPAP II instrument will be replicated or formally established at the end of the 
project implementation. The target for this indicator is that by project end a framework 
agreement will be established between the EPF and at least one commercial bank  
 
-The EPF develops capacity to finance pollution abatement activities through the 
operationalization of a “sustainable development premium” consistent with the principles 
set forth by the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) introduced by the Kyoto 
Protocol. The target for this indicator is that by the end of the project, the World Bank 
purchases at least 7 million tons of emission reductions.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Bank and the government of Egypt have agreed to implement an environmental 
program consisting of a project (Environmental Pollution Abatement II Project - EPAP 
II) and a Carbon Finance (CF) sub-program. The EPAP II project will be implemented 
within a time frame of five years, while the CF sub-program will extend beyond the five 
year time frame but with no implications on the lending terms, as it will not be using the 
proposed loan proceeds.  
 
The EPAP II Project:  
 
-Component 1: A line of credit facility managed by an Apex bank (National Bank of 
Egypt) and financed from a loan from the World Bank (US$20 million), and a 
concessionary loan of about US$45 million from the European Investment Bank (EIB). 
The Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC) is likely to join the project at a later 
stage with a concessionary loan of US$ 40 million equivalent. This component will focus 
on pollution abatement in major hot spots in the Alexandria and Qaliubya Governorates 
and will target the industrial sector at large. A small portion of the facility might be used 
for financing other bankable activities related to environmental protection such as 
environmental services (manufacturing of equipment for environmental monitoring or 
pollution abatement).  
 
-Component 2: Technical Assistance activities aimed at strengthening the capacity of 
EEAA and other key stakeholders and provide project management support. This 
component will be financed by the in-kind contribution of the Government of Egypt 
(GOE), a contribution from the National Bank of Egypt and the Government of Finland 
(a grant of about Euro900,000). Also, upon approval of the EIB loan, the project will be 
able to access additional grant (up to 3 to Euros4 million) through the Facility for Euro-
Mediterranean Investment and Partnership (FEMIP). The proposed list of technical 
assistance activities is provided in Annex 4-A of the PAD.  
 
The Carbon Finance Sub-Program:  
 
This sub-program will assist the GOE’s efforts to set up a sustainable pollution 
abatement program by using portions of the revenues from the sale to the World Bank 
and other buyers of emission reductions (ERs) generated under the Kyoto Protocol’s 
Clean Development Mechanism (CDM). The Bank has already signed two Letters of 
Page  3
Intent (Onyx Project in Alexandria and AMA Project in Cairo) for purchasing ERs 
generated from the solid waste landfills in which at least 6% of the revenues will be 
allocated for financing pollution abatement activities and other legitimate sustainable 
development activities other than those programmed under EPAP II .  The role of the 
Bank will be to monitor the use of the revenues generated from the sales of ER and 
ensure that pollution abatement activities are being implemented using the EPAP II 
model. This component will be managed by the Environmental Protection Fund  (EPF) 
instead of EPAP II Project Management Unit. EPF was established in 1995 under Law 4-
1994 with the objective "to stimulate environmental investments and support the 
environmental, social and economic policies in the pursuit of sustainable development". 
It is expected that the proceeds generated by the sale of ERs, along the other resources of 
the EPF, will contribute to the financing of environmental projects aiming at curbing 
pollution and improving the overall environment through, in an accountable and 
transparent manner.  The CF sub-program will be processed in compliance with all 
relevant Bank Safeguard Operational Policies as appropriate. For example, the first two 
CDM projects (Onyx Project in Alexandria and AMA Project in Cairo) as well as all 
other future CDM projects, for which the Bank is the purchaser of Emissions Reduction 
Units, will be implemented in accordance with the relevant World Bank environmental 
and social safeguards policies, namely OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and 
OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This project will be focusing in environmental hot spots in two governorates (Alexandria 
and Qalubya). The project is a pilot for the new OP/BP 4.00 relative to country systems. 
Significant impacts are not expected as all the sub-projects will aim at improving the 
environmental conditions in the selected hot spots.  
 
The investment component has followed the "Use of Country System" approach on a 
pilot basis according to the requirement of O.P. 4. 00   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNSRE) 
Mr Maged Mahmoud Hamed (MNSRE) 
Mr Knut Opsal (MNSRE) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Following the decision to use the investment component of the EPAP II project as a pilot 
for the use of country system appraoch, the focus has been put on the ensuring and 
enhancing the capacity of the environmental adminstration to follow appropriately on the 
EIAs that will be prepared during the project and to ensure at the same time appropriate 
enforcement of environmental regulation while enhancing particpatory approach through 
public consultation and disclosure.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No harmful nor negative long term impacts are expected as a result of the implementation 
of the project. No activities triggering the involuntary resettlement policy will be 
financed under the project   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N.A.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Investment Component:  The Bank and the Government of Egypt have 
agreed to apply in the context of this project the “Country systems” approach 
inagreement with the World Bank Policy 4.00 authorizing piloting the use of country 
systems. The report on the use of the country systems for this project was prepared by the 
World Bank staff, in accordance with the new Bank Policy 4.00. An executive summary 
of this report is included in this document as Annex 10. The report was submitted to 
public consultation and disclosed at the Bank info shop and at the specific locations in 
Egypt.  This report showed that :  (a)  the Bank's EA policy and the Egyptian EIA system 
have many common features and principles and are compatible by many aspects;  (b) no 
additional legislation  is required to improve the equivalence;  c) the proposed  measures 
Page  5
for remediation to the equivalency gaps can be solved at the levels of the revised EA 
guidelines and/or changes of procedures; and (d) that the capacity of relevant Egyptian 
institutions  their implementation practices and track record in addressing 
environmentalsafeguard issues needs further strengthening. The World Bank and the 
Government have agreed on specific mitigating and monitoring measures to move 
towards a sustained acceptability which will be supported by EPAP II.  
 
Technical assistance component: This component will include activities aimed at filling 
the gaps identified during the UCS assessment. Training activities targeting various 
stakeholders will be organized and a disclosure system based on benchmarking the 
performance of industrial sector companies will be introduced through the project TA 
activities.  
 
Carbon Finance program: This component will not be submitted to the “Country 
System” pilot. Each Carbon Finance projects will be screened in order to define the 
appropriate environmental category according to the World Bank Environmental 
Assessment Safeguards Policy O.P. 4.01. This component should be viewed as a program 
that will be constituted of several projects. At the time of project preparation only two 
deals have been agreed to with project developers (Solid waste project in Alexandria – 
ONYX Company and Solid Waste project in Cairo with AMA Company). The EIA for 
the ONYX project has been reviewed and has been found to be acceptable. The Carbon 
Finance operations attached to the EPAP II project will be submitted to the 
environmental assessment process in compliance with the World Bank guidelines. The 
environmental assessment will have then to be carried out and disclosed at least 60 days 
before EPAP II Board approval in the case of the first carbon Finance project (ONYX 
solid waste in Alexandria) and 60 days before signature of the Emission Reduction 
Purchase Agreement (ERPA) between the Bank and the project developer for the 
subsequent carbon finance projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
EEAA and the World Bank jointly organized a public consultation workshop to discuss 
the draft version of this report in Cairo on December 4, 2005.  In preparation for this 
workshop, EEAA circulated advance copies of the draft report to a large number 
individuals and relevant agencies inviting their participation and comments.  Over 
seventy people, representing NGOs, consultants, donor agencies, academia, industry 
representatives, participating Banks, media and various Government departments 
including EEAA, attended this workshop. H.E. Mr. Maged George, the Egyptian Minister 
of State for Environmental Affairs, chaired the workshop.  
 
Participants expressed their overall support to the proposal to pilot Egyptian EIA system 
in the context of the proposed EPAP II and agreed with the findings and gap filling 
actions proposed to achieve and sustain equivalence and acceptability. Annex 2 of the 
UCS report provides a matrix on issues raised and comments made by different 
stakeholders and responses from EEAA and the World Bank.  
 
Arabic version of the executive summary and English version of this full report are 
currently being disclosed in the following places: (a) EEAA website; (b) EEAA’s library 
in Cairo; (c) Greater Cairo and Alexandria RBOs; (d) libraries of Cairo and Ain Shams 
Page  6
Universities; (e) the World Bank Public Information Centre in Cairo office; and (f) the 
World Bank Infoshop in Washington DC.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/06/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
12/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/22/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/12/2005  
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N.A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hocine Chalal 
12/08/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Panneer Selvam Lakshminarayanan 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Narasimham Vijay Jagannathan 
 
Comments:   
