Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1298 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/14/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: El Salvador 
Project ID: P078993 
Project Name: Excellency and Innovation in Secondary Education (EXITO). 
Task Team Leader: Emanuela Di Gropello 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 13, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 13, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSHE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Secondary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
19.00
19.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Government identifies the key development objective of the proposed project as follows:  
increase opportunities for young people and adults to complete their secondary education with 
general and/or relevant specialized competencies to contribute to improving the productivity, 
international competitiveness, and social development of the country." Specific over-arching 
development objectives include: (i) increase secondary school (grades 7-11/12) enrollment and 
attainment particularly for the most disadvantaged socio-economic groups; (ii) increase the 
percentage of secondary students scoring at the intermediate or advanced level on the grade 9 
and PAES exam; (iii) increase the competency levels of secondary students in key areas such as 
English language proficiency, use of technology, and work-preparedness.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The GOS has identified an investment loan, with strong focus on results, as the most suitable 
lending instrument for this new project. An investment loan would allow the GOS to capitalize 
on the technical assistance provided by the Bank in facing this urgent and growing challenge of 
broad-based quality secondary education in El Salvador.  
 
Component Descriptions:  
Page  2
I. Quality and Relevance of Secondary Education  
 
This component would promote high-quality and relevant secondary education by strengthening 
learning in core subjects, while also improving the productivity and employability of secondary 
education graduates.  
 
A. 
Strengthening learning in core secondary subjects.  The objective is to improve  
 
student learning in the five basic disciplines; math, Spanish, English, science, and social 
science; putting special attention on those students who are academically behind.  
 
B. 
Relevance of the third cycle of basic education (grades 7-9). This  sub component is  
 
geared towards resolving the weaknesses of grades 7-9 by supporting curricular and structural 
reforms of the cycle to improve quality and integration with upper secondary.  
 
C. 
Relevance of upper secondary education (grades 10-12). This sub component would  
 
aim at improving the productivity and employability of secondary education graduates by 
granting better articulation between general and technical education, more balanced curricula, 
better integration with tertiary education, and better linkages with the labor market and the 
private sector.  
 
D. 
Connectivity and technology in secondary education. El Salvador's schools have only  
 
just begun to teach and use advanced technology. Economic competitiveness in El Salvador 
will be linked to the population's comfort with and mastery of information technology. The 
objective of this subcomponent is to develop the technological skills of rural and marginalized-
urban students in lower secondary.  
 
E. 
'Convivencia Escolar' program for youth.  This subcomponent would support the  
 
Convivencia Escolar program which aims to strengthen the learning and social environment of 
poor urban schools and decrease violence through prevention and skill building methodologies. 
The goal being to provide a more stable place for student learning, teaching, and school 
functioning with links to the labor market.  
 
II. Broad-Based Coverage of Secondary Education  
 
This component would promote broad-based secondary education by applying a combination of 
policy options: expansion of traditional modalities, development of flexible delivery modalities 
and development of demand-side subsidies.  
 
A. Flexible delivery modalities to support secondary education completion. To close the 
secondary coverage gap where it is most prevalent (poor and rural areas), this subcomponent 
develops flexible delivery modalities, including accelerated, semi-distance and distance 
education, for youth and adults who did not complete, or are at risk of not completing, secondary 
education. The flexible modalities would provide relevant, quality education and diminish the 
direct and opportunity costs of schooling for these populations.  
 
Page  3
B. Improvement of the physical environment of learning. The objective is to improve the 
infrastructure and equipment of public secondary schools.  
 
C. Demand-side subsidies for students from socio-economically disadvantaged families. This 
sub component would envisage promoting public-private partnerships in the delivery of 
secondary education by providing public subsidies to public and private schools to have them 
enroll low income students. We plan to undertake an impact evaluation of this innovatory 
program. Additionally, the subcomponent would also look to expand and improve an existing 
scholarship program by providing yearly grants to students starting in grade 7 to support 
secondary completion for 3000 youth from the bottom two income quintiles. The goal of this 
subcomponent is to improve secondary completion rates specifically for poor students who face 
the strongest economic barriers to secondary completion.   
 
III. School Effectiveness  
 
This component would improve school effectiveness by addressing the need for more and better 
assessment, while also improving school-based management.  
 
A. Evaluation, accreditation and certification of students, teachers, and schools. This 
subcomponent aims at improving student, teacher, and school evaluation and accreditation. It 
will support an accreditation and certification system for teachers, and include strengthening the 
current academic assessment system by improving its effectiveness, relevance and coverage. 
Basic education indicators will be developed, monitored at the school level, and disseminated to 
school communities, to facilitate greater local access to information and foster accountability.  
 
B. School autonomy. The objective of this subcomponent is to improve the efficiency of 
secondary education in El Salvador through the expanded use of school autonomy. It will pilot 
school autonomy, modeled after EDUCO schools, in a group of  new and existing secondary 
schools. We are  planning to undertake an impact evaluation of this intervention.  This 
subcomponent will also support the transfer of unified school budgets allocated according to 
equity and efficiency criteria to all secondary schools (autonomous and traditional).   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be country-wide.  Based on the poverty map, it will target areas of greatest 
poverty in rural and urban marginal areas.  The methodology and criteria will be further refined 
during pre-appraisal.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Areas to be covered under the proposed project have similar social and environmental 
characteristics as those in the current Secondary Education Project (P041680).  As demonstrated 
during implementation of the Project, the Borrower has followed recommendations of the Social 
Assessment produced during project preparation.  Implementation of relevant safeguards policies 
is expected to be facilitated by the experience of the Ministry of Education acquired under the 
Secondary Education Project.  New project preparation activities will include the development of 
a
Social Assessment and guidelines for Environmental Management, which will evaluate the 
effectiveness of safeguards-related measures used under the on-going project.  It will develop 
Page  4
additional measures, if necessary, to enhance the Borrower?s capacity to address identified 
environmental and social issues under the proposed project.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project will include rehabilitation of schools focusing on three areas: substitution of 
existing infrastructure, rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, and expansion of existing 
infrastructure.  Due to the inclusion of expansion of existing infrastructure, it has been 
recommended to rate the project a ?B? and to include in the operational manual environmental 
guidelines for any expansion proposed at existing school sites.  It will include appropriate 
mitigation measures for negative impacts and recommendations for enhancement measures for 
positive impacts. A traditional Environmental Assessment may not be necessary.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
A
social assessment will be conducted.  Within this assessment, it will be determined if the 
safeguard policy related to indigenous peoples is applicable and a plan will be developed if 
necessary.  At this point, data from various studies (including household surveys) indicate that 
those self-identifying as Indigenous only represent 2-6 percent of the population in El Salvador.  
 
As such we have not considered plans to include specials measures to address this 
population.  
 
Project beneficiaries are expected to be vulnerable groups such as those in the lowest 
quintiles, rural and urban marginal populations, and youth affected by violence.  The Social 
Assessment would review the social imbalances associated with these groups.  The study would 
cover these areas in depth, and project design would draw heavily from the findings and 
recommendations to adequately incorporate the particular characteristics of these groups.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/01/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
social assessment will be conducted.  Within this assessment, it will be determined if the 
safeguard policy related to indigenous peoples is applicable and a plan will be developed if 
necessary.  At this point, data from various studies (including household surveys) indicate 
that those self-identifying as Indigenous only represent 2-6 percent of the population in El 
Salvador.  As such we have not considered plans to include specials measures to address this 
population.   Project beneficiaries are expected to be vulnerable groups such as those in the 
lowest quintiles, rural and urban marginal populations, and youth affected by violence.  The 
Social Assessment would review the social imbalances associated with these groups.  The 
study would cover these areas in depth, and project design would draw heavily from the 
findings and recommendations to adequately incorporate the particular characteristics of 
these groups.  
 
The target start date for the safeguard-related study(s) is March 2005. It is projected that 
they  
 
would be completed in May 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Emanuela Di Gropello 
02/24/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
04/06/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eduardo Velez Bustillo 
04/06/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
