                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I ­ Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 14, 2004                                     Report No.:AC1100
A. Basic Project Data
A.1. Project Statistics
Country: Ethiopia                                       Project ID: P050272
Project: Private Sector Development Capacity            TTL: Agata E. Pawlowska
Building
Total project cost: US$25.00
Appraisal Date: November 1-12, 2004                     Loan/Credit amount($m):
                                                        IDA: 24.12, of which grant component
                                                        US$5.00
Board Date: December 21, 2004
Other financing amounts by source:                        ($m.)
Managing Unit: AFTPS                                    Sector: General industry and trade sector
                                                        (100%)
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery?           Yes? [ ]            No? [X]
Environmental Category: B
A.2. Project Objectives

The key objective of the project is to facilitate increased participation of the private sector in the
economy by creating conditions for improving its productivity and competitiveness. This goal will
be achieved by helping accelerate the process of divestiture of public enterprises and facilitating
increased private participation; improving the business environment and increasing competition
and the contestability of markets; strengthening the linkages and integration of the Ethiopian
economy into the global markets; strengthening support for technical and business management
skills and thus improving the productivity at the firm level. The project integrates a set of
complementary and mutually reinforcing activities to support enterprise needs, including a
matching grant fund, tools for business schools to better train managers, and a business plan
competition to catalyze innovation, and entrepreneurship. The project will also support poverty
reduction strategy dialogue and implementation of policy measures agreed in the framework of the
PRSC.

The higher level objective is to facilitate increased growth and competitiveness of the Ethiopian
private sector. This objective is aligned with the Bank's CAS and with the Government's
commitment to stimulate PSD to attain high and sustainable level of growth needed to reduce
poverty and realize the MDGs.

A.3. Project Description

To support the implementation of agreed policy measures under PRSC-II, as well as to build the
capacity of the private sector, the PSD CB Project consists of three components:

(i)     Component One - Accelerating the Implementation of Privatization Program;
(ii)    Component Two - Improving the Business Environment through Implementation of
        Competition Policy and Accession to the WTO
(iii)   Component Three - Strengthening the International Competitiveness of the Private Sector
        and the Capacities of its Representative Organizations.

Component One - Accelerating the Implementation of Privatization Program

This component will assist the Government in accelerating the implementation of its Privatization
Program of commercial public enterprises. The Government has recognized that its early approach
to privatization needed to be revised substantially and outlined the key principles and approach to
the privatization process in a Privatization Action Plan, which the PSD CB project will help
implement over the next five years. The Plan is geared towards accelerating the privatization
program. To achieve this objective, the Government intends to make use of a range of divestiture
modalities including asset sale, concessions, leasing, joint ventures, management contracts, etc.
The Government will adopt process-driven procedures in transactions using a market-oriented,
open, transparent and competitive bidding process. Further, in order to address concerns of
potential investors related to labor issues, the divestiture process will allow the successful bidder
flexibility to restructure the labor force of the enterprise. To mitigate the social impact of possible
redundancies that may result, the Government will develop and introduce an excess labor program.
The details of the program (i.e., the options offered to redundant workers, that may include
voluntary redundancy, retraining, counseling, early retirement, etc.), a defined formula in
accordance with existing legislation, institutional arrangements, as well as a mechanism that
ensures that staff benefiting from the program will not be rehired by Government, will be designed
prior to the implementation of the redundancy program.

This component will provide financial and technical assistance in the following areas:

(i)     Institutional capacity building of PPESA ­ This activity will cover training of the PPESA
        staff and board members on specific topics such as negotiating skills and contract
        management. An enhanced information system, building on the systems that were in use in
        PESA and EPA, will also be designed and implemented.
(ii)    Transaction advisory services to the divestiture process ­ This activity will support a range
        of services, including: (a) transaction advisors to assist PPESA at various stages in
        transactions from preparation through to closing for selected larger and more complex
        transactions; (b) full and partial environmental impact assessments, identified as required
        during the environmental pre-audit and, if required, (c) capacity building for the
        Environmental Protection Authority.
(iii)   Excess labor program ­ This activity will assist in dealing with excess labor in public
        enterprises slated for privatization.1 The program will be co-funded by Government and
        investors and will provide a package of benefits, which may comprise of voluntary
        redundancy, early retirement, counseling, retraining and out placement, for redundant
        workers. A short term consultancy will be funded to assist in the design of the program.
(iv)    Studies.- A short term consultancy will be funded to help design and implement a system to
        monitor compliance by investors with contract covenants.

Component Two - Improving the Business Environment through Implementation of
Competition Policy and Accession to the WTO

This component aims at assisting the Government in the effective implementation of their
competition policy, preparation for WTO accession negotiations, and long-term capacity-building
for the formulation and implementation of trade and competition policy. The ultimate objectives
are to maintain and encourage competition, strengthen integration in the world economy, increase

 1The US$7 million of IDA funding earmarked for this activity is likely to be adequate only for the initial
 phase of the program. Should the program prove to be successful, additional funding will need to be
 sought.

economic efficiency and competitiveness, and promote consumer welfare. It will provide technical
assistance and training in two sub-components covering competition policy and WTO accession.

Subcomponent A ­ Implementation of Competition Policy

This component will assist in the implementation of the Trade Practices Proclamation in order to
ensure a level playing field, fair business practices, and greater accountability and transparency in
government-business relations for all economic agents. It will consist of the following elements:

(i)    Preparation of implementation guidelines, regulations, procedures and methods relating to
       various provisions of the Proclamation including the administrative procedures for handling
       complaints, selecting cases, conducting investigations, gathering evidence, protecting
       business confidentiality, measures safeguarding the rights and obligations of parties
       involved in competition case matters, remedies and fines, examination of widespread
       anticompetitive business practices and industry specific situations, engaging in `competition
       advocacy' and other such matters deemed necessary for the effective implementation of
       competition law-policy. In addition, provision for the review, evaluation, and changes to
       improve the Proclamation is included.
(ii)   Staff Capacity and Institution Building through the provision of short term visiting
       international experts/advisers to provide advice and materials on case specific matters,
       investigative techniques, evaluating evidence, and conduct staff training workshops and
       public information dissemination programs. Also staff participation in short-medium term
       educational programs-courses, internships at cooperating counterpart competition agencies,
       workshops, etc.
(iii)  Materials. A limited amount of supplies will be provided to ensure that staff in the
       Competition Commission-Secretariat and MOTI have the material support necessary to do
       their jobs.

Subcomponent B ­ Support to WTO Accession

The project will help the government prepare for negotiations on WTO accession by
supplementing other bilateral assistance and coordinating closely with other donors and
international agencies involved in the process. It will consist of the following elements:

(i)    Analytical studies of the different policy options open to the government as it considers the
       degree and pace of liberalization that it is prepared to offer in various sectors. These will
       assess the likely economic impact of reform drawing on international experience but based
       on the specificities of the Ethiopian economy. The studies will include detailed treatment
       of the appropriate regulatory framework required for successful liberalization and assess the
       current state of play in Ethiopia.
(ii)   Short-term advisors to help in the preparation of responses to questions from WTO
       members, the elaboration of negotiating positions, and the delivery of workshops.
(iii)  Training. In addition to dissemination workshops for all studies, various seminars will be
       conducted for the private sector, civil society and parliament, in Addis and the provincial
       capitals, in order to improve public awareness of the objectives, issues and challenges
       involved in WTO accession.
(iv)   Materials and workshops. A limited amount of materials and documentation will be
       provided to ensure that staff in MOTI and one or two other key government ministries have
       the material support necessary to do their jobs.

Component Three - Strengthening the International Competitiveness of the Private Sector and
the Capacities of its Representative Organizations

This component will help strengthen human and institutional capacity of the private sector. It
includes three complementary and mutually reinforcing sub-components for which the PSD CB
project will provide financial and technical assistance:

(i)     BIZCAP ­ aimed at building international competitiveness within private firms, and at
        building the capacity of private business and professional associations and of chambers to
        better serve their members.
(ii)    BIZPLAN ­ Business Plan Competition aimed to support and grow private small and
        medium enterprises (SMEs) in Ethiopia.
(iii)   SCHOOLCAP ­ Global Business School Network aimed to strengthen the institutional
        capacity of the Faculty of Business and Economics at the Addis Ababa University.

Subcomponent A ­ BIZCAP

This sub-component consists of two "windows." FIRMCAP, which focuses on building the
international competitiveness of Ethiopian private firms, so that they can compete in both domestic
and international markets. The proposed basic delivery mechanism is a Matching Grant Scheme
(MGS) where an individual firm will finance an agreed proportion of the costs of training and/or
technical assistance it desires. FIRMCAP will build on long World Bank experience of operating
similar MGS schemes in many developing countries. Three types of activities will be carried out
within FIRMCAP: (i) pro-active promotion to firms of the benefits of using business development
services, in order to build competitiveness; (ii) free, on-going hand-holding and advice in preparing
their requests for grant funding; and finally (iii) the grants themselves including approving requests
on the basis of compliance with clear eligibility criteria, and monitoring implementation of
supported activities.

The MGS concept is different from most traditional approaches to helping firms as the scheme is
deliberately temporary. The main "institution-building" achieved will be within each individual
firm. The grants will decline over time, so as to reduce the risk of a "grant culture" being
developed. The help given is deliberately partial. The firm must make a meaningful contribution to
costs. Experience shows that this is essential to ensure real commitment and ownership. In return,
however, it is the firm and not the scheme that decides on activities to be supported and that selects
the service provider. The firms self-select, and are supported on first-come, first-serve basis. Also,
the firm will reveal to the responsible MGS management unit its detailed and confidential
competitiveness-building plans. To assure this, management arrangements are designed to ensure,
so far as possible, that firms will have full confidence that commercial confidentiality will be
maintained.

ASCAP will provide support to private sector entities such as business and professional
associations and chambers of commerce, so as to improve their advocacy capabilities, expand
membership, and where appropriate, regulate professional codes of practice. It operates under most
of the same principles as apply to FIRMCAP. It aims at encouraging the use of outside expertise
and of travel, to build capacity within associations and chambers.

Subcomponent B ­ SCHOOLCAP

This sub-component will build on the IFC initiative called the Global Business School Network
(GBSN) started in 2002 to strengthen the institutional capacity of Business Schools in developing

countries. SCHOOLCAP will improve the capacity of the Faculty of Business and Economics at
the Addis Ababa University which is the only institution in Ethiopia that awards graduate degrees
in management and finance. Taking into account the composition of students obtaining their
degrees at the Faculty of Business and Economics (FBE) at the Addis Ababa University, building
their capacity will impact the private sector throughout Ethiopia.

SCHOOLCAP will upgrade the program curriculum as well as the resources required to implement
the revision. In addition to other courses designed for the new curriculum, courses will be designed
in the areas of competition policy and WTO accession This sub-component will also include an
annual training to transfer skills to the other business schools as well as a regular publication both
to communicate new knowledge and record the development of business education in Ethiopia.

Subcomponent C ­ BIZPLAN

BIZPLAN, or Business Plan Competition, will assist GOE's efforts to support and grow private
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in Ethiopia. BIZPLAN Competitions have proved to be an
excellent vehicle to identify and support promising small-scale projects in other countries.
Ethiopian BIZPLAN aims to provide technical and financial assistance to Ethiopian SMEs thus
enabling these entrepreneurs to strengthen their skills and increase the availability and quality of
services, both financial and technical assistance, to them. By engaging the private banks,
BIZPLAN will also strengthen and develop their institutional capacity to provide better services,
financial and non-financial, to the private sector.

The Ethiopian BIZPLAN will promote competition among entrepreneurs for new and pioneering
ideas aimed at increasing efficiency and productivity, and demonstrate to Ethiopian banks that
lending to SMEs is an attractive and viable business line. Finalists of the BIZPLAN will receive
technical assistance (TA) from the competition organizer and winners of the BIZPLAN will
receive a financial award (credit from the private banks participating in the scheme). The TA and
finance combination is designed to address the two main constraints to entrepreneurship growth.
The process of identifying the winners is open, transparent, and highly visible, making it attractive
for the participants to put their best ideas forward and for the organizers/sponsors to highlight key
issues and priorities.

A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

Project location ­ Ethiopia ­ nationwide as the enterprises are located across the country.
Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis ­ See the results of the
environmental pre-audit as described below.


B. Check Environmental Category A [ ], B [X], C [ ], FI [ ]
Comments: Environmental Category: B (Partial Assessment)
Experience has shown that successful privatization of industrial enterprises is intertwined with
qualitative and quantitative assessment of the post, current, and future environmental, health, and
safety issues. Moving PEs from the public domain to the private sector is not neutral in
environmental terms as it raises the issue of responsibility for environmental impacts from past and
ongoing operations as well as the broader concerns of environmental management. Such evaluation
is also important for a potential buyer for whom a major issue is the associated environmental
liability that results from a PE's purchase. Increasingly, financial institutions, as part of loan
transactions, are also requiring evaluation of potential environmental liabilities associated with
purchase. Thus, evaluation of environmental issues related to PEs is crucial. If the environmental

aspects are appropriately addressed, the reforms may produce positive environmental effects, such
as, increased efficiency in the use of natural resources and more rapid adoption of cleaner
technologies.

In Ethiopia, many of the 126 privatization candidates, particularly in certain industries, may leave
behind significant environmental risks or have already caused serious impacts from their
production and waste handling practices. The project recognized these facts and during preparation
an environmental pre-audit was undertaken that: (i) measured the environmental and social
conditions, for both past and on-going activities, of the selected enterprises against the risk of being
held responsible for damage; (ii) determined the need for remedial actions necessary to bring a
given enterprise into compliance with national and Bank safeguard policies prior to privatization;
and (iii) formulated recommendations for partial and full audits for each facility or site, as
applicable, and suggest a framework for subsequent audits.

As a result of the study, 24 PEs will require full environmental audits (EAs) and remediation plans;
72 PEs will require partial audits; 44 will require no audits.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
                                                                           Yes                         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                                   [X]                         [ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                               [ ]                       [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                   [ ]                       [X]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-)                              [ ]                       [X]
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                       [ ]                       [X]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                [ ]                       [X]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                        [ ]                       [X]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                 [ ]                       [X]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                                 [ ]                       [X]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP
                                                                            [ ]                       [X]
7.50)




 *
  By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
 claims on the disputed areas

Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.

D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

As a result of The Environmental Pre-audit, 24 PEs will require full environmental audits (EAs)
and remediation plans; 72 PEs will require partial audits; 44 will require no audits. Detailed EAs
will be conducted as part of the transaction process for these PEs and prior to their divestiture,
with funding provided by the project. When such audits are undertaken as part of privatization
transaction, they will be reviewed and cleared by IDA. There are no potential irreversible
impacts.

D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area.
N/A

D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
N/A

D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

As a result of The Environmental Pre-audit, 24 PEs will require full environmental audits (EAs)
and remediation plans; 72 PEs will require partial audits; 44 will require no audits. The
approached adopted has been to agree with the Government on a specific set of guidelines for
conducting EA but to defer conducting the EAs as part of the transaction process for these PEs
and prior to their divestiture, with funding provided by the project. The list of privatization
candidates for which environmental audits would be undertaken was agreed and is included in
Annex 10, PAD. When such audits are undertaken as part of privatization transaction, they will
be reviewed and cleared by IDA.

The Environmental Pre-audit has also assessed the institutional and legislative support for
conducting environmental audits as well as for monitoring and enforcement of environmental
management in Ethiopia. The Federal Environmental Protection Authority (FEPA) has the
responsibility for overall management of Ethiopia's environment. The Authority, since its
inception in 1995, has been continuously improving the environmental management initiatives.2
However, extensive work is still required to develop and refine the specific EHS guidelines and
regulations to accommodate the different sectors; methodologies for monitoring waste and toxic
products in industrial effluents; standards for monitoring environmental parameters. The
institutional set-up of the FEPA should also be strengthened to enable it to conduct high quality
EAs and adequately monitor and enforce adherence to the national environmental standards and
regulations. Recognizing these needs, the project will also provide funding for strengthening of
capacities of the FEPA.




2For instance, environmental management is gradually being integrated into the national policies for
development in Ethiopia as outlined in the "Provisional Standards for Industrial Pollution Control in
Ethiopia" (2003).

D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The key stakeholders include three groups: (i) small and medium enterprises from the private and
the public sectors; (ii) the meso-level private sector institutions (chambers, industry and
professional associations) that serve these enterprises; and (iii) public sector entities that are
implementers of the competition policy, WTO accession and privatization program, as well as
institutions related to the environmental and social safeguard policies and occupational health
(e.g., Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, Environmental Protection Authority, Ministry of
Health).

These stakeholders were consulted through direct meetings as well as through workshops and
seminars, but no particular safeguard policy decisions were necessary.


F. Disclosure Requirements        Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                        1 Nov 2004       or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                    9 Nov 2004       or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                     9 Nov 2004       or Not Applicable
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors                                          .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                        .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                    .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                     .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                        .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                    .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                     .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                        .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                    .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                     .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                        .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                    .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                     .../.../...   or Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Not Applicable

Section III ­ Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                            Yes    No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                X
                                                                                Pre-
                                                                               audit
                                                                               report
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA
                                                                                       X
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                       X
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                                                  Yes    No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                                       X
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures          X
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                      Yes    No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                             X
Is a separate PMP required?                                                            X
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?                               X
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:                                  Yes    No
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                 X
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
                                                                                       X
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                                   Yes    No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in
                                                                                       X
consultation with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve
                                                                                       X
the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed
                                                                                       X
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                          Yes    No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been
                                                                                       X
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve
                                                                                       X
the plan / policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4.36 ­ Forests:                                                           Yes    No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and
                                                                                       X
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                       X
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                       X
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                                    Yes    No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                   X
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts
                                                                                       X
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and                             X

arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                                Yes       No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                  X
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement, then has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the              X
memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?                                                 X
    Please explain:                                                                     X
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                 X
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                         Yes       No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the
                                                                                        X
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the
Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?                 X
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                                 Yes       No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                       Yes       No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
                                                                               X
been prepared for the implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                   X
                                                                             TDB in
                                                                             detailed
                                                                              EAs
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project
                                                                               X
implementation?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                               X
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
Signed and submitted by:                               Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Agata E. Pawlowska                         14 Nov 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 1: Amadou Konare
Approved by:                                           Name                         Date
Regional Safeguards
                                    Thomas E. Walton
Coordinator:
Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Demba Ba
Comments:

