Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/20/2005 
Report No.:  AC1442
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Gabon 
Project ID:  P082812 
Project Name:  Local Infrastructure Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Chantal Reliquet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 4, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTU2 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General public administration sector (20%);Sewerage (20%);Other social 
services (20%);Sanitation (20%);Roads and highways (20%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P);Municipal governance and institution building 
(P);Decentralization (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
27.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.00
2.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
21. 
The Project has two main objectives: (i) increasing access of the population living 
in low-income settlements to basic services; and (ii) increasing access of SMEs to civil 
work and construction contracts with the public sector.  These two objectives are closely 
interrelated in the national TIPPEE Program mentioned above.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed Project will have 3 components:  
 
(a) 
Community-based infrastructure upgrading in low-income settlements.  This 
component aims at improving the physical accessibility of low-income settlements to key 
urban services;  
 
(b) 
Development of SMEs in the local construction industry.  This component aims at 
developing the local private sector and supporting job creation, on the basis of the labor-
based and small infrastructure approach developed during the pilot project; and  
 
Page  2
(c) 
Support to public works management reform.  This component aims at improving 
the management (procurement and contracts) of infrastructure works by the public sector 
(National Government and municipalities) to facilitate local private sector involvement in 
the implementation of public works.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will expand coverage to the main cities of Libreville, Port-Gentil, and 
Franceville, as well as the selected secondary cities of Oyem, Lambar?n? and Mouila.  
The nature of sub-projects to be carried out under the project has been identified and this 
would include (i) infrastructure improvements inside target areas such as access roads; 
(ii) micro-projects for the rehabilitation of existing facilities and construction of service 
networks for water and sanitation water standpipes and public latrines, controlled 
secondary dumping sites, small composting units, etc.; rehabilitation or construction of 
small community facilities in neighborhoods (playgrounds, small markets sites, parking 
lots, etc.); improvement in road signage and street furniture (bus shelters, etc.); and (iii) 
community-based micro-projects (for which identification study has already started) to be 
defined with the communities.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Major negative environmental impacts are not anticipated as a result of the project.  The 
infrastructure works such as paving of existing community earth roads and construction 
of new road works will be carried out on existing rights of way without involving any 
involuntary resettlement.  The approval of micro-projects will be subject to specific 
environmental analysis.  Provisions and mitigation measures have been made in the 
Page  3
Environmental and Social Management Framework to address any negative impact that 
may arise during the implementation of the sub-projects.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No long-term adverse impact is anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
As part of project preparation activities, an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared by the 
Gabonese government.  
 
The main features of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is 
an outline of the potential environmental and social impacts of the project (most 
especially the community-based infrastructure investments in low income settlements 
component), the mitigation measures required, the management responsibilities (for both 
implementation and monitoring) and the cost associated with its implementation. 
Institutional strengthening will be provided to participating government agencies  
 
PAPSUT will be responsible for the implementation of the ESMF and RPF 
recommendations at the national and municipal levels.  
 
In addition, PAPSUT will be responsible for the implementation of the EMP and the 
environmental monitoring plan. Consultants will be engaged to prepare resettlement 
action plans as and when necessary.  
 
Before project effectiveness, PAPSUT is expected to recruit an environmental specialist, 
who will be given adequate and specialized training under the project, and will be 
complemented with short-term national environmental and social safeguards consultants 
as and when the need arises.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the population living in the targeted settlements, municipalities, 
community leaders, NGOs, and private firms operating in the construction sector.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/03/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/12/2005 
 
Page  4
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/03/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/12/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/22/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Chantal Reliquet 
03/31/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
03/31/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard Verspyck 
04/01/2005 
Comments:   
