Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1393 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/28/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Gambia, The 
Project ID: P094281 
Project Name: Poverty Alleviation & Municipal Development Capacity Bldg - 
Supplemental 
Task Team Leader: Christian Diou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTU2 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General education sector (36%);Health (36%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (16%);Sub-national government administration (7%);Central 
government administration (5%) 
Theme: Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (P);Other urban development (P);Municipal finance (S);Municipal governance 
and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.20
0.20 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's objective is to contribute to improved living conditions of the urban population, and 
the poor in particular: (i) Provision of public infrastructure and services based on demand and on 
fulfillment of clearly defined criteria; and: (ii) Implementation of a capacity building program 
aimed at improving the LGA's resource mobilization and management.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed Supplemental Credit would finance:  
 
(a) Investments (US$3.35 million): The Project would finance a portfolio of six subprojects 
already identified and the rehabilitation of the Bakotech dumpsite.  
 
(b) Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.4 million): The cost of technical 
and financial audits, final evaluation of the program and the supervision costs and training 
activities for consultants, small-scale contractors and GAMWORKS staff will be supported.  
Page  2
(c) GAMWORKS Operating Costs: The Credit would also finance GAMWORKS fees for this 
new portfolio, for an estimated amount of US$0. 25 million or 7% of the program delegated to 
the Agency.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Bakotech improved disposal site, located in Kanifing, is aimed at serving the Greater Banjul 
Area.  
 
The six other subprojects proposed for the Supplemental Credit are located in Banjul, Kanifing, 
Brikama, Gambissara and Basse (in urban or suburban areas).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Gamworks'Manual of Procedures has been in use for many years and includes simple procedures 
for environmental screening (absence of negative environmental impact is an eligibility criteria 
for subproject selection).  An ex-post environmental assessment is underway by an international 
consultant to: (i) fine tune internal procedurses vis-a-vis environmental issues; and (ii) produce a 
specific Guide for EA of simple projects.  International consultants already recruited for the 
studies pertaining to the Bakoteh dumpsite are also producing the specific EIA and the relevant 
mitigation plan.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
-
Specific Environmental Assessment for the rehabilitation of Bakoteh dump site.  
 
-
Other small subprojects (six) are subject to the provisions made in the Agetip Manuel of 
Procedures (approved by the Bank in 2000) and a specific Guide for the Environmental 
Assessment of Simple Projects under preparation (available for Appraisal)   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
To be determined during appraisal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  03/16/2005 
 
Page  3
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
-
EIA for the rehabilitation of the Bakoteh dump site produced by an international consultant 
in draft form.  
 
-
Guide for EA for simple projects under preparation (available by Appraisal)   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christian Diou 
03/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
04/26/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Eustache Ouayoro 
04/26/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
