Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC593 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 29, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Georgia 
Project ID: P087888 
Project Name: COMMUNITY-BASED TOURISM 
AND CULTURAL ASSET MANAGEMENT 
Task Team Leader: Janis D. Bernstein 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 25, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: October 28, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Other social services (100%) 
Theme: Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Other financial and private sector development 
(S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:   
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA:  3 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The project’s main development objective is to improve the management of cultural assets in Georgia in 
terms of financial and social sustainability.  This can be achieved through:  (a) continuation of the ERP 
and development of a sustainability plan for the Fund, (b) promotion of institutional development at the 
local level, including establishment of cultural heritage or historic preservation community associations, 
(c) adoption of modern cultural asset management techniques, including the development and 
implementation of community-based tourism and cultural heritage action plans, and (d) strategic 
promotion of local and international tourism in participating communities.  
 
C.  Project Description  
 
Based Cultural Tourism Development (US$1.6 million).  
The primary activity under this component 
will be site development involving the establishment of historic preservation districts (conservation areas) 
possessing cultural heritage sites and other assets of cultural importance.  It is anticipated that the project 
areas will include two or three sites that have already received assistance under the LIL, and others, to be 
identified through further investigation, that have potential for increasing local and possibly international 
tourism.  The criteria for the selection of sites and activities will be designed so as to promote community 
development, tourism, and poverty reduction.  The involvement of communities in decision making and 
implementation will be essential to the success of this component.   It  will be facilitated by the cultural 
heritage committees established under the LIL or new community associations who will bring together 
representatives of NGOs, local authorities, private sector, and citizens to identify in a participatory 
manner the role local residents can play, and determine why and where the community has a comparative 
advantage in developing tourism-related business activities.  Sub-project activities will include:  
 
Site Improvement
.  The project will finance successful proposals and support the development and 
implementation of community-based historic site or area management plans at project areas.   Project 
financing would cover:  needed site improvements, conservation and regulatory measures,   land 
management plans, interpretation and visitor facilities, and conservation and protective works.  The plans 
will be informed by social, economic, and site management assessments.   For some areas, support from 
Page  2
 
 
other Bank-financed projects (for example, MDDP Project and SIF) can be used for meeting priority 
infrastructure needs.  
 
Capacity Building
.  The project will finance a set of local capacity building activities to help develop 
community-based site management plans and business skills.  The activities may include:  promotion and 
support of new or existing community associations and/or local NGOs to identify and manage tourism-
related development activities; (b) training of local government staff in planning and managing cultural 
sites; (c) training in business planning and development of community development plans; (d) support to 
communities in developing and implementing strategies to promote cultural tourism, including cultural 
asset assessment to determine the scope of existing assets and make recommendations for future 
development (e.g., improving product design, addressing business-related issues that may impede 
handicraft development); and (e) after site development activities are underway, implementing a 
marketing strategy targeted to local and international various markets (developing partnerships between 
public and private sector). 
 
Small and Medium-Size Enterprise Development
.
  
The project would support:  (a) establishment of local 
businesses by facilitating access to existing micro-credit schemes/facilities as well as training in business 
skills; (b) the activities of local institutions and the private sector in finding ways to increase tourist visits 
and spending (e.g., training tour guides, producing and marketing handicrafts and food, developing local 
lodging and adventure tourism services); (c) training for qualified local businesses in providing quality 
tourism services (e.g., accommodations, transport services) and adopting modern technologies and 
management mechanisms.  Project preparation will include a needs assessment to identify areas of 
potential development for bed and breakfasts and tourist guide services as well as the improvement in the 
production of local products such as handicrafts and natural products (including food) to make them 
competitive.   
 
Emergency Rehabilitation Program (approx. US$1 million).  
This component would continue Bank 
support of the ERP established under the LIL and successfully managed by the Fund for Culture.  Under 
the proposed project, the Bank would continue to support the ERP on the condition that it require winning 
proposals to incorporate strategies for ensuring the sustainability of the winning projects.  Building on the 
success of the past, the ERP would continue to provide assistance on a demand-driven basis and target 
cultural assets in urgent need of saving.  The ERP also could provide assistance to communities in 
cultural tourism development, and to national institutions such as the Ministry of Culture, to finance 
priority activities.  It is envisaged that the Georgian Cultural Revival Board (selection committee for the 
ERP) will be broadened to include representatives of private tourism operators.  The Fund for Culture 
would ensure the identification and prioritization of promising projects on the basis of preliminary survey 
and evaluations, and assist applicants in elaborating project proposals and cost estimates, and provide the 
necessary technical expertise to ensure successful project implementation.   
 
Institutional Strengthening (approx. US$.6 million).
  This component will support institutional 
strengthening at both national and local levels to build capacity at both levels for strengthening the 
management of cultural heritage and promoting community-based tourism.         
 
National Level
.
   
With regard to 
cultural heritage management
, the project would finance training and 
technical assistance to the Ministry of Culture relating to site management planning, 
institutional/regulatory analysis, enforcement of local land use controls, and community participation in 
heritage conservation and business planning.  With regard to the 
tourism
, the project would provide 
technical assistance to the Department of Tourism in: (a) refining the Government’s Tourism Strategy, 
and (b) identifying and analyzing potential tourist markets (for example, ecological, cultural, and 
adventure tourists) and developing marketing strategies that focus on community-based tourism.   
 
Page  3
 
 
Sustainability
.  The project will finance consultant(s) to examine feasible options for sustaining the Fund 
and project-financed investments after the Credit closes, and to develop a realistic sustainability plan.  
Options for sustaining the Fund may include:  introducing charges to tourists staying at hotels; charging 
management fees to donors that contribute to preservation work; obtaining charitable status for the Fund 
so it would be tax exempt and donors would have tax exemptions; allowing the Fund to accept properties 
which it could use or resell; and establishing a commercial arm of the Fund that would provide 
consulting/advisory services, and institutionalizing central and local government funding.   
 
Project Management
.  The PIU (the Fund) established under the LIL will have principal responsibility for 
managing the project.  Prior to and during implementation, the PIU also will explore linkages with other 
relevant World Bank-financed projects in Georgia and other donors.  This component would finance the 
operating costs and salaries of PIU staff as well as local consultants to be hired as needed to carry out 
specialized tasks (e.g., social surveys, construction supervision).   
 
Monitoring and Evaluation
.  The Project will support a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system, 
including baseline surveys in participating communities, periodic surveys, and participatory M&E.  
 
D.  Project Location (if known) 
 
The coverage of the Emergency Repair Program Component is nationwide.   The exact locations of 
individual investments will be known only after project proposals are selected for funding in the course of 
project implementation.     
The Community-Based Tourism Component will include two or three of the pilot sites financed under the 
LIL (that is, Old Tbilisi, Sighnaghi, and Uplistsikhe) and another one or two locations that will be 
identified during the early stage of project implementation.  Those locations will be determined on the 
basis of such factors as:  significance of cultural assets, tourism potential, and level of community 
development.   
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Under the Georgia Cultural Heritage Project, all safeguard issues were addresses satisfactorily.  The PIU 
ensured that all necessary measures were undertaken to address the Environmental Assessment and 
Cultural Property safeguard policies.  The project financed the development of an Integrated Master Plan 
for Old Town which includes an environmental analysis and guidelines for restoration and conservation. 
This plan was used to guide investments in Old Town Tbilisi under the LIL and currently is considered a 
guiding document by the Tbilisi Architectural Service, Cultural Heritage Subcommittee of the Pariliament 
of Georgia, and many cultural heritage experts.  In addition, the LIL financed the preparation of site 
management plans for two project sites (Uplistsikhe, Shatili) that address biodiversity protection and 
tourism impacts.   In addition, the LIL’s operational manual required that all constructions would be done 
in accordance with the Bank’s environmental guidelines.   
 
During the next phase of project preparation, the task team will require the Borrower to include in the 
project operational manual a generic environmental management plan (EMP) that meets the Bank’s 
requirements.  The generic EMP would be used as a basis for preparing site specific environmental 
management plans for both the ERP and the Community-Based Cultural Tourism Components.  The task 
team also will assess the need for the project to include funds to finance local technical assistance in 
preparing investment-specific EMPs that will include both technical and public consultation requirements.   
 
The PIU, which will be responsible for managing the two investment components of this project, already 
has met all requirements to comply with the Bank’s policy on cultural property (draft OP 4.11) under the 
Page  4
 
 
LIL.  The PIU as well as the task team will also ensure that any project-financed construction contracts 
and activities incorporate appropriate measures to properly manage chance finds. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01)   
The proposed project may involve both interior and 
exterior repairs and renovations of historic structures; possible construction of small visitor 
facilities or kiosks; and other investments to enhance the environment surrounding historic sites 
through possible improvements in infrastructure (streets, street lighting, signage), prevention of site 
destruction, and landscaping.
  
Some project investments may have some minor adverse 
environmental impacts associated with increases in tourist visits (i.e., need to manage waste, 
increased demand for water and sanitation services), possible use of toxic chemicals in 
rehabilitation works or crafts activities, and construction impacts that will require adequate impact 
mitigation
.
  
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared in accordance with OP 
4.01 Annex C, a public consultation meeting will be held and record of the consultation included in 
the EMP, and the EMP will be disclosed in the country (in local language) and at the Bank's 
Infoshop prior to Appraisal.
  
The loan agreement will have appropriate language committing the 
borrower to implement the EMP
.
 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ X] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)  
The project will involve repairs to cultural 
properties or possible development in the areas surrounding these assets.  While these investments 
are intended to safeguard these properties, the project will incorporate measures to protect cultural
 
properties in compliance
 
with the Bank’s policy.
     
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA category 
(mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS    June 2004 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Janis D. Bernstein 
Date 
Approved by: 
 March 
23, 
2004 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name  Ronald N. Hoffer 
Date 
March 23, 2004 
Comments: 
The project is delegated to the TTL's sector manager for sign off at the time of Appraisal 
and Negotiations.  Once the PCN stage ISDS is signed, no further clearance from the regional 
safeguards coordinator will be required.
 
Ag. Sector Manager: 
Name   Nora Dudwick  
Date 
March 26, 2004 
Comments 
 
wb94565 
P:\GEORGIA\RURENV\GENERAL\CB-Tourism ISDS-Conc Stage.doc 
March 31, 2004 12:11 PM
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
