Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  06/03/2005 
Report No.:  AC1601
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Georgia 
Project ID:  P095551 
Project Name:  Irrigation and Drainage Community Development Project Additional 
Financing 
Task Team Leader:  Joop Stoutjesdijk 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Flood protection (60%);Irrigation and drainage (40%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Water resource management 
(P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Natural disaster management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.20
1.20 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective for the proposed reconstruction of flood-damaged infrastructure component 
would be to improve and secure the sustainability of river flood protection works and 
irrigation headworks and canals, which, if unattended, could lead to increased flooding 
occurrences and infrastructure damage, and subsequent human life and economic losses.   
 
3. Project Description 
Georgia has been hard hit by major flooding since mid-April, especially in the west of the 
country.  Floods are typically caused by a combination of snowmelt and rainfall.  This 
year, with a large snowpack, high spring temperatures that cause rainfall at higher 
elevations and fast snowmelt, and heavy and prolonged rainfall over large sections of the 
catchment areas of several of the major river systems, the floods reached levels estimated 
up to one in hundred years return periods in certain rivers.  The floods caused destruction 
or damage of infrastructure, including river embankments and irrigation headworks and 
canals, cut off large parts of affected districts, and affected thousands of hectares of 
farmlands, often in the poorest areas of the country.  The flooding is still ongoing, and 
detailed data about the damage is still being compiled.  The government appealed to the 
international community for assistance in the rebuilding efforts.  
Page  2
A
component of US $6.20 million would be added to IDCDP to finance urgent works to 
safeguard lives, and public and private property.  The Additional Financing would enable 
strengthening of river embankments at critical locations along major rivers (including 
Rioni, Tskhenistkali, and tributaries of the Alazani).  It is not excluded that some funding 
will be provided to also carry out river bank protection along some of the mountainous 
rivers as well, in case this is identified by government as a priority after compiling the 
final flood damage information at the end of the flood season in July.  The component 
would rehabilitate several flood-damaged irrigation headworks and canals as well.  A list 
of priority sub-projects has been identified, but there would be certain flexibility during 
project implementation in case sub-projects are identified after the flood season that have 
clear flood-related damage and the reconstruction of which would have higher impact 
than other sub-projects on the priority list.  The works to be carried out should provide 
complete protection for a certain area and should be well constructed in order to be 
durable and provide a long-term protection to rural people and public and private 
infrastructure or, in the case of irrigation systems, be able to provide the needed irrigation 
water to farmers.  The proposed component would introduce innovative and cost 
effective design and construction measures.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Most of the proposed sub-projects are located in western and central Georgia, with few 
located in east Georgia, all along rivers in the lower areas of the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze (ECSSD) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The additional component would finance repair and reconstruction of destroyed and 
damaged infrastructure.  No new structures are envisaged.  The component would not 
include any investments in dams or involve resettlement.  The proposed component has 
been classified as Category "B" for the purposes of OP 4.01, similar to the original 
project.  There are no potential large-scale, significant, or irreversible impacts associated 
with the proposed project.  The investments would significantly reduce the environmental 
impact from near-term additional precipitation and flooding on weakened riverbanks and 
irrigation systems.  
 
During the design stage of each sub-project all possible environmental factors would be 
reviewed.  Necessary mitigating measures would be an integral part of design and 
implementation.  From visits to the potential sub-projects, it is expected that typically 
minor potential negative impacts of the component would relate to: (i) disposal of 
excavated sediments and construction materials; and (ii) possible environmental damage 
caused by contractors during construction activities.  Sediments and other debris would 
be displaced in an orderly manner, rather than dumped indiscriminately.  Contractors 
would be required to prevent, minimize, or mitigate environmental damage.  This would 
be described in the tender documents, for which there are established practices under the 
ongoing project.  
 
While the existing project is covered by an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), 
the Borrower/Recipient would update, augment, or supplement the EMP to take into 
account any additional measures to protect the environment (for example to emphasize 
strengthening of river embankments, and existing irrigation headworks, and canals).  
Given the emergency nature of this additional financing action, an exemption to the 
completion and disclosure of the updated or augmented EMP before appraisal and Board 
review is justified under paragraph 12 of OP 4.01.  These steps will instead be made a 
condition of disbursement.  In response to points (a) and (b) of paragraph 12 of the OP, it 
should be noted that the extent to which damage was exacerbated by inappropriate 
environmental practices (not necessarily connected with Bank-financed operations) 
would be determined during project preparation and implementation, and necessary 
corrective measures will be identified and carried out to the extent possible under this 
activity.    
 
While the project does trigger the Bank's policy on International Waterways (OP 7.50), 
and exemption to the requirement for notification of riparian countries is clearly justified 
and has been approved by ECA's VP.  Most of the sub-projects are located in the 
catchment area of western Georgia that drains into the Black Sea.  None of the proposed 
works anywhere in the country would adversely change the quality or quantity of water 
flows, and would not change the nature of the original sub-projects or alter or expand the 
scope and extent as to create a new or different scheme.  In addition, works for river bank 
protection are concerned with flood protection, not flood control.  
Page  4
Under IDCDP, an independent Dam Safety Panel, comprising one experienced 
international dam engineer, who was the chairperson of the Panel, and six local 
specialists, carried out safety evaluations at four major irrigation dams (Algeti, Sioni, 
Tbilisi, and Zonkari dams) and a large river diversion structure near Poti in the Rioni 
River, which operated at the verge of failure, endangering the safety of the population of 
Poti.  None of the proposed sub-projects is in the command area of any of these four 
dams.  The Poti structure is downstream of any of the proposed sub-projects.  
 
The Panel convened three times between August 2003 and August 2004, and all five 
structures were visited.  A program of investigations -- including geotechnical, 
hydrological, seismic, stability analysis, and underwater surveys -- was also carried out.  
Detailed reports have been prepared.  It was concluded that none of the dams has critical 
safety issues that have to be addressed immediately, except for the Poti structure where 
emergency rehabilitation works are currently carried out.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
None   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
This additional financing builds on the successful track record for environmental due 
diligence of the ongoing project (under an existing EA/EMP). The Project Technical Unit 
of IDCDP employs an environmental specialist who would also be made responsible to 
oversee the additional component with regard to environmental aspects and ensure that 
the proposed works would cause no damage to the environment.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The design and implementation would be based on the analysis of the existing damage 
and the application of agreed technical specifications, which require little local input or 
formal social assessment.  As with the existing project, project staff would consult with 
communities and local administrations to describe planned works.  During 
implementation, the project could include a community monitoring program that would 
aim at engaging local residents in the regular checking of structures, e.g. checking the 
conditions of Reno mattresses at regular intervals to capture damage early on.  
Contractors are expected to provide significant short-term employment to local people, 
which is of benefit in areas of high unemployment.   
 
Page  5
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/29/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of this action, and in conformance with paragraph 12 of OP 
4.12, augmentation, updating or supplementation of the project EMP (including Bank 
approval and disclosure) will be delayed from appraisal to be a condition of 
disbursement.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
Yes 
Page  6
cost? 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Joop Stoutjesdijk 
05/25/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Darejan Kapanadze 
05/25/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
05/25/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
05/25/2005 
Comments:  This has my clearance for safeguards 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph R. Goldberg 
05/26/2005 
Comments:  Cleared on behalf of Juergen Voegele. 
