Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC469 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 8, 2003 / February 5, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P081482 
Project Name: Community-Based Rural 
development 
Task Team Leader: Charles Annor-Frempong 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 29, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 3, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Colin Rees 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 80 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($15m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The project is the second phase of implementing a community-driven development program in 
Ghana. The Village Infrastructure Project which is scheduled to close on June 30, 2004 was 
phase one. The objective of the proposed CBRDP is to raise the incomes and the quality of life 
of beneficiaries by improving their productive assets, rural infrastructure and access to key 
support services from both private and public sources. Specific objectives are :  
 
(i) 
to build the capacity of local administration and communities for the delivery of rural 
infrastructure through increased transfer of technical and financial resources for the 
development of village infrastructure that can be sustained by the beneficiaries; 
 
(ii) 
to consolidate empowerment of local communities and district assemblies to identify, 
plan, access, implement and maintain village level infrastructure investments that will 
promote economic well being, natural resource management and contribute to 
growth; 
 
(iii) 
support the decentralization policy of the government by designing the framework for 
the harmonized and coordinated delivery of rural infrastructure and strengthen 
institutional capacity of regional, district and sub-district assembly structures for 
improve delivery of rural infrastructure services to the poor.   
Page  2
 
 
 
The proposed project will seek to assist in strengthening beneficiaries (groups, communities, 
sub-district and district assembly structures) to plan and undertake development activities that 
raise rural incomes and provide opportunities for sustainable growth. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The proposed project will support the Government’s decentralization efforts as identified in the 
GPRS, specifically on areas related to capacity building for the delivery of effective rural 
infrastructure services. Beneficiary communities will be assisted through appropriate training 
programs and other capacity enhancement procedures to identify needs, develop community and 
district plans in a participatory process, access development funds through the project and other 
sources to implement priority programs in a sustainable manner. The proposed project 
components will include: 
 
Component 1 – Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Service Delivery 
 
The objective of this component is to develop social capital among beneficiaries by empowering 
and bringing people together to participate decision making through a learning by doing process. 
Community mobilization and planning activities will be the entry point of the project to 
determine the scope of interventions and eventual impact in project components. Consequently, 
beneficiary groups and communities will be assisted to engage in activities identified by them as 
key priority for economic and community development.  
 
The component will design the frame work the harmonization and coordination for the delivery 
of infrastructure services in the rural space across sectors and strengthen relevant local 
government institutions (public and non public rural community based organizations)  in 
planning, financial management, procurement and coordination functions and other skills that 
may be required to improve the delivery of rural infrastructure service. This component would 
intensify the institutional strengthening that was started under the VIP and NRMP-1 at the 
district assembly level and broaden the coverage at sub district levels. 
 
Component 2 – Development of Rural Economy 
The objective of this component is to develop infrastructure and institutions (including the 
provision of credit) that will enhance farm and non-farm economic activity of the rural 
population. A menu of community-based and small scale infrastructure, as identified through the 
community-based prioritization process would made up of three main subcomponents as follows: 
 
Sub-component 2.1 – Development of Rural Transport Infrastructure
: 
 The objective of this 
sub-component is to improve the transportation of inputs and village products to and from 
production and marketing centers  by ensuring easy accessibility. This involves selective spot 
improvements in existing village to market rural roads, upgrading arterial village tracks, bridges 
and culverts and the promotion of intermediate means of transport (IMTs) to reduce head portage 
and drudgery among the rural population especially women and children. Interventions will be 
planned to maximize synergy in the provision of rural transport infrastructure such as that 
Page  3
 
 
achieved by linking the development of village trails and tracks to the provision of IMTs with 
private sector support services and with NGOs support for implementation assistance at training 
and supervision stages.  
 
Sub-component 2.2 – Development of Rural Water Supply and Post Harvest
 
Infrastructure:
 The objectives of this sub-component are (i) to provide water for targeted rural 
communities as part of the improved service delivery for enhanced productivity. The provision 
of potable water would be done in targeted communities where other projects do not provide the 
same and where the communities express demand for provision of domestic potable water as a 
priority; and (ii) to reduce post harvest losses through the provision of rural level facilities for the 
treatment and preservation and enhancement of value and shelf life of crops, animal products and 
other non-timber forest products. Facilities to be provided include, drying floors and equipment, 
agro-processing and storage facilities and market infrastructure. 
 
Sub-Component 2.3 – Rural Enterprise and Learning Centers Development
:
  The objective 
is to strengthen community economies through the establishment of local community businesses, 
owned and managed collectively by the community or groups. This includes on-farm 
development, strengthening cooperatives business activities, market research, business linkages 
and joint venture agreements, micro-enterprise development and small businesses. 
 
The enterprises will double as learning centers for the wider community and  serve as focal 
points for empowering the poor through the acquisition of knowledge and skills, processing units 
and marketing outlets. Trainees who acquire skills from the centers, become part of the learning 
and production network and may continue to be associated with the center and will be 
encouraged to set up their own businesses. It will provide opportunities for the creation of new 
rural enterprises and expansion of businesses. All agro-processing groups and non-farm income 
generating operations will be organized into production and marketing units along the learning 
centers approach. 
 
Component 3 –  Infrastructure for Social and Human
 Development 
 
The objective of this component is to enhance the quality of life of the rural population through 
the provision of potable water, health and educational facilities. This component will link up and  
complement facilities provided under existing or proposed Bank support for Community and 
Water and Sanitation, Education and Health. The linkage provided will become the driving force 
for the harmonization and coordination of he delivery of rural infrastructure services for both 
economic and social welfare of the rural poor. The project will support the provision of potable 
water and sanitation facilities, rehabilitate existing schools and health centers, under exceptional 
cases where it has been shown by the requesting community, that the programs mentioned above 
are unable to provide the facility. This component will seek to build on component 1 and aim at 
harmonizing procedures for effective delivery. 
 
 
 
 
 
Page  4
 
 
Component 4 – Community-based Integrated Natural Resources Management 
 
The objective is to enhance environmental governance and promote integrated management of 
the land and water resources by the communities while ensuring sustainable production. The 
project will support proposals made by communities intended to introduce technologies and 
techniques in natural resource management and environmental conservation such as soil and 
water conservation and fertility enhancement, land and watershed management and 
rehabilitation, forest management and sustainable development of traditional forms of energy. In 
addition, appropriate support would be provided for water for rural farm and forestry operations, 
including micro-dams and dugouts, small scale irrigation schemes to encourage dry season 
farming, particularly high valued cash crops such as fruits and vegetables, small-scale forest 
nursery and plantation development.  
 
Component 5 – Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
 The nature of the proposed interventions, will require inter-sectoral collaboration, between 
ministries and agencies as well as local government and community based institutions. The team 
will consult with stakeholders during preparation and build on the success of the Rural 
Infrastructure Coordinating Unit in designating an autonomous institution to manage the project 
under the overall supervision of the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development.  
 
A Project Steering Committee made up of representatives of relevant ministries and agencies 
will be created to give policy guidelines for project implementation. 
 
The district assemblies and communities will be responsible for planning and implementing sub-
projects. 
 
The management information and M&E system designed for the VIP and NRMP-1 will be 
improved and expanded to cater to the needs of the propose project.  Beneficiary and impact 
assessments will be carried out by experts in academia, NGOs and private firms at strategic 
phases of the project’s implementation. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Nationwide. The project will cover the entire 110 districts in the country. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]
                            
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
Capacity of district assemblies has been enhanced during the implementation of the village 
infrastructure, the community water and sanitation and to some extent the urban and 
environmental sanitation projects. Capacity building at the districts will be continued through 
refresher courses and programs. The Rural Infrastructure Coordinating Unit (RICU) which is the 
overall program implementation unit has been working hand-in-hand with Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) in the country to ensure that the safeguard policies of the Bank are 
adhered to and all districts in the country have EPA officers who ensure that sub-projects at the 
community level meet the guidelines. 
Page  5
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
The project is not likely to have any major negative impacts on the environment.  
However, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be 
prepared to address any unexpected negative impacts that might occur during 
project implementation. The EMSF will provide a framework for communities 
and communes to screen their sub-projects for potential environmental/social 
impacts and to develop/implement appropriate mitigation measures. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
The project does not include any activities that displace people involuntarily and 
due to the participatory processes put in place to insure consensual and ‘win-win’ 
outcomes, involuntary resettlement is unlikely.  However, the risk of  weaker 
social groups being marginalized by dominant groups (which could lead to 
involuntary resettlement) may need to be monitored.  A Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF)  will be prepared to ensure that if this happens, the requisite 
plans will be prepared and implemented . 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
  
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
March 1, 2004 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
An Environmental Assessment was completed and submitted to ASPEN for review on January 8, 
2004.  The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) will be completed by February 28, 2004. They will be disclosed in country 
and at the InfoShop prior to Appraisal. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Charles Annor-Frempong 
02/05/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas E. Walton 
02/05/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Mary Barton-Dock 
02/05/2004 
Comments 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
