Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1620 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/23/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ghana 
Project ID: P093610 
Project Name: e-Ghana 
Task Team Leader: Laurent Besancon 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 2, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 19, 2006 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: General information and communications sector (60%);General public 
administration sector (20%);General industry and trade sector (20%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market access (P);Other public sector governance 
(P);Technology diffusion (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring and privatization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 INTERNATIONAL 
FINANCE 
CORPORATION 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims at generating increased employment in the Information Technology 
(IT) Enabled Services (notably Business Processing Outsourcing or BPO) sector, enhancing 
efficiency, transparency and accountability in selected government agencies and departments, 
and improving access to information/transaction capabilities for citizens and businesses in 
selected districts.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
number of alternative approaches were considered for deciding on project components:  
 
-
A
pure public sector approach to Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
interventions was considered and abandoned. This approach was the one favored initially by 
GoG.  However, involving the private sector as a co-investor in projects would leverage the use 
of GoG resources and enhance the prospects of success while providing valuable experience to 
the private sector.  
Page  2
-
Focusing primarily on internet-based only approaches to citizen service delivery was 
considered.  However, given the high level of mobile penetration versus Internet penetration in 
Ghana  for instance, it would be preferable to explore the possibility of delivering citizen 
services through multi-channels, including mobile phones too.  
 
-
Limiting the interventions to a few large initiatives instead of spreading out to a number of 
interventions was considered. However, it was felt necessary to capture various synergies as part 
of the project so as to improve the prospects of success.  
 
The proposed project has adopted six guiding principles that will be reflected in the design of 
each component: (i) programmatic approach, (ii) results-based and Monitoring & Evaluation-
conscious, (iii) Public Private Partnerships-oriented, (iv) multi-channel delivery of services, 
including via mobile phones, (v) participatory development approach, and (vi) Development 
Partners? (DP) harmonization.  
 
In order to achieve the stated project development objective, the proposed project will focus 
on (i) creating an overall enabling environment (Component 1), (ii) attracting IT/ITES 
investment, notably Business Process Outsourcing (BPO), and promoting the development of 
local ICT business i.e. ICT-led growth (Component 2 and 3), (iii) achieving greater efficiency, 
transparency and accountability at selected Government Agencies and Departments (Component 
3), (iv) increasing the reach of the network to improve access to information/transaction 
capabilities for citizens and businesses (Components 4 and 5), and (v) supporting the adaptation 
of skill sets to match new job opportunities (Component 6).  
 
Based on the above considerations, the e-Ghana project will cover the following components:  
 
1.
Enabling Environment (US$ 6 million) by (i) finalizing or developing the relevant 
policies, legislation, regulations and procedures (telecommunications/broadcasting/Postal/e-
legislation) and developing guidelines for a common PPP framework across GoG (ii) technical 
assistance, capacity building and supporting knowledge management system for (a) the 
implementation agency/project management (the Ghana Information Communication and 
Technology Directorate, GICTeD), (b) the Ministry of communications (MoC) coordination of 
ICT-led GoG initiatives, and (c) coordination of DPs contributions so as to optimize DP support, 
and (iii) developing and maintaining an M&E framework (also aimed at facilitating GoG?s 
program management of the project, public information and World Bank supervision efforts);  
 
2.
Business Process Outsourcing and Local ICT businesses (US$ 3 million) to (i) position 
Ghana as a prime destination for Business Process Outsourcing in the region (strengthening ICT 
promotion and removing investment barriers) and (ii) encourage the development of local ICT 
businesses (quality certification/ accreditation under the GoG inter-operability Framework ; 
software-testing tools and facilities in public universities ? to be used by local companies and 
faculty/students); this component also builds on the MSME project which supports the 
establishment of an ICT Park;  
 
3.
E-Government (US$12.5 million) to (i) allow interoperability between GoG applications 
under a common IT architecture and implement a service provider accreditation mechanism, (ii) 
roll-out key e-government applications with the involvement of the private sector (80% to 90% 
of the investment) for service provision, (iii) provide for replication of these PPP arrangement 
with GO4IT [Government Outsourcing for IT] Pool Fund (opened to other DPs), (iv) develop a 
Page  3
gateway for public and private sector multi-channel delivery of services (including on mobile 
phones);  
 
4.
Digital Inclusion (US$ 3 million) to enable the rural communities to improve their 
livelihood and quality of life through increased access to information/transaction capabilities at 
the district level by (i) delivering ICT awareness-building channeled through local governments, 
(ii) establishing Community Information Centers (CICs) leveraging on private sector 
participation to ensure sustainability and knowledge transfer, (iii) building capacity within 
communities to enable effective utilization of ICTs including broadcasting.  Donor co-financing 
arrangements will be sought for establishing CICs and potentially establishing a fund to promote 
innovative use of ICTs by the communities;  
 
5.
Infrastructure (US$10 million) to facilitate the implementation of a national broadband 
network in collaboration with the private sector and in liaison with GoG efforts relating to 
Voltacom / SAT3 access / international market segment competition and assistance to re-
privatization of Ghana Telecom.  This is aimed at (i) bringing down the cost of bandwidth to a 
level which makes Ghana competitive with other Business Process Outsourcing destinations and 
(ii) extending the reach of the network infrastructure;  
 
6.
Human Resource Development (US$ 4 million) to adapt skills by (i) setting up 5 IT 
Enabled Services (ITES) training centers in collaboration with private sector, and promoting 
linkages between teachers/students and IT/ITES businesses (iii) a two-tiered support to training 
programs for civil servants (computer training for technical staff of GoG and Chief Information 
Officers (CIOs) executive immersion course).  Synergies are being sought with the tertiary 
institutions subcomponent of the on-going Education Project.  
 
The project will be a Specific Investment Loan combined with an IDA Guarantee (for the 
privatization of Ghana Telecom). Implementation agency will be GICTeD.  Preliminary 
discussions indicate the project is not likely to run into any significant safeguards problems.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be targeting a number of districts in Ghana. Districts have not yet been 
identified at this time; updated information will be provided at pre-appraisal stage.   
 
E.  B
orrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Ministry of Communications (MoC) is preparing itself to handle safeguard policies. An 
assessment will determine the level of training needed to ensure proper safeguard oversight 
within the MoC. The MoC will include safeguards accordingly in the TORs of the planned 
capacity-building support under the Gateway and Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise (MSME) 
projects .   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An Environmental and Social Management Framework will be produced because of potential 
construction of buildings/infrastructure as part of the project. The impact is however expected to 
be minimal.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be conducted because of potential land acquisition as 
part of the project. The impact is however expected to be minimal.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/19/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
An Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy 
Framework will be completed and disclosed prior to appraisal by November 2005. 
 
The Safeguards Review and Clearance was transferred to the Sector Manager of the Global 
Information and Communications Department (GICT) at the Project Concept Note Review 
Meeting.  Kristine Schwebach remains in the project Team and acts as the ASPEN liaison.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Besancon 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Pierre A. Guislain 
 
Comments:   
