Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/23/2005 
Report No.:  AC1591
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Ghana 
Project ID:  P092986 
Project Name:  GH-Economic Management Cap. Bldg. Proj. 
Task Team Leader:  Christopher Juan Costain 
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTFS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General finance sector (85%);General public administration sector (15%) 
Theme:  Other financial and private sector development (P);Other public sector 
governance (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.60 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)5.20
12.80 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project aims at supporting the government to define and perform its role as 
a
facilitator for economic development. The project seeks to establish a level playing 
field in the finance sector focusing upon outcomes rather than institutions, together with a 
clear policy to improve the efficiency of public sector management for an enhanced 
service delivery (where institutions respond to the incentives available to them under the 
project). The project, through support to FINSSP, will seek to catalyze the allocation of 
capital to Ghanaians and improve competitiveness and governance of long term savings 
institutions and markets. The project aims to strengthen the Public Sector Strategy 
through providing a framework for prioritization, consensus building and budgeting and 
to translate the strategy into detailed action plans supported by a thorough monitoring and 
evaluation mechanism. While this project might support future implementation of any 
action plan through collaboration with Development Partners, any more substantive 
engagement would be covered through a supplemental operation. As such, the objective 
of the Public Sector component would be to facilitate a reform initiative in the public 
sector which would be comparable to that achieved through FINSSP in the financial 
sector in recent years. In addition, it is proposed to design this project component with an 
Page  2
open architecture to maximize the involvement of interested Development Partners 
(DPs).   
 
3. Project Description 
The project focus will be on knowledge transfer, capacity enhancement and the 
promotion of best practice on an incremental basis with the understanding that the MDBS 
should be the appropriate mechanism for the support of recurrent costs.  
 
Key potential areas aimed at improving service delivery capacity of the civil and public 
service may include: development of a professional HR framework, development of an 
effective performance related pay policy and reform of subvented agencies. However 
additional issues could be tackled, depending on the commitment of key stakeholders, 
including Development Partners.  
 
The project will also support the implementation of FINSSP in the areas of capital 
markets, improvement of financial institution legal and regulatory environment, 
insurance regulatory reform and microfinance regulation and supervision strengthening 
as these represent the areas of most need for external support.  
 
On the one side, this project will support the implementation of FINSSP in the areas of 
Capital Markets, Financial Institutions, Insurance and Credit Unions as these represent 
the areas of most need for external support. Policy related work will be supported through 
the PRSC and MDBS, while this project will focus on technical assistance, capacity 
building and investment within the FINSSP implementation process.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Major implementation tasks and agencies will be located in Accra. However certain 
project components will address issues and institutions across the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
Yes 
Page  4
policies? 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Christopher Juan Costain 
09/22/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:  Approval of the Appraisal stage ISDS is with the Sector Manager. No approval from 
the Regional Coordinator is required. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Antony Thompson 
09/22/2005 
Comments:   
