                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/14/2005                                        Report No.: 34331

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Ghana                                 Project ID: P085006
Project Name: Ghana - Micro,Small and Medium Enterprise Project
Task Team Leader: Papa Demba Thiam
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 28,         Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2005
2005
Managing Unit: AFTPS                           Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                               Loan
Sector: Micro- and SME finance (80%);Law and justice (20%)
Theme: Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and competition policy (S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):              0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             45.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                   1.90
        INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION                                   40.00
        FOREIGN PRIVATE COMMERCIAL SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED)                             32.00
                                                                            73.90
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []              Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)           Yes [ ]      No [X]

2. Project Objectives
The Project aims to enhance the competitive and employment levels of Ghanaian
MSMEs. This will be achieved by: (i) developing and strengthening the capacity of
local intermediaries to deliver financial and non-financial services to MSMEs; (ii)
reducing selected business constraints faced by MSMEs; (iii) promoting local
entrepreneurship; (iv) streamlining the trade facilitation infrastructure; (v) providing an
enabling environment that leads to increased investments in the MSME sector and; (vi)
building the Government capacity to generate, implement, monitor and evaluate private
sector and trade development programs and projects.

3. Project Description
In support of the Government's Private Sector Development Strategy, Trade Sector
Support Program, the Poverty Reduction Strategy Program, and the World Bank
Groupâ TMs Country Assistance Strategy, the Project comprises the following
components:

 (i)    Access to Finance Component (indicative US$82.1 million: IDA US$13.4
million; IFC US$40.0 million; Participating Banks US$27. 10; SME borrowers US$1.6
million). This component aims to significantly improve SME access to finance
(particularly term finance), thereby fostering SME growth, competitiveness and
employment creation. The Component, designed to achieve this objective through a
multi-pronged approach that will address key bottlenecks to SME financing, comprises
five sub-components: (i) an IDA/IFC SME loan portfolio Partial Credit Guarantee
Program (PCG); (ii) an IDA-funded Performance Based Grant Program for banks
participating in the Line of Credit (LOC) facility to be financed by IFC; (iii) technical
assistance matching-grants for SME finance capacity building in PCG and LOC
participating banks, and â " to the extent possible â " to other local banks; (iv) technical
assistance matching grants for existing and potential SME clients of PCG and LOC
participating banks; and (v) technical assistance and matching grants for the development
of additional financial instruments to SME

 (ii)   Access to Markets, Trade Facilitation, and Entrepreneurship Development
Component (US$24.5 million; Government US$1.2 million, IDA US$20.0 million,
clients US$3.3 million) will help MSMEs overcome operational, technical, and
regulatory barriers to markets. Project support will focus on the development of a
market of non-financial services to MSMEs through building sustainable delivery
capacities for local service providers and other private sector and trade development
support structures. The assistance to be provided will respond to needs assessments in
selected value chain clusters, business membership organizations, and specialized
business service providers. The project will also support the implementation of a business
linkages fund established to facilitate sub-contracting between larger and smaller
enterprises, informal and formal ones. The approach will be piloted in the construction
sector and extended to other sectors. In addition, building on achievements under the
Gateway Project, project activities will reinforce the trade facilitation and investment
promotion objectives of the Government. Project resources will finance the development
of the markets access and trade facilitation infrastructure as well as it will support new
approaches to trade promotion as a response to globalization. Finally, this project
component will support specific strategic and catalytic interventions of the Government
in the framework of its entrepreneurship development strategy. In this vein, the credit
will support the transformation of the Tema Export Processing Zone (EPZ) enclave into a
Multi-Purpose Industrial Park (MPIP) with an information, communications, and
technology (ICT) park, a furniture city and common service centers for selected branches
of manufacturing activities.

 (iii) Business Environment Component. (US$4.9 million; IDA US$4.5 million,
Government US$0.4 million). Activities supported under this component will support
the National Medium Term Private Sector Development Strategy (PSDS) and will team
up efforts with other development partners to ensure the implementation of the program
in the holistic and effective way. While providing support through the fund pooling
mechanism, the IDA funds will: (a) support the implementation of the Ghana trade
policy; (b) reform the business registration; (c) improve the national system of
standardization, certification, and accreditation of conformity assessment by encouraging

broader private sector participation and by updating and enforcing regulations in this
area; and (d) build the institutional capacity of the Government Ministries, Departments,
and Agencies (MDAs) to effectively deliver services to the private sector and strengthen
public-private dialogue.

 (iv)    Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation component (US$3.2 million;
IDA US$2.9 million; Government US$0.3 million) is designed to support the execution,
reporting, review, and monitoring requirements of the Project. Provisions will be made to
(i) test out models proposed to assist MSMEs; (ii) enable the Government to design and
implement a comprehensive project performance framework; (iii) assist the Government
(primarily the Ministry of Trade and Industry the Ministry of Private Sector
Development/Presidential Special Initiatives and the Ministry of Telecommunications) to
coordinate project activities and carry out the objectives of the project components as
provided in a Project Implementation Manual; (iv) facilitate the partnership between the
Government and the private sector to better ensure ownership and sustainability of
reforms; and (v) enable the Government to maximize assistance received from its
development partners on initiatives addressing similar constraints as the MSME Project
by harmonizing implementation and pool funding arrangements.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed project will be implemented nationally .

 Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard: recognizing capacity building under
the IDA-financed Gateway Project was available to the Environmental Protection
Agency, the institutional and functional capacity within the Agency is now within
acceptable standards.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                           X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                              X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                      X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Although the project is not expected to present any specific environmental risks, IDA
funds may finance services that may lead to adverse environmental impact. Also, under
the Trade Facilitation and Entrepreneurship Development Component, the project will
have infrastructure elements including construction of a building and laying down fibre
optic cables at the industrial park. These components do not involve development of a
new site nor have any resettlement issues.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
See above.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
While the project is building on the achievements under the IDA-funded Gateway
Project, the project components were not covered in the Environmental Assessment (EA)
nor the Environmental Management Plan for the Gateway Project. However, recognizing
the achievements and functional capacity within the Environmental Protection Agency
and that the components will be implemented within the Tema site, the Government
agreed that this environmental action plan has been disclosed again in Ghana and in the
World Bank's InfoShop.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In addition to re-disclosure mentioned above, the mitigation and management measures
in the Gateway EA will also apply to all infrastructure components of this Project.
Appropriate reference to the environmental action plan and implementation requirements
will also be incorporated in the legal documents.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders will include the Ministries of Trade and Industry, Finance,
Communications, Environment and Science, Information, Tourism and Modernization of
the Capital City, Private Sector Development and the President's Special Initiatives; and
Roads and Transport; Government agencies including the Ghana Standards Board, Ghana
Export Promotion Council, Registrar General's Department, Ghana Investment
Promotion Council; and prospective private sector beneficiaries. This Environmental
Action Plan will be available to all project beneficiaries from relevant public sector
agencies.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     10/25/2005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/24/2005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/27/2005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA     Yes
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?

  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                          Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                 Mr Papa Demba Thiam     10/27/2005
Environmental Specialist:         Mr Serigne Omar Fye     10/27/2005
Social Development Specialist
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Thomas E. Walton     10/27/2005
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Demba Ba             10/27/2005
 Comments:

