Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  33157 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/27/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guatemala 
Project ID: P094321 
Project Name: TERRITORIAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT 
Task Team Leader: Pierre Werbrouck 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);General transportation 
sector (30%);Agricultural marketing and trade (25%);Telecommunications (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic engagement 
(P);Indigenous peoples (P);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.00 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
50.00
70.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The development objective of the Project is to enhance income generation and employment in 
the productive sectors in selected territories, thus contributing to national goals concerning 
poverty reduction. To reach this objective, the Project will support productive supply chains 
involving indigenous and poor people, local productive infrastructure, planning and 
implementation capacity strengthening involving public-private-civil society partnerships, and 
selected investments in infrastructure at the national level.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Project will follow a strategy based upon: (1) a demand-driven approach emphasizing the 
fundamental role of local actors in promoting economic development; (2) the encouragement of 
public-private-civil society partnerships for local development planning; (3) the promotion of 
intercultural constructive relationships, and (4) the strengthening of modern, democratic and 
plural public multi-sector institutions.  
 
Page  2
The project will include five components:  
 
Component 1:  Local Economic Development  
 
The Project will finance private and public productive investments, pre-investment studies and 
technical assistance in specific territories through a demand driven approach.  See Annexes 1 and 
2.  
 
(i) 
Local private investments will be generated within the framework of production and 
supply chains including production, processing and services in traditional agriculture, small scale 
industry, tourism, environmental services, forestry, ornamental plants, and agro-industry.  The 
Project would finance (on a matching grant basis) infrastructure such as warehouses or cold 
storage, processing and transport equipment, tools as well as first year incremental operating 
costs.  The beneficiaries would be the private sector willing to invest in those localities as well as 
poor or indigenous associations active in production and processing within the supply chains.  
The beneficiaries would prepare proposals (profiles) to be screened for eligibility criteria at the 
Departmental level.  After screening, the proponents would further develop their proposals with 
the help of qualified NGOs and firms specialized in the organization of the specific production 
and supply chains (such as AGEXPRONT) and obtain the matching grant to implement their 
proposals.  
 
(ii) 
Local public investments will aim at making private investments more competitive and at 
stimulating new private and public investments.  The Project would finance municipal and inter-
municipal economic infrastructure such as rehabilitation of existing roads and communications, 
construction of public tourism infrastructure, business zones, telecommunication centers and 
markets, and improvement of electricity connections.  These investments would also be financed 
on a matching grant basis.  At the municipal and micro regional  level, municipalities, groups of 
municipalities (?mancomunidades?) and public-private-civil society organizations (such as 
?Grupos Gestores?) would prepare public investment proposals (profiles) to be screened at the 
Departmental level.  After screening on the basis of eligibility criteria, these organizations would 
further develop their proposals and obtain the matching grant for implementation.  
 
(iii) 
Pre-investment studies and technical assistance  The Project would also finance studies to 
help the beneficiaries prepare the detailed investment proposals (pre-investment studies) as well 
as technical assistance and training to help implement the investments (or subprojects).  Such 
studies and technical assistance would be carried out by specialized agencies including NGOs. 
These activities will particularly focus on the poor and indigenous associations, on linking 
producers to markets and on municipalities that have lower implementation capacity.  
 
Component 2:  National level infrastructure  
 
National infrastructure is needed to ensure local competitiveness. This may require selected 
investments to improve national transport, electricity and communications networks. This 
component would also be based on the demand from public?private?civil society partnerships, 
but would have to be managed by national line ministries.  In this context the installation of a 
national network of rural telecom connectivity is being studied.  Such investment would cost 
Page  3
about US$25 million of which US$15 million could be financed by the Bank loan.  This 
component could be implemented in phases, prioritizing the areas where explicit demand has 
been made.  
 
Component 3:  Territorial planning and institutional strengthening  
 
To achieve the investment co-ordination objective the Project will finance staff, consulting 
services and operational costs of a Rural Development Coordination Unit within SEGEPLAN.  
The main task of the Unit is coordinating rural development actions at the national level and to 
develop methodologies for territorial planning and management.  This new territorial planning 
system will be composed of the Strategic Territorial Planning, the National System of Investment 
Planning and the National System of Pre-Investment (the latter still to be developed).  
 
At the Departmental level the Project would strengthen the existing Departmental Technical 
Units functioning under the Departmental Development Councils to (i) help implement the above 
program, and (ii) help the Departmental Development Councils to adequately plan and co-
ordinate development at the Departmental level.  
 
At the Municipal level, the Project would strengthen (through training, capacity building and 
technical assistance) the planning capacities of the Municipalities and micro regional 
organizations in particular in planning for economic growth to be linked with the municipal 
budget execution.  At the level of the communities, the Project will strengthen the capacity of 
indigenous people to participate in local decision-making.  
 
Development planning at all levels would be participatory, involving entrepreneurs, civil 
society representatives as well as indigenous groups.  To complement this component 
SEGEPLAN will also seek financial and technical assistance from Germany and Sweden, 
through a Municipal Capacity Building Program.  Therefore, coordination of the Project with 
this Program will have to be ensured.  
 
Component 4:  Intercultural Development  
 
This component will include the development and implementation of a communication strategy 
explaining the virtues and achievements of successful partnerships, both within the supply chains 
and the local productive infrastructure investments.  Special emphasis will be put on the 
successful co-operation between several ethnic groups.  Further work will be needed to develop 
this component.  
 
Component 5:  Monitoring and evaluation  
 
The overall guiding philosophy of the impact monitoring and evaluation system is to provide a 
mechanism that will help Government assess the income and employment benefits attributable to 
Project, and assure the transparency, efficiency and equity of expenditures. It will also help the 
potential Project beneficiaries identify the types of interventions needed, and self evaluate the 
impacts of interventions (or lack of interventions) as part of an ongoing learning process. The 
Page  4
monitoring and evaluation system will utilize existing quantitative and qualitative data to 
establish baselines and track changes over time.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
It is suggested that the Northwestern and Southwestern Regions be the territorial focus of this 
project. These regions, which are primarily rural, account for about 39% of the general 
population in Guatemala, but about 50% of the poor and 55% of the extreme poor.  They are also 
characterized by high proportions of indigenous populations. In a previous prioritization of 102 
municipalities by SEGEPLAN (ranked in terms of poverty, population densities and existence of 
organizations), 2/3 of them (66) are located in these Regions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The capacity of SEGEPLAN to effectively coordinate at the national level is still a question 
mark. Fragmentation of economic policy development and implementation is another 
characteristic of Guatemala's political environment that needs to be taken into consideration.  
Moreover, by law, SEGEPLAN can not implement projects (it can only coordinate) and an 
implementation agency or agencies (dealing with procurement, disbursement and financial 
management) will need to be identified and selected.   The influence of the Secretariat itself may 
also be short-lived because of changing political alliances. At the Departmental level, 
SEGEPLAN could be more successful as the Project would bring the resources to strengthen the 
Technical Units and some screening control over the investments can also increase their 
leverage.  To mitigate these risks, the Rural Development Unit of SEGEPLAN would be 
strengthened, first under a PHRD Grant and then under component 2 of the Project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Irma Yolanda Avila Argueta (LCSEO) 
Mr Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (LCSFT) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Category B Project. The Environmental Assessment will be carried out by SEGEPLAN and 
sent to the World Bank before the end of August 2005. The EA will focus particularly on: 
environmental eligibility criteria for investments (Category A subprojects would be specifically 
excluded); environmental management procedures for sub project approval; typical sub projects 
and the corresponding mitigation options;preparation of an operations manual or similar 
document.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Will be determined during Environmental Assessment.  If necessary mitigation measures will 
be included in the environmental management plan   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Will be determined during Environmental Assessment. If necessary mitigation measures will 
be included in the environmental management plan   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
Will be determined during Environmental Assessment. If necessary mitigation measures will 
be included in the environmental management plan   
Page  5
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Will be determined during Environmental Assessment. If necessary mitigation measures will 
be included in the environmental management plan   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
An Indigenous People's Development Framework (IPDF)will be prepared by SEGEPLAN 
and will be disclosed after adequate consultation with indigenous groups.  A social assessment 
(SA) will be carried out during project preparation in those territories which are to be included 
under the scope of the project.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
The eligibility criteria for investments will expressly exclude financing of sub-projects that 
would cause involuntary resettlement   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment is expected to be completed by SEGEPLAN by end August, 2005 
and will be reviewed in the Bank thereafter.  
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Framework will be be prepared by SEGEPLAN by end 
August 2005 and will be reviewed in the Bank thereafter.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Stephen J. Brushett 
06/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
07/01/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
07/01/2005 
Comments:   
