Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1395 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/31/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guatemala 
Project ID: P087106 
Project Name: LAND ADMINISTRATION II APL 
Task Team Leader: Jorge A. Munoz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 25, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSER 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Other rural development (P);Personal 
and property rights (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S);Legal 
institutions for a market economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
16.00
16.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Guatemala Land Administration Project is the second phase of an Adaptable Program Loan 
whose objective is to (i) increase legal security of land tenure; and (ii) to strengthen the legal and 
institutional framework for land registry and cadastre services nationwide. The first phase?s goal 
has been to pursue this objective in the department of El Peten. This new project or second phase 
will complement the efforts that were started under the first phase. The specific objective will be 
to build an integrated and decentralized land administration system to provide users 
(beneficiaries) in the project area with accurate information on urban and rural land parcels as 
well as effective and equitable land administration services in a timely and cost-effective 
manner. The second phase of the project will continue the work started by Phase 1 to finish 
regularization activities in El Peten. At the same time, it will extend its coverage to 6 
departments.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
This project will be the second phase of a horizontal APL in support of the national 
government?s land administration policy. This project will build on the achievements started 
Page  2
under the first phase, mainly, to increase legal security of land tenure and strengthen the legal 
and institutional framework of land cadastre and registry services. It will also title and clarify 
property rights for the poor, small farmers and vulnerable groups such as women, indigenous 
peoples and afro-descendants. Lastly, it will contribute to mitigate land conflicts by improving 
the quality of records and providing free legal services.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The second phase of the project will finish a few remaining regularization activities in El Peten 
and expand to 6 selected departments. The physical and biological characteristics of these areas 
will be evaluated as part of the Environmental Assessment (EA) being conducted as part of 
project preparation activities.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The new areas to be covered under Phase II have similar social and environmental characteristics 
as those in El Peten department. Therefore the successful regularization methodology that was 
used in El Peten during Phase I (including all applicable safeguards procedures) is likely to serve 
as the basis for Phase II areas. Implementation of relevant safeguards policies is expected to be 
facilitated by the experience of UTJ acquired during Phase I. Project preparation activities for the 
new phase include the development of an EA (and resulting Environmental Management Plan) 
and social assessment ? both of which will  evaluate the effectiveness of safeguards-related 
measures used during the first project phase, and develop additional measures, if necessary, to 
enhance the Borrower?s capacity to deal with identified environmental and social issues.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental Assessment started in March 2005 and it will be completed by May 2005.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Natural Habitats is triggered.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Cultural Property Safeguard is triggered.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Indigenous Peoples Safeguard is triggered.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Safeguard assessment will determine if Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard is triggered.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/29/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Safeguard assessments started in March 2005 and they should be completed by May 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jorge A. Munoz 
02/03/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
02/03/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
02/03/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
