Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1707 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/27/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guatemala 
Project ID: P077756 
Project Name: GUATEMALA Maternal and Infant Health and Nutrition 
Task Team Leader: Carlos Marcelo Bortman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 30, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSHH 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Health (75%);Other social services (25%) 
Theme: Child health (P);Nutrition and food security (P);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Building on the experience of the PEC, the proposed Project aims to support the Government of 
Guatemala to: (a) increase the capacity and quality of the maternal and infant health referral 
network in the entire country; (b) tackle chronic malnutrition among children younger than 3 
years of age by implementing an Expanded Brand of Community Integrated Attention of 
Children and Women (AINM-C) in the 102 poorest districts; and (iii) support Government 
efforts to define, implement, and consolidate a medium-term cross-sectoral policy to prevent 
chronic malnutrition, and institutionalize its implementation.  
 
Specifically, the main outcomes of the project would be, (i) to reduce the indigenous/non 
indigenous and rural/urban infant mortality ratio and maternal mortality ratio by 10% (from 1.3 
and 3 to 1.17 and 2.7 respectively), by increasing access to culturally appropriate and supervised 
health services to improved the rate of safe, assisted births, and access to oral rehydration 
treatment centers and acute respiratory therapy services for children under 5; (ii) to reduce the 
prevalence of chronic malnutrition in children under 5 by 25 percent in five years in the areas of 
intervention, through implementing an adequate model of AINM-C; and (iii) to formulate and 
Page  2
implement a comprehensive mid-term strategy to scale up interventions to prevent chronic 
malnutrition.  
 
The project would also contribute to strengthening the multi-sectoral approach to malnutrition 
and the ongoing health reform, including the system of purchasing of services from NGOs, 
improving the quality, monitoring and supervision of the PEC.  
 
Finally, the proposed project would foster the demand for health and nutrition services as a 
complement to improving the quality and provision of basic health and nutrition services (supply 
side). The proposed project would support the introduction of inter-culturally accepted practices 
within Maternal and Infant Integral Centers  ("Centros de Atenci?n Integral Materno Infantil" / 
CAIMIs) to promote safe institutional deliveries, involving traditional birth attendants as a key 
actor to increase the demand for reproductive health services. At the same time, the proposed 
project would support government efforts to strengthen community-based programs to provide 
basic health and nutrition services. These programs, which have proven to be very effective in 
reaching extremely poor population (in the case of Guatemala through the PEC program (MoH) 
and recently through Creciendo Bien (SOSEP), are based on contracting NGOs to reach small 
communities and regularly provide basic health and nutrition services. The project would support 
the government to improve the PEC model through introducing the AINM-C strategy, in 
coordination with the Creciendo Bien program.  
 
The proposed strategy seeks to close the gap in access to basic health and nutrition services 
through community based interventions, instead of other demand-side alternatives. In particular, 
the government will not follow a CCT (Community Cash Transfer) strategy for the health sector 
in the short term, not only because its community-based programs are set to reach families in 
their own communities and thus overcome the barrier to access and create a permanent demand 
for these services, but also because conditions for a CCT program are complex and currently 
absent in Guatemala; specifically, there is need for a better supply of basic health and nutrition 
services, and information requirements (targeting mechanisms, monitoring and information 
systems, and so on), are not yet set sufficiently develop to support a CCT strategy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
A
project of US$35 million is proposed with five components over a five-year period supported 
by a Specific Investment Loan. The costs and activities presented below are indicative and will 
be prioritized and refined in the process of project preparation.  
 
Component 1. Strengthening of the Maternal and Infant Health Network (US$23 million)  
 
Supporting the development of a Maternal and Infant Health Referral Network and promoting 
the demand of maternal and infant health care will contribute to increase the proportion of safe 
institutional deliveries, the referral of obstetric emergencies directly from the community, and 
access to a referral system for children with acute respiratory and digestive diseases. This 
component would:  
 
i) 
Finance the upgrading of 50 CAIMIs distributed in key strategic points of the Maternal 
and Infant Health Care Referral Network (on average 2 per department);  
Page  3
ii) 
Support culturally appropriate and supervised health services to increase safe births 
assisted rates, and access to oral rehydration and acute respiratory therapy services for children 
under 5 years;  
 
iii) 
Engage community groups and, traditional birth attendants to better identify obstetric 
emergencies and to refer them in a timely manner to the CAIMIs. The Project will strengthen the 
demand for reproductive health services by disseminating messages on safe motherhood, 
including the timely referral of obstetric emergencies and promoting the participation of 
traditional birth attendants as integrated human resources in the CAIMIs;  
 
iv) 
Support a clear definition of treatment protocols, identification of facility standards and 
norms for each level of care that establish criteria for when to refer patients;  
 
v)
Finance contracting out for private and NGOs health service providers when this option 
is superior to developing MoH's services (i.e. laboratory services);  
 
vi) 
Finance training, radio communications and ambulances to support the referrals from the 
PEC's units and directly from the communities of obstetric emergencies. The support will also 
strengthen the referral system from the CAIMIs to main hospitals;  
 
vii) 
Support seed funds for Maternal Homes ("Hogares Maternos") to facilitate access to safe 
deliveries to those women living in isolate areas. Each of these Maternal Homes will be 
connected with a CAIMI and will be transferred to the municipalities.  
 
Despite the fact that the component does not have an explicit target population, rural and 
indigenous people all over the country would benefit the most by this component due to the 
community-based approach and the specific activities that it supports.  
 
The CAIMIs would be developed on already existing health centers, and the component would 
support (i) civil works, equipment, training and promotion of community involvement during the 
entire project, while and (ii) health service contracts and human resources on a declining basis 
during the first three years of the project.  
 
Component 2. Implementation of the AINM-C Strategy (US$ 9 million)  
 
This component seeks to support government efforts to institutionalize and scale up effective 
interventions to tackle chronic malnutrition in a sustained way. Tackling the main determinants 
of chronic malnutrition on a long term basis requires addressing parents' knowledge of childcare, 
breastfeeding and hygienic practices; mothers' nutritional status; family planning including 
pregnancies at young age, number of children and intra-birth spacing; incidence and frequency of 
illness in young children including diarrhea and respiratory infections; and household 
consumption. Most of these determinants of chronic malnutrition can be prevented through 
multi-sector community-based interventions appropriately linked to the health system, which 
have been successfully proved in other countries of Central America, like the Honduras AIN-C 
program, a cost-effective community-based program that prevents malnutrition by counseling 
mothers about appropriate child-feeding and child-care practices (see Annex I). The proposed 
project would support the Government to institutionalize and scale up current initiatives under 
implementation to tackle chronic malnutrition through effective community-based programs. To 
this end, the project would support the government to: (i) define a single package of services, (ii) 
define and set coherent and sustainable institutional arrangements for service provision and a 
Page  4
single supervision scheme, and (iii) establish adequate and unique monitoring and evaluation 
methods.  
 
The nutrition package would consist of 4 sub-components: (1) the basic AINM-C package of 
services including preventive activities (growth monitoring of pregnant women and children 
under 3, prenatal and neo-natal care), management of prevalent childhood diseases and 
recognition of danger signs requiring medical attention, behavior change communication and 
individual counseling to mothers; check for other major health actions (immunizations, essential 
micro-nutrients such as Vitamin A, iron and zinc), and referral of severely malnourished 
children, pregnancy related complications and childhood illnesses to appropriate health facilities 
;
(2) regular group workshops to mothers regarding home hygiene, cooking, hand-washing and 
water usage, childcare, pregnancy, breastfeeding practices, and so on; (3) community and 
municipal participation to improve the implementation strategy and guarantee future 
sustainability; and (4) a monitoring and supervision system to follow up the quality of service 
provided and monitor families patterns behavior regarding child care and nutrition and the 
improvement in health and nutritional status of mother and children.  
 
In addition, the nutrition component would pay special attention to the needs and difficulties 
faced by the indigenous population. The prevalence of child malnutrition in Guatemala is twice 
as high among children of indigenous families (70%) as among children of non-indigenous 
families (36%).  Previous studies have shown that in Guatemala large differences in chronic 
malnutrition by ethnicities are not simply explained by differences in income, education or 
infrastructure, but can reflect social exclusion or the existence of traditional practices that may 
interfere, for example, with exclusive breastfeeding or proper child care.  The fact that the AIN-
C
strategy is based on the work of community nutrition volunteers, typically mothers from the 
same community, would ensure that most of the problems of access faced by indigenous people 
are addressed. In addition, the project would make sure that all the communication tools are 
designed taking into account traditional practices and beliefs and that support and dissemination 
material would be developed in all the indigenous languages. For that purpose, in-depth 
formative research would be conducted to identify barriers to the adoption of key behaviors. 
Finally, to the extent possible, activities would be developed in coordination with practitioners of 
traditional medicine (such as the comadronas - midwives, the curandero - herbalist and the ajq'ij 
-
the Mayan priest) who are traditionally relied upon the indigenous population.  
 
Component 3. Institutionalization of a nutritional policy (US$ 1.2 million).  The purpose of this 
component is to support the Government's initiative to pull all ongoing interventions together in 
one single strategy to reduce malnutrition in Guatemala and set the institutional arrangements to 
support its sustainability. The agency responsible for this component would be the recently 
created SESAN. To reach this goal, the Project would support the following activities: (i) 
formulating a cross-sectoral mid-term strategy to improve nutrition status of children younger 
than five, with particular emphasis to infants under two years of age living in rural areas and 
indigenous communities; (ii) designing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation system to 
follow up nutrition interventions; (iii) defining and implementing a 
communication/dissemination strategy; and (iv) support the institutionalization of the SESAN.  
 
Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Continuous Auditing Systems ($1.0 million)  
Page  5
The project would finance the design and implementation of a comprehensive monitoring and 
evaluation system to assess Project's success in achieving the agreed outcomes and expected 
impacts. The M&E system would include the following components: (i) a management 
information system to track project's physical and financial progress during implementation; and 
(ii) an external impact evaluation to asses the effect of the interventions on households' welfare. 
The monitoring and audits included in this component would be compatible with both public 
sector management and results-based budgeting initiatives being supported in other Bank 
operations.  
 
Component 5. Project Management and Administration ($0.8 million)  
 
This component would focus on Project Administration and it would support MoH to finance 
computing and office equipment and furniture and technical assistance of a small team of 
specialized professionals to support the Unit at the Ministry of Health responsible for 
coordinating projects. This Unit would be institutionalized within the MoH to manage all 
external financed operations and would share resources to execute the Financial Management 
and Procurement processes.  
 
.
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  
 
The responsible agency for the project will be the Ministry of Health, who would implement 
project components 1, 2, 4 and 5. The recently created SESAN would implement component 3 in 
close coordination with the MoH. Within the MoH the Health Service Provision Unit for 
Secondary Level (UPS2) would be responsible for the implementation of component 1, while the 
Health Service Provision Unit for Primary Level (UPS1) would be in charge of administering 
and monitoring the implementation of component 2, in coordination with the Secretariat of Food 
and Nutritional Security (SFNS). The provision of the nutrition package would be integrated 
with the basic health service package provided by the PEC program, either directly by the MoH 
or through contracting specialized NGOs. In particular, the Secretariat would work with the 
MoH to guarantee full involvement of communities and municipalities in the expansion and 
sustainability of the nutrition intervention.  
 
Special attention would be paid to improving coordination among central agencies involved in 
implementing or working in nutrition programs. In the recent past, coordination among at least 
three of them: the Ministry of Health, the Frente contra el Hambre (currently SESAN), and 
SOSEP - has been weak. Therefore, the Project will emphasize improving institutional and 
implementation arrangements.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Guatemala   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government already has adequate mechanisms to ensure implementation of safeguard 
policies.  It has, for instance, already issued the bio-safety norms for solid waste of the health 
facility.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Page  6
Ms Irma Yolanda Avila Argueta (LCSEO) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Yes, the project team will prepared an Environmental Assessment that will be published in 
Country by Appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
As part of the OP/BP 4.10 (formerly policy OD 4.20) the project will prepare an Indigenous 
Peoples Plan (IPP).   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/03/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The borrower will prepare an Environmental Assessment (EA) and Indigenous Peoples Plan 
(IPP).  These documents will be disclosed by Appraisal (January 30, 2006).   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Carlos Marcelo Bortman 
07/27/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
07/25/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keith E. Hansen 
07/26/2005 
Comments:   
