Page  1
 
 
Page  2
Proposed ISDS PAD Format – Draft Pre-meeting with ISG - February 13, 2004 
 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) 
Section I – Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: Updated on February 5, 2004 from previous version dated Jan. 2001 
A. Basic Project Data 
 
A.1. Project Statistics 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P065127 
Project:  
Second National Rural Infrastructure Project (PNIR 2) 
TTL:
 Moctar Thiam
 
Total project cost (by component): 
Appraisal Date: 04/19/04 
IBRD Amount ($m): 
Board Date: .06/15/04 
IDA Amount ($m): 30.0 
GEF Amount ($m): 
PCF Amount ($m): 
Miscellaneous Funds (specify…….) ($m):   
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Sector:
 
Transport, Infrastructure 
Lending Instruments: AFTT/AFRD 
IDA Credit
 
 
Environmental Category: 
A 
A.2. Project Objectives  
The rural populations in targeted areas will benefit from improved basic roads and commercial 
infrastructure and sustained management and maintenance systems, including rehabilitated public buildings 
affected by wars in neighboring countries. 
A.3. Project Description  
Component 1: Rural Roads
 – Achieving all season access to the rural populations through rehabilitation of 
intermediate level, prefectoral roads and supporting road sector management reforms. 
Component 2: Emergency Reconstruction
 – Assisting rural populations in war-affected areas to restore 
basic social services through the reconstruction of damaged or destroyed public buildings. 
Component 3: Commercial Infrastructure
 – Assisting rural professional organizations and economic groups 
to exploit export and domestic opportunities for market oriented growth through the construction of 
improved post harvest treatment and marketing facilities. 
Component 4: Project Management
 –The project is managed in conformity with legal and fiduciary 
requirements as stated in the Credit Agreement.
 
 
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis: 
The PNIR 2 will finance activities in rural road rehabilitation and commercial infrastructure that are located 
all over Guinea.  The activities related to emergency reconstruction are concentrated in the border areas 
with Sierra Leone and Guinea Bissau.
 
Salient physical characteristics of the lands of the country largely differ per main natural region.  Guinea is 
divided into four main regions as follows: Guinée Maritime, Moyenne Guinée, Haute Guinée, Guinée 
Forestiere. 
 
B. Check Environmental Category 
A [
 
], B [
X
], C [ ], FI [ ] 
 
Comments:  
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
 
 Yes 
No 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
[
Yes 
] [ 
] 
 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03 -) 
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
[
Yes
 ] 
[ ] 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
Page  3
Proposed ISDS PAD Format – Draft Pre-meeting with ISG - February 13, 2004 
 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)  
[ ] 
[No ] 
 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  4
Proposed ISDS PAD Format – Draft Pre-meeting with ISG - February 13, 2004 
 
 
Section II – Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
. 
 
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe 
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
The main safeguard issue is the preparation of environmental assessment reports in compliance with OP 
4.01.  EA reports include a Strategic Environmental Assessment and a Social Impact Analysis carried out 
in 2001/2002 as well as a recent Environmental Assessment, which primarily focused on project 
interventions scheduled for the first year.  Specific project interventions for subsequent years, which are not 
known at this time, will be assessed prior to their implementation. 
A second safeguard concern is the possible relocation of some persons that live on land destined to be used 
for certain project interventions.  For first year interventions, as scheduled now, compensation is required 
in the case of three 
Boucheries grands centres 
which require relocation of 3 + 10 + 25 persons. 
The project is not expected to have any large scale, significant and /or irreversible negative impacts.   
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the 
project area. 
The project may have some indirect and/or long-term negative impacts due to anticipated additional future 
activities in the project area.  Such impacts are considered minor and very localized.  They would be the 
result of easier access to rural areas via improved rural roads by bandits, and facilitate illegal cutting of 
wood and poaching.  Changes in traffic patterns due to rehabilitation and construction of new commercial 
sites in urban areas may lead to local traffic congestion. 
 
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
 
 
An analysis of the no-project alternative has been included in the environmental assessment.  The 
alternative was rejected as it would prevent social and economic development from taking place and slow 
down the fight against poverty.  
 
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of 
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.   
 
The borrower has prepared a Strategic Environmental Assessment, a Social Assessment, and recently an 
additional Environmental Assessment which includes specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMP) for the first-year activities planned under the three project components of PNIR2, in 
particular the two components expected to have potential negative impacts: the Rural Roads and 
Commercial Infrastructure components.  In addition, a Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared to 
clarify and guide resettlement arrangements for the project, should these become necessary.  Initial 
resettlement plans for three “boucheries” sites were also prepared 
The ESMPs and resettlement instruments will form part of the Project Implementation Manual. 
The actions proposed in the specific Environmental and Social Management Plans for the first-year 
activities will be funded by the project and will be implemented by the Government agencies concerned.  
All actions will be specifically supervised on a day-to-day basis by the Environmental Protection Unit of 
the Ministry of Public Works, which is now fully operational, and which will be further strengthened by the 
project.   
 
The Environmental Protection Unit of the Ministry of Public Works is responsible for preparing the 
Environmental and Social Management Plans for activities to be implemented in subsequent years of the 
project and which are undefined at this time.  Funding for these additional ESMPs has been included in the 
project. 
 
The Directorate of Environment (national environmental agency) will monitor implementation of all 
environmental management plans prepared under PNIR 2, and is funded to do so. 
 
Page  5
Proposed ISDS PAD Format – Draft Pre-meeting with ISG - February 13, 2004 
 
D.5. 
Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are  
-  Rural communities (CRD), who will have the opportunity to take fuller advantage of economic 
opportunities and social services in the country through improved access.  
-  Rural producers, who will be in a position to participate more fully in the market economy both internally 
and beyond the country’s borders as a result of commercial infrastructure investments (livestock products 
and agricultural processing) planned under the project 
-  Workers in certain secondary urban centers who will find employment in agricultural production and 
marketing facilities to be rehabilitated under the project; 
-  Public servants in border areas, who will be able to carry out their work again once public buildings are 
reconstructed under the project.  Also, residents in these border areas, who can be provided with basic 
public services again. 
All project investments are demand-driven and will be carried out in tandem with assistance to CRDs 
through the PACV project, thus reinforcing economic and social investments in these areas.  The 
environmental and social assessment process has included scoping sessions, extensive consultations in the 
field related to interventions of the first year of the project (subsequent years are undetermined as yet).  All 
sites for first year actions scheduled in the rural roads improvement, commercial infrastructure and 
emergency components were visited by environmental staff to assess the concerns and to document the 
views of local stakeholders, and to integrate the pertinent ones into the EA and social reports.  This 
consultation process is now set up to be carried out on an annual basis during the life of the project, at the 
time that specific interventions have been determined.   
The draft reports of EA/ESMP/RPF and plans were presented and discussed at a special validation meeting 
in Conakry, which included participants of all agencies, private sector representatives, NGOs, and other 
stakeholders.  The feedback of the public consultation, which covers the major concerns of the people 
present at the meetings, are being included in the final version of the EA report.  At the same time the 
EA/ESMP/RPF will be disclosed in Guinea at the various project sites and in the capital.  The availability 
of the report for public comments will be announced in the media.  It is expected that the Directorate of 
Environment in Guinea will evaluate the EA documents prior to February 10, 2004.  At the request of the 
Government, the EA/ESMP/RPF will be forwarded to the World Bank for comments and disclosure in the 
Bank’s Infoshop, at least 120 days prior to appraisal. 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select one)
 
[ ] S
1
. –The project has significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; where there are significant 
potential impacts related to several safeguard policies.  
[
v
] S
2
. – One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited to their impact and are 
technically and institutionally manageable.  
[ ] S
3
. – No safeguard issues 
[ ] S
F
. – Financial intermediary projects 
 
Page  6
Proposed ISDS PAD Format – Draft Pre-meeting with ISG - February 13, 2004 
 
 
F. Disclosure Requirements                                        Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
2/3/04     
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
2/4/04    or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
2/5/04      or Not Applicable 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
2/3/04…  
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
2/4/04    or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…       Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Pest Management Plan:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. 
 
Section III – Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment: 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?    
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?  
In process 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   
Yes 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:  
Would the project result in any significant conversion  or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, 
does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?    Yes           No 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:  Not Applicable 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?               Yes                 No 
Is a separate PMP required?                                                                     Yes                 No 
If yes,  are PMP requirements included in project design?                      Yes                 No 
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property: Not Applicable 
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                 Yes                No 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural 
resources?                                                                                                  Yes                
 No    
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples: Not Applicable 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with the Indigenous 
People?                                                                     No 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan? Yes               No 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by the Regional 
Social Development Unit?                                                                                              Yes      
         No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:  
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?     
Yes, Resettlement  
Policy Framework and specific abbreviated resettlement plans for three areas
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan / policy framework / 
policy process?                                                                                                                
In process 
Page  7
Proposed ISDS PAD Format – Draft Pre-meeting with ISG - February 13, 2004 
 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests: Not Applicable 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out?  Yes     No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?                  Yes     No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification 
system?                                                                                                                        
                      Yes     No 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams: Not Applicable
  
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                                                           
   Yes     No 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and 
approved by the Bank?                                                                                                          
             Yes     No 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made for public 
awareness and training?                                                                                                        
              Yes     No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways: Not Applicable
  
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                                                        Y
es     No 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has this been cleared 
with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?                                       Yes     No 
What are the reasons for the exception?      Please explain:………………………… 
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                                                                        
Yes     No 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
: 
Not Applicable
  
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the project, including the 
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with 
the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?                                                                                   Yes
     No 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?                                  Yes     No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: Not Applicable Not Applicable 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                  Yes     No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are 
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?                                     Yes     No 
All Safeguard Policies
: 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the 
implementation of the safeguard measures?                                                                                    Ye
s      
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                                                       Yes     
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?                           Yes     
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and 
measures?                                                                                                                      
                    Yes     
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been 
adequately reflected in the project legal documents?                                                                        Yes
    
 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader: 
Name  Moctar Thiam 
Date:  Feb. 12, 2004 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Name  Tom E. Walton 
Date:  Feb 12, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager 
Name: Sanjivi Rajasingham   Date:  Feb 5, 2004 
Comments 
 
