Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/12/2005 
Report No.:  AC1990
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Guinea 
Project ID:  P098959 
Project Name:  Village Community Support Program - Phase  I - Additional Financing 
Grant 
Task Team Leader:  Abdoulaye Toure 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 24, 2006 
Managing Unit:  AFTS4 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sub-national government administration (40%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (25%);Other social services (25%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.40 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.40 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
0.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the first phase of the Village Community Support Program (VCSP) 
remains unchanged.  The additional financing will be used to scale-up decentralized and 
participatory rural development by increasing the financing of local development plans 
through matching grants from the present cap of 100 Rural Development Communities 
(Communautes Rurales de Developpement(CRDs))to 146 CRDs.  The scope of eligible 
micro-projects remains unchanged.  The 46 additional CRDs have already benefited from 
capacity building support.  
 
The original Development Credit Agreement, in the amount of SDR 15.7 million (about 
US$22.0 million equivalent), was approved on February 23, 1999.  It became effective on 
November 30, 1999.  As of October 30, 2005, more than 95 percent of the Credit was 
disbursed and disbursement projections indicate that the total credit amount will be fully 
disbursed during the first quarter of 2006.  The closing date was revised to December 31, 
Page  2
2006 to correspond with the implementation period for the additional financing package.  
The revised closing date is thirty months later than the original closing date.   
 
3. Project Description 
The first phase of the VCSP has 4 components:  
 
A. Village Investment Fund  
 
This sub-component provides matching grants to organized communities for the 
financing of priority community infrastructure micro-projects, identified using 
participatory mechanisms.  
 
B. Support for Local Development  
 
This component includes five activities: (i) streamline legal and regulatory framework 
for decentralization; (ii) establish effective fiscal and financial decentralization; (iii) 
strengthen the CRDs capacity to manage local development programs; (iv) strengthen the 
capacity of the Ministry of the Interior and Decentralization, which is responsible for 
decentralization; (v) sensitize and train elected local officials and CRD administrative 
and technical staff in the areas of local development government planning and financial 
management.  The proposed Additional Financing would only be used for the purposes of 
the third and fifth activity.  
 
C. Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Rural Roads  
 
Following the approval by the Board of the Second Phase of the National Rural 
Infrastructure Project (PNIR2), which also covers these activities on a national scale, the 
VCSP stopped supporting these activities as of June 30, 2005.  
 
D. Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
Functions to be performed to implement the project are: oversight, coordination, 
procurement, financial management and monitoring and evaluation.  Most activities are 
being performed by public institutions in charge of project implementation.  Activities 
related to fiduciary responsibilities are, however, implemented by an independent 
structure whose staff has been recruited competitively.  
 
Other than the change related to Component C, no changes will be made in 
implementation arrangements.  The present arrangements have been reviewed and 
evaluated on several separate occasions and are judged sound.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The 146 target CRDs have already been identified and their local development plans have 
been appraised as part of the capacity building exercise during first phase supervision and 
as part of preparation of the second phase.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTS4) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected as a 
consequence of the project.  An environmental assessment was carried out as part of first 
phase preparation and re-evaluated during project implementation.  Environmental issues 
related to social infrastructure are very limited and highly localized, given their small 
footprint and wide geographic dispersion.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Based on past implementation experience, no such impacts are expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Since this concerns additional financing for an ongoing project which is rated highly 
satisfactorily, no alternatives are relevant at this stage.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The procedures laid out in the environmental management plan of the VCSP will apply to 
micro-projects funded through the Additional Financing.  These procedures have been 
evaluated at the time of mid-term review and pre-appraisal of the second phase and were 
found to be satisfactory.  In addition, capacity building was carried out as part of project 
implementation to ensure that procedures were consistently applied.  As a result, the 
safeguards system has worked well and no issues were identified during project 
implementation.  
 
The National Coordination Unit (NCU), established at the Ministry of Planning is 
responsible for ensuring that micro-projects are demand-driven, socially inclusive and 
environmentally sustainable, and can be properly operated and maintained.  The NCU has 
Page  4
prepared an annual work program of approved local development plans.  Micro-projects 
that are likely to have negative environmental and/or social impact are identified and go 
through an evaluation based on procedures detailed in the Project Implementation 
Manual. These assessments are carried out by national consultants. The NCU is 
satisfactorily staffed and has an environmental specialist.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The project has used participatory tools adapted to local circumstances.  In addition, 
conflict management tools are under development and will be tested starting January 
2006.  Local community involvement is critical for the success of the project and in all 
communities, and the approach has been satisfactorily evaluated as part of first phase 
implementation.  Emphasis in all community level work is placed on the identification 
and inclusion of vulnerable groups such as women and youth.  
 
On November 30, 2005, the environmental management plan developed for the original 
project and applicable to the Additional Financing was re-disclosed in-country through 
the NCU and at the World Bank's Infoshop in Washington, DC, as well at the Resident 
Mission's Documentation Center.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/1998 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/1998 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/30/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
Page  5
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdoulaye Toure 
12/12/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
12/12/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
12/12/2005 
Comments:   
