Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC565 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 13, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P065129 
Project Name: Guinea: VILLAGE COMM.SUP.II 
Task Team Leader: Suzanne Piriou-Sall/Moctar 
Thiam 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: November 30, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry 
sector (50%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (25%);Other social services (25%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Konare Amadou, Buursink John 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 30 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
The long-term purpose of the program remains the same. The proposed operation would be Phase II of the VCSP 
and would scale-up and streamline decentralization and participation strategies in improving service and good 
provision for the rural population.  
 
Phase 2 will scale-up decentralized and participatory rural development through: 
(i)  
The geographical expansion of the program to include all 303 local governments 
(ii) 
The sectoral expansion of the scope of micro-projects to include, in addition to basic 
infrastructure, rural services and productive investments;  
(iii) 
The continuing of policy reforms in support of decentralization and participation in the areas of 
demand-driven service and good provision, fiscal decentralization, the strengthening of the public 
and private sectors’ roles and responsibilities.  
 
Expected results will include, in addition to the successful expansion of the project to all 303 local governments (in 
rural communities), a demonstrated impact on people’s livelihood measured through selected socio-economic 
indicators. 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description  
The second phase of the Village Communities Support Project will have 4 components:  
 
A. Support to financial and fiscal decentralization 
(i) Investment funds for demand-driven priority investments 
(ii) Fiscal decentralization 
Improve mobilization and management of resources for and by decentralized entities. 
B. Support to decentralized and participatory development 
(i) Support for implementation of the Local Investment Funds (local governments and public socio-economic 
goods and services) 
Page  2
 
 
(ii) Support for implementation of the Local and Regional Development Funds (for the provision of good and 
services in support of production)  
(iii) Support to producers organizations 
C. Improving land rights and security 
D. Coordination, monitoring and evaluation, communication  
 
Component A
: Support to Financial and Fiscal Decentralization 
 
(i) Demand-Driven Funds for priority investments 
This sub-component will provide grants to organized communities for the financing of micro-projects: basic 
infrastructure, productive investments, and services. There will not be land acquisition. Land transactions will 
be: donation and/or rental arrangement 
It will operate through three windows:   
- The first one
, 
called
 Local Investment Fund (LIF),
 benefiting local governments for the financing of public 
goods and services (similar to Phase I).  
- The second and third ones, called
 Local Development Fund (LDF) and Regional Development Fund (RDF) 
are open to organized producers at the local and regional levels for the financing of goods and services in 
support of production.  
(ii) Fiscal Decentralization 
This sub-component will support improvements in tax collection and use, as well as the establishment of a system of 
government transfers towards the front-line. 
 
Component B
: Support to decentralized and participatory development
 
 
This component will include all activities for fund implementation: policy reforms, capacity building activities for 
public and private providers, and for beneficiaries/clients.  
 
Component C
: Support to land securing
 
Given the complexity of the land issue as well as the intrinsic social risks, the Government of Guinea will therefore 
start with a first 4-year pilot phase to design innovative land securing mechanisms. 
Implementation of a pilot for developing a methodology for recording all land rights (customary and otherwise) and 
initiating a formalization of these rights based on participation and decentralization principles, on sound social 
analysis, and on preserving/improving the rights of vulnerable groups (women, herders, poor). 
 
Component D
: Coordination and Monitoring & Evaluation of the program
 
Functions to be performed to implement the project are: coordination, procurement, financial management and 
monitoring & evaluation. Most activities will be performed by public institutions in charge of project 
implementation. Activities related to fiduciary responsibilities will be implemented by an independent structure 
recruited competitively. 
 
 
 
D.  Project location  
The project is national in scope and will complement existing efforts during the first phase of the project and will 
extend the project to all 303 rural development communities (local governments) throughout the country. Inclusion 
of CRD in the project will be programmed according to available capacity of implementing agencies and ability and 
quickness of local governments to raise their own contribution. However, at project close, all 303 CRD in the 
country are expected to have benefited from project’s resources and capacity development at local level and national 
institutional capacity building activities. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The first phase of the project has achieved excellent results in building capacity for safeguard policy, particularly 
regarding the EA and action plan for microprojects and rural roads. The second phase will consolidate initial gains 
and will develop the expertise in safeguards as they relate to Land security. 
Page  3
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
will finance micro-projects in a variety of sectors. Criteria for micro-project selection must include 
screening for safeguards and mitigation measures 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ x] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
will finance micro-projects in a variety of sectors. Criteria for micro-project selection must include 
screening for safeguards and mitigation measures 
[x ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
will finance micro-projects in a variety of sectors. Criteria for micro-project selection must include 
screening for safeguards and mitigation measures 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Experience from the first phase of the project show that generally the type of infrastructures involved are small-scale 
and minimize environmental damages. The project design will take this into consideration and will support a series 
of practical action to address potential environmental issues that will arise during implementation. In that regard, the 
project preparation activities will include an update of Environmental Management Plan prepared during the first 
phase of the project. The updated document will propose specific actions including the early screening for micro-
project activities for negative environmental impact and continuous training for all actors involved in the 
implementation of the project. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared. 
 
The PAD-stage ISDS will be prepared during the project quality Enhancement review planned for March 2004. 
Additional work will be carried out and its finding incorporated in the updated version of ISDS. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
Launching of the studies: March 04 – June 04 
 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Suzanne Piriou-Sall 
01/13/04 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Mary A. Barton-Dock 
 
Comments 
                                                                                                                               
                                                           
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
