Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1983 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Guinea 
Project ID: P098959 
Project Name: Village Community Support Project I - Additional Financing Grant 
Task Team Leader: Abdoulaye Toure 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: January 19, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (40%);General water, sanitation and 
flood protection sector (25%);Other social services (25%);Central government 
administration (10%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (S);Gender (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
7.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.40 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.40
0.80 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the first phase of the Village Community Support Program (VCSP) remains 
unchanged.  The additional financing will be used to scale-up decentralized and participatory 
rural development from 100 to 146 Rural Development Communities (Communautes Rurales de 
Developpement(CRDs)).  The scope of eligible micro-projects remains unchanged.  
 
The original Development Credit Agreement, in the amount of SDR 15.7 million (about 
US$22.0 million equivalent), was approved on February 23, 1999.  It became effective on 
November 30, 1999.  As of October 30, 2005, more than 95 percent of the Credit was disbursed 
and disbursement projections indicate that the total credit amount will be fully disbursed during 
the first quarter of 2006.  The closing date was revised to December 31, 2006 to correspond with 
the implementation period for the additional financing package.  The revised closing date is 
thirty months later than the original closing date.   
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The first phase of the VCSP has 4 components:  
 
A. Village Investment Fund  
 
This sub-component provides matching grants to organized communities for the financing of 
priority community infrastructure micro-projects, identified using participatory mechanisms.  
 
B. Support for Local Development  
 
This component includes five activities: (i) streamline legal and regulatory framework for 
decentralization; (ii) establish effective fiscal and financial decentralization; (iii) strengthen the 
CRDs capacity to manage local development programs; (iv) strengthen the capacity of the 
Ministry of the Interior and Decentralization, which is responsible for decentralization; (v) 
sensitize and train elected local officials and CRD administrative and technical staff in the areas 
of local development government planning and financial management.  The proposed Additional 
Financing would only be used for the purposes of the third and fifth activity.  
 
C. Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Rural Roads  
 
Following the approval by the Board of the Second Phase of the National Rural Infrastructure 
Project (PNIR2), which also covers these activities on a national scale, the VCSP no longer 
provides support to these activities.  
 
D. Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
Functions to be performed to implement the project are: oversight, coordination, procurement, 
financial management and monitoring and evaluation.  Most activities are being performed by 
public institutions in charge of project implementation.  Activities related to fiduciary 
responsibilities are, however, implemented by an independent structure whose staff has been 
recruited competitively.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The 146 target CRDs have already been identified and their local development plans have been 
appraised.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The procedures laid out in the environmental management plan of the VCSP will apply to micro-
projects funded through the Additional Financing.  These procedures have been evaluated at the 
time of mid-term review and pre-appraisal of the second phase and were found to be satisfactory.  
In addition, capacity building was carried out as part of project implementation to ensure that 
procedures were consistently applied.  As a result, the safeguards system has worked well and no 
issues were identified during project implementation.  
 
The National Coordination Unit (NCU), established at the Ministry of Planning is responsible 
for ensuring that micro-projects are demand-driven, socially inclusive and environmentally 
sustainable, and can be properly operated and maintained.  The NCU has prepared an annual 
work program of approved local development plans.  Micro-projects that are likely to have 
negative environmental and/or social impact are identified and go through an evaluation based 
Page  3
on procedures detailed in the Project Implementation Manual. These assessments are carried out 
by national consultants. The NCU is satisfactorily staffed and has an environmental specialist.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Yves Andre Prevost (AFTS4) 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The procedures laid out in the environmental management plan of the VCSP will apply to 
micro-projects funded through the Additional Financing.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/09/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
All safeguard-related studies were completed under the original project. No new activities are 
proposed under the additional financing grant and the same procedures, reviewed during 
supervision and judged to be adequate for the original project, will apply to the activities 
financed under the additional financing grant.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdoulaye Toure 
11/28/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
11/28/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Mary A. Barton-Dock 
11/28/2005 
Comments:   
