Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/13/2005 
Report No.:  AC1565
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Haiti 
Project ID:  P093640 
Project Name:  Haiti Community Driven Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Garry Charlier 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 23, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 21, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSER 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other rural development (S);Other 
environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
38.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.60 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.60 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Building on the successful experience of the PCF CDD pilot, the proposed project would 
scale-up the direct transfer of public resources to local community organizations in poor 
rural and peri-urban communities, by: (i) financing small-scale investments proposed, 
implemented and managed by community organizations to improve their access to basic 
social and economic infrastructure and support income-generating activities; (ii) 
strengthening social cohesion and building social capital of local communities to 
organize collectively to better meet their own needs;  and, (iii) improving local 
governance by greater citizen participation and transparency in open decision-making 
processes, through the creation and strengthening of community associations and project 
development councils.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Community Subprojects Funds, Management and Support, would finance 
approximately 1,300 small-scale investments which are identified by community 
organizations (OCBs) and later prioritized in project development councils 
(COPRODEPs) as a function of available resources under the project.  Subprojects, 
costing on average US$20,000 (but in all cases no more than US$50,000), would 
Page  2
mainstream the financing mechanism tested under the PCF-funded CDD pilot project and 
would finance basic socio-economic small-scale infrastructure, education, health, 
productive, natural resource management and other investments as identified by OCBs.  
Funds for subproject execution would be transferred directly to OCBs, which are then 
responsible for subproject financial management and expense reporting, in the form of 
Statements of Expenditure, following subproject completion.  Subproject selection would 
be demand-driven and would follow procedures detailed in an updated project 
operational manual, drawing on lessons learned from the CDD Pilot project and 
expanded in response to the scaled-up operation.  The component would also earmark 
resources for technical assistance to mobilize OCBs in the targeted communes and train 
them in the preparation and subsequent execution of subproject investments.  Given the 
information-intensive nature of CDD, a comprehensive communications strategy would 
also be financed under this component to raise awareness among the intended project 
beneficiaries on the project objectives and avenues for participation. The component 
would also finance training and technical assistance to prepare project municipal councils 
(COPRODEPs) to fulfill their responsibilities related to subproject monitoring and 
supervision, training to OCBs.  
 
Component 2: Capacity-Building and Technical Assistance would finance, among other 
things,: (i) training-of trainers events in financial management and accounting for 
COPRODEPs, as well municipal government and regional representatives of central 
government ministries;  (ii) periodic regional and national exchanges among 
COPRODEPs to share knowledge and experiences gained under the project; (iii) 
workshops for MDODs (both existing and those which enter the project over its period of 
execution) to equip them to adequately accompany OCBs and COPRODEPs in carrying 
out the activities under Component 1; (iv) training for PL-480 staff in order to effectively 
supervise overall project implementation and (v) prepare a medium to long-term national 
strategy to facilitate the mainstreaming of CDD.  
 
Component 3: Project Administration, Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation would 
finance incremental costs associated with project implementation by the project 
coordination unit (PCU), which will be housed in the existing PL-480 Management 
Office and operate under the oversight of the Ministry of Planning and External 
Cooperation.  This would also include the establishment of a Monitoring and Evaluation 
subcomponent, which would accompany project execution.  Impact evaluation would 
also be financed under this component.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The national territory of Haiti is divided into 10 Departments, 140 communes, and 554 
"communal sections". The proposed project will include the 67 poorest ("priority") 
communes across Haiti.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber (LCSEN) 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSER) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project will support multiple, small-scale (averaging less than $20,000 in cost) 
investments (subproject) prioritized by OCBs representing the neediest rural and peri-
urban communities across the country. Based on experience gained in the one-year PCF-
funded CDD pilot project, these subprojects are likely to include activities such as 
irrigation and drainage, road maintenance and improvements, water supply and sewerage, 
electrification, agricultural processing equipment, health, natural resource management, 
productive projects, social infrastructure (such as training centers), etc.  
 
These activities are not expected to produce any large-scale, signficant and/or 
irreversible impacts. Moreover, these activities will be accompanied by an Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) designed to improve environmental management in the areas 
supported by the project. Therefore, the project is expected to result in an environmental 
improvement compared to the existing situation.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Long-term impacts are expected to be overwhelmingly positive, especially with regard to 
social impacts; based upon the pilot experience, the project is likely to result in signficant 
improvements in building social capital and capacity in target communities. Moreover, 
through enviromental management activities and related technical assistance supported 
through the project, it is expected to result in significant environmental improvements.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower prepared an Environmental Assessment (EA), in accordance with OP 4.01. 
The EA evaluated the enviromental impacts associated with the pilot phase, and based on 
this assessment, made recommendations to improve environmental management of 
subproject. These recommendations are included in the project's EMP, which will be 
legally binding and included in the project's operational manual. The EMP includes 
procedures for the screening of all subproject and sites, application of mitigation 
measures to offset identified impacts, regular environmental monitoring (including of 
cumulative impacts), and enviroment-related tecnical assistance.  
 
The project design is considered to adequately reflect the staffing and capacity needs to 
ensure adequate implementation of the EMP.    
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the communities, NGOs, and related government agencies. 
The Borrower has made the draft EA available in country (advertised in local 
newspapers) and through the Bank's Infoshop. The Borrower is also planning a public 
consultation to be held in Port-au-Prince in May 2005, during which stakeholderes will 
be invited to comment on the draft EA. The final EA will include a summary of the 
consultation, including attendees, issues raised, and how the final EA addressed those 
issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/13/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/13/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
 
N/A 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  6
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Garry Charlier 
05/13/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ann Jeannette Glauber 
05/13/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa 
05/13/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Mark E. Cackler 
 
Comments:   
