Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:
35817 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/11/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P092987 
Project Name: Pico Bonito Forest Regeneration and Sustainable Livelihoods Project 
Task Team Leader: Douglas J. Graham 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 1, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: N/A (does not go to 
the Board) 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: BioCarbon Fund 
Carbon Purchase 
Sector: Forestry (100%) 
Theme: Biodiversity (P);Other rural development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
BCF Amount (US$m.): 
2.40 
Japanese PHRD (US$m.):  
0.61 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
15.90
18.91 
B.  Project Objectives  
The objective of the project is to support a private sector-based program of reforestation, 
commercial forestry, conservation, and communicy support in the area of the Honduras’ Pico 
Bonito National Park. The project will generate a global benefit through carbon sequestration, a 
conservation benefit through direct conservation investments and indirect support to Pico Bonito 
National Park, and local economic benefits through support of revenue-generation opportunities 
in local communities. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The Pico Bonito Project is composed of five components:  
 
1) Agroforestry for Small-scale Producers  
The project will support implementation of agroforestry activities for local communities on about 
600 ha of land.  
 
2) Reforestation for Conservation. 
Page  2
About 1000 ha of degraded lands will be reforested for long-term restoration of lowland forest 
areas in and near Pico Bonito National Park. 
 
3) Reforestation for Sustainable Commercial Forestry. 
About 1000 ha of degraded land will be reforested in order to sustain a commercial hardwood 
forestry operation.  
 
4) Forest preservation through land acquisition. 
About 250 ha of forest lands will be acquired as part of the project for long-term conservation. 
 
5) Community-based sustainable management of existing forests. 
About 300 hectares are targetted under this component. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Project activities will take place in or in the buffer zone of Pico Bonito National Park, near 
Ceiba, Honduras. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Although the project proponent is a consortium of private sector/NGOs, the Honduran Ministry 
of Environment (SERNA) is heavily involved in the project. For example, SERNA is the 
recipient of a PHRD preparation grant for the project. SERNA of course is responsible for 
environmental assessment in Honduras. Their capacity is however probably low to medium. The 
NGOs who are the primary proponents of the project (US-based EcoLogic and Honduras-based 
FUPNAPIB) have a long history of environmental and conservation programs and their 
safeguard policy capacity is considered from medium to high. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Douglas J. Graham (LCSEN) 
Social specialist (TBD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Effects of the project on the environment are likely to be overwhelmingly positive. Possible 
minor negative inputs stemming from the community-level activities are possible but unlikely.  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
The project provides support to community forestry activities through the sustainable 
harvesting of timber and non-timber forest resources near Pico Bonito Park. The project will 
provide technical assistance and training to community forestry groups so that they may comply 
with the relevant protected area management norms and  regulations, and provide technical 
assistance and small grants to promote more sustainable forestry techniques. These activities will 
be carefully screened, and are designed to replace less sustainable techniques and forest 
management strategies currently in use in this area of Honduras, and should therefore lead to a 
more sustainable use of forest resources.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
There are some indigenous groups in the general area of the project but depending on the 
final location of project investments, it is likely that these will not be in areas occupied by 
indigenous peoples. Because of the small scale of the project investment ($2.5 million of carbon 
purchase funds from the Bank, not even a loan or grant, properly speaking), we do not intend to 
do an IPDP, instead addressing any issues of indigenous peoples directly in the project design.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/12/2005 (TBD if a QER will be required) 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental, social, and indigenous assessments are being carried out and will be 
completed by October.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Douglas J. Graham 
08/15/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
08/15/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Abel Mejia 
08/15/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
