Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC462 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 2, 2003 
 
I.   
BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Honduras 
Project ID: P086775 
Project Name: HN Rural Infrastructure 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Guillermo Ruan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 15, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: November 11, 2004 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways 
(40%);General water, sanitation and flood 
protection sector (30%);General energy 
sector (30%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Marco Zambrano 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):   
IDA: 60 
Other financing amounts by source: CABEI $15M 
PHRD Cofinancing $3M 
($m) 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will support two of the six pillars of the PRSP:  (i) reducing rural poverty and (ii) 
promoting sustainability.  Consistent with these two pillars, the development objective of the 
project is to provide rural communities with adequate access to improved infrastructure services 
on a sustainable basis.  In the process, the project will enhance the capacity of the institutions, 
both local (
mancomunidades
, municipalities, water boards, etc
) 
and central, to manage rural 
infrastructure. The project development objective will be pursued in a limited number of 
mancomunidades
, chosen according to eligibility criteria that include poverty status, 
development potential, and institutional capacity, with an investment menu limited to roads, 
water/sanitation, and electricity. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
3.1 
Selection of 
Mancomunidades 
and Preparation of Development Plans 
• 
Final selection of 
mancomunidades 
to be targeted during years 2, 3 and 4 of the project, 
based on agreed eligibility criteria (
mancomunidades 
to be targeted during the 1st. year 
will be selected and analyzed as part of project preparation); 
• 
Diagnostic of sustainability and development potential of these 
mancomunidades, 
following a participatory process, and the analysis of infrastructure needs related to social 
and economic development
; 
 
• 
Preparation of integrated development plans for these 
mancomunidades 
including the 
confirmation of investment and TA priorities that could be funded by the project; 
Page  2
 
 
• 
Signing of agreements (
convenios) 
by 
mancomunidades, 
municipalities, government and 
sectoral agencies. 
 
 
3.2 
Infrastructure Service Delivery Component
 
• 
Investment in infrastructure facilities to include: 
 
Rural Roads: 
(i) rehabilitation of the core
1
 rural road network of the 
mancomunidades 
including the connections to the national road network; (ii) spot road improvements to 
permit year-round use of roads within the 
mancomunidades 
but outside their core 
network; and (iii) improvement of trails and tracks and the construction of footbridges to 
improve the accessibility of isolated communities (not served by roads).  
Water and Sanitation:  
rehabilitation, expansion and/or construction of community  
water and sanitation services of the municipalities in the 
mancomunidades.
. 
Electrification: 
(i) implementation of offgrid renewable energy projects, primarily 
hydro-based micro-grids, through the provision of subsidies to private sector, 
cooperatives and  community-based organizations; (ii) the establishment of a program for 
solar home systems, which would increase affordability of this technology for low-
income dispersed households; and (iii) support to implementation of a new grid extension 
program.   
 
 
3.3  
Technical Assistance and Consultants Services Component 
Cross-sectoral: 
Consultants services for: (i) studies to develop and improve sector 
strategies for a decentralized, territorially-based cross-sectoral approach to rural 
infrastructure; (ii) TA to strengthen the 
mancomunidades
, and central and local 
government agencies
 
to manage integrated multi-sectoral rural infrastructure projects -- 
which includes the creation and training of the technical units in the 
mancomunidades
– 
and to enhance project sustainability
; 
and (iii) the design and implementation of 
coordination, monitoring and evaluation mechanisms;  
Sectoral
: Consultants services for: (i) pre-investment activities to include technical, 
environmental, social, economic and financial feasibility studies and final engineering 
designs of sub-projects to be implemented, in each of the sectors, in the second, third and 
fourth year of the project; (ii) the supervision of the works financed under the project; 
(iii)  the establishment of sustainable service delivery models, which could include 
support to the community-based juntas administradoras de agua, as well as small-scale 
private operators, in close collaboration with the local government; (v) the establishment 
of rural electrification schemes based on the provision of efficient, targeted, sustainable, 
output-based subsidies in partnership with communities, providers, users, financial 
institutions (IDB in particular), and both the central and local governments; (vi) TA to 
SERNA for the completion and coordination of Rural Energy Plan, for the development 
of adequate regulatory standards for rural areas, and for the promotion of productive uses 
of electricity; (vii) the formation of community-based micro-enterprises for the provision 
of services and/or maintenance of investments; and (viii) training and business 
development services for new service providers. 
 
 
D.   
Project location (if known) 
To be determined 
 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
                                                
 
1
 The core network is defined as the road network that provides adequate accessibility to municipalities in the 
mancomunidad
. In defining the size of core network, consideration should be given to the financial capacity of the 
municipalities in the 
mancomunidad 
to contribute to the rehabilitation and maintenance of the network 
Page  3
 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
The project team and the Government are assessing the capacity of the three institutions that 
would be involved in order to establish the project implementation arrangements and 
sustainability issues.  The Team expects to have a definition of this issue during the next 
Preparation Mission. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[X] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
 [Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  
What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and 
prepare to mitigate them? 
 
The Government and IDA will agree on methodology to carry out the required environmental 
work. 
 
A.    How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
Community consultations will be carried out during project preparation and resulting 
documentation will be made available at each municipality and other convenient locations. 
 
IV  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW
 
 
 
PCN Review Meeting scheduled for November 3, 2003 
 
V.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
2
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
VI.  APPROVALS
 
 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Guillermo Ruan 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name:  Juan Quintero 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name:  Jose Luis Irigoyen 
Date 
Comments 
                                                
 
2
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
