Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/17/2005 
Report No.:  AC1233
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Honduras 
Project ID:  P088319 
Project Name:  Barrio-Ciudad Project 
Task Team Leader:  Alexandra Ortiz 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 22, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSFU 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Water supply (40%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(30%);Sub-national government administration (30%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (P);Municipal 
governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
15.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.50
1.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project development objective is to improve the quality of life for the urban poor and 
to enable their municipal governments to achieve similar results with other underserved 
communities through capacity building and improved access to credit.  Specific project 
objectives are: i) increasing access to basic and satisfactory quality services for poor 
urban households through targeted investments; ii) strengthening human and social 
capital in poor neighborhoods by increasing community participation in the planning, 
delivery and maintenance of public works and services; iii) improving the capacity of 
municipal governments to plan, finance and deliver urban services and infrastructure; and 
iv) improving the capacity of the central government, municipal governments and 
community organizations for the multisectoral prevention of urban crime and violence.  It 
is important to note that these objectives were discussed and agreed upon during a logical 
framework workshop (February 2004) with the participation of government and donor 
representatives from the urban, infrastructure, social and municipal development sectors.  
These project objectives are consistent with the Bank's Country Assistance Strategy 
(CAS) and support key objectives in the government's PRSP for reducing urban poverty 
and guaranteeing sustainability.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The Honduran Social Investment Fund (FHIS) will coordinate the implementation of the 
proposed project.  The project will work in urban municipalities (defined as those with an 
urban population greater than 15,000 ) and finance the following components:  
 
1) 
Urban services and infrastructure ($5.8 M), to be financed through a loan window 
comprising public (IDA credit) and private capital.  The loan window is intended to jump 
start municipal lending in Honduras by addressing key market issues (see Annex 1). This 
component includes city-level infrastructure projects to promote urban development and 
attract new investment, such as markets, transportation terminals and road infrastructure, 
cemeteries, slaughterhouses and extensions/improvements to the city water and sanitation 
systems (all works would be revenue generating and permit cost recovery).  Also eligible 
will be other infrastructure of municipal interest to help equip cities with basic facilities: 
fire stations, city center improvements and communications services.  
 
2) 
Neighborhood upgrading ($5.8 M), to be financed through a poverty-targeted 
grant window.  Urban neighborhoods will be selected by their respective municipal  
governments on the basis of eligibility criteria for upgrading to improve their quality of 
life and connect them to the formal city.  The investment menu will include typical urban 
upgrading interventions:  land titling, water & sanitation connections, drainage, access 
roads, recreation centers, parks, community facilities, street lighting, child care facilities, 
risk mitigation works, and eligible resettlement costs.  
 
3) 
Technical assistance ($1.1 M) for:  
 
a. 
Neighborhood development activities ? to build the capacity of municipalities and 
neighborhood organizations for participatory planning and execution of urban upgrading;  
 
b.
Municipal government strengthening ? to improve municipal government capacity 
for commercial borrowing and debt management. In coordination with SGJ, which is 
developing individualized technical assistance plans (PATMUNIs) with municipalities in 
the areas of institutional strengthening and financial management, the project will also 
support TA in selected key areas such as: preparing loan financing proposals and 
financial statements, urban planning, water and sanitation service delivery, financial 
management, revenues collection, project management, environmental management, and 
regulation.  
 
c. 
Strengthening the recently created General Directorate for Housing and Urban 
Development (DGVU) in the Secretariat of Transportation, Public Works and Housing 
(SOPTRAVI)- the DGVU is the designated policy-making and regulatory entity for the 
housing and urban development sectors.  However, the DGVU has had little experience 
in project implementation and in urban development, having focused more on the 
housing sector with technical assistance from the IDB.  This component will assist the 
DGVU in building technical capacity to deliver TA to municipalities, formulate policy 
and provide sector oversight and regulation in urban development;  
 
4) 
Urban crime and violence prevention ($1.0 M), which will take advantage of the 
project's social infrastructure investments and two-tier intervention - municipal and 
Page  3
neighborhood - to develop public works and prevention strategies that enhance 
community security & integration.  This component does not intend to solve the country's 
crime and violence problems; rather, it seeks to mainstream prevention into the overall 
project through improved physical living conditions, community participation, and some 
community program support.  This component includes:  
 
a. 
Situational prevention, which introduces measures that reduce opportunities for 
particular crime and violence problems through spatial interventions such as Crime 
Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) and urban renewal;  
 
b.
Capacity building, training and technical assistance in multi-sectoral crime and 
violence prevention, which includes:  community crime mapping and diagnostics, 
preventing juvenile delinquency & domestic violence, community safety, and monitoring 
&
evaluation;  
 
c. 
Complementary investments and activities, including municipal plans for crime 
and violence prevention and grant funds for complementary infrastructure and programs 
for community safety.  
 
5) 
Project administration ($1.3 M), which includes the operation of the PCU in 
FHIS, TA for FHIS and BANHPROVI, project management, monitoring & evaluation, 
and audits.  
 
With the exception of the loan window under Component 1, all technical assistance and 
other project interventions at the local level would be passed on to municipalities as 
grants.  The subproject financing and TA for municipalities will be demand-driven; 
participating municipalities will prepare and submit proposals for the loan- and grant-
financed assistance.  
 
These project components were jointly identified by the Government and IDA in a 
series of project identification and preparation missions.  These project components were 
also discussed with mayors of municipalities that would likely benefit from the project 
and validated in a workshop with government and donor representatives from a variety of 
sectors (i.e. municipal development, infrastructure, and crime and violence prevention).  
Together the project?s components will support an integrated urban development 
intervention in the participating cities as well as improve capacity in central and local 
government for urban development technical assistance, policy and regulation.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will work in urban municipalities (defined as those with an urban population  
 
greater than 15,000).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSHS-DPT) 
Mr Jorge E. Villegas (LCSFU) 
Ms Jenny Elizabeth Suazo Navarro (LCSFU) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
In compliance with OP 4.01, an environmental framework was carried out as part of 
project preparation to identify any potential environmental impacts associated with the 
subprojects and activities to be implemented and develop appropriate mitigation 
measures. The environmental assessment included:  i) a review of the policy, regulatory 
and institutional framework for environmental assessment and management relevant to 
infrastructure and urban development projects; ii) an environmental review of the 
activities to be carried out in each project component; and iii) a rapid environmental 
appraisal of the types of subprojects and works to be financed in the project.   The 
environmental framework concluded that the subprojects and works to be financed will 
generate positive environmental impacts and any negative environmental impacts can be 
identified, planned for and mitigated.  There are no irreversible environmental impacts 
foreseen, so the project is classified as a Category B project.  
 
The project triggers OP8.30 Financial Intermediary Lending. A thorough review of the 
project was conducted by Carlos Cuevas, adviser in the Financial Sector Operations and 
Policy Department (OPD). His conclusion is that the project fully complies with the 
requirements of the operational policy. His recommendations have been incorporated to 
the project design.  
 
Despite the positive social impacts of the project for the population in urban areas, in 
some instances it could require land acquisition and the involuntary displacement of 
population. For this reason, an involuntary resettlement framework has been developed 
according to the Bank's Operational Policy 4.12. All the participant municipalities will be 
informed of the resettlement policy of the Bank, and the local authorities as well as the 
responsible institutions will have to adhere to the involuntary resettlement framework. 
Based on this framework, each municipality will prepare a resettlement plan before 
starting works of any subproject that is determined to cause resettlement.  
 
Page  5
In agreement with the Government of Honduras and QUAT it was decided that the OD 
4.20 Indigenous Peoples is not triggered by the potential presence of indigenous or afro-
descendant groups in the project areas for the following reasons: (a) land inhabited by 
ethnic families living in urban areas does not correspond to ancestral territories, so there 
is no cultural attachment to said lands; (b) ethnic and mestizo families in urban areas 
suffer similar poverty conditions, so although ethnic families may be present in some 
neighborhoods alongside mestizo groups, a special strategy targeted to ethnic families 
may create inequity and social conflict; and, (c) indigenous groups' income in urban areas 
does not originate primarily in subsistence-oriented production, as described in OD 4.20.  
 
Nevertheless, conscientious of the risk of exclusion of ethnic groups, the social strategy 
includes the following mechanisms to ensure that indigenous and afro-descendant groups 
that live in neighborhoods participating in the urban upgrading component of the project 
are included in the decision-making processes and enjoy full recognition of their right to 
benefit:  
 
(a) 
The ethnicity variable will be included in the baseline, databases and monitoring 
and evaluation systems of the project, to ensure inclusion of delegations of those groups 
in the sector assemblies, and the neighborhood general assembly (see assembly 
descriptions below);  
 
(b) 
If the household survey indicates the presence of families speaking only their 
native language (not Spanish), the project must ensure that the information is conveyed to 
them in their native language;  
 
(c) 
All information will be disseminated to mestizo and ethnic organizations alike to 
invite them to take part in the sector assemblies as well as the neighborhood assemblies 
and workshops; and  
 
(d) 
The ex-ante, mid-term, and ex-post evaluations as well as the impact evaluation 
will take into account the potential presence of ethnic groups in the project area.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project's main environmental risk derives from the institutional capacity of the 
subproject executors to incorporate environmental quality aspects into each of the 
subproject's design and implementation.  
 
Resettlement will be minimized.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
FHIS, the project's coordination unit, has nearly 10 years of experience assuring 
environmental quality in small-scale subprojects through its instruments and policies for 
subproject design, implementation and evaluation. However, in the proposed project, 
Page  6
subproject design and implementation will be carried out locally by municipal 
governments and their local contractors; this will require that the project provide TA and 
institutional strengthening for municipal environmental units (UMAs) and technical units 
(UTMs) in the participating municipalities. FHIS has specific project manuals, with best 
practices and recommendations for incorporating environmental risk prevention, 
mitigation and compensation into the project cycle; these will be distributed to 
participating municipalities. FHIS is also authorized, under an agreement with SERNA, 
to issue environmental permits and authorizations for projects it is implementing or 
overseeing; this will facilitate the environmental appraisal process for the proposed 
subprojects. It is expected that the project's area of influence will not extend to any 
protected areas or forests, given the focus on urban areas. However, the poorest urban 
neighborhoods are often located on marginal lands, prone to erosion, flash floods or 
landslides. For this reason, the selection of neighborhoods for urban upgrading 
(subcomponent 1a) will incorporate a vulnerability analysis to avoid investments in high-
risk areas and will also have a resettlement framework in cases where this is necessary 
(though this will be avoided to the extent possible).  
 
Because the subprojects will be implemented locally by municipalities and urban 
neighborhoods, environmental assessment (EA) will be carried out as part of the  
 
preparation process of each subproject. FHIS will review the urban development project 
portfolios of the municipalities to ensure that appropriate EA has been included in  
 
compliance with IDA's environmental safeguard policies. In addition to the EA for each 
subproject, environmental assurance measures will also be incorporated into each of the  
 
project's components.  
 
A
Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared by SOPTRAVI and reviewed by 
FHIS, based on the World Bank Guidelines for Involuntary Resettlement and consistent 
with the provisions in OP4.12. The purpose of the framework is to clarify resettlement 
principles and organizational arrangements in accordance with legal requirements in 
Honduras.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Honduran Social Investment Fund (FHIS) and Secretariat of Public Works,Transportation 
and Housing (SOPTRAVI)  
 
Resettlement and environmental frameworks available at FHIS's and SOPTRAVI's 
offices and web pages.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/25/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/10/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/10/2005 
 
Page  7
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/26/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/22/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Alexandra Ortiz 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Jenny Elizabeth Suazo Navarro 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Jorge E. Villegas 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Jean-Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr John Henry Stein 
 
Comments:   
