Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC804 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 21, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P083780 
Project Name:  Tamil Nadu Urban 
Development Project - III 
Task Team Leader: Abha Joshi Ghani 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  July 15, 2004 
 
Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: SIL 
 
Sector: General Water, Sanitation and Flood Protection Sector (65%); Roads and 
Highways (25%); Sub-national government administration (10%)  
 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Samuel Thangaraj (Sr Social 
Development Specialist), Sanjay Srivastava (Environmental Specialist) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA:  
IBRD: $130 m 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
10 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 5 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The proposed repeater project would build on and consolidate the achievements of TNUDP II, 
continuing to improve urban infrastructure services in Tamil Nadu in a sustainable manner. The 
two main objectives are: 
 
·
to strengthen the empowerment of ULBs by
 
continuing the decentralization 
process through delegation of powers from state level bodies to ULBs; and
 
through continuing and expanding the capacity building programs started under 
the existing project; 
 
·
to mobilize resources for urban infrastructure investments by: 
-
mobilizing private financing for ULB infrastructure investment by linking ULBs to 
the financial markets through the intermediation of TNUDF; 
-
providing incentives for investments in low income and poor neighborhoods 
through capital grants. 
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description  
 
Institutional Development Component 
 
Support for management improvements and institutional changes, including: 
 
-
Expanding e-governance and networking of municipal functions; 
-
Support for improvements in city management and strategic planning by introducing MOUs 
between GoTN, Financial Intermediaries (FIs) and ULBs;  
-
Putting in place a ULB borrowing framework through establishment of a debt management 
cell, including focus on GoTN 
–
ULB devolution;. 
-
Support for redefining the role of para-statals such as Department of Town and City Planning 
(DTCP) and Tamil Nadu Water and Drainage Board (TWAD), restructuring Department of 
Municipal Administration (DMA), defining service providers at ULB level with clear 
objectives and business plans;  enhancing the capacity of  municipal staff; and leveraging 
private sector participation in service delivery; 
-
Strengthening the municipal monitoring framework, increasing transparency and 
accountability; 
-
Technical Assistance to ULBs for project preparation and supervision (Project Development 
and Advisory Facility); 
-
Capacity Building through continued training programs enhancing demand responsive 
managerial and technical capabilities at the ULB level. 
 
Urban Investment Component 
 
The urban investment component will aim at developing  sustainable urban investments in water 
supply, waste water treatment, solid waste management, storm water drains, roads and common 
facilities such as transportation networks, and sanitation facilities, with possible linkages to City 
Corporate Plans developed under TNUDP-II.  This would include investment support to TNUDF 
through a line of credit.  However, besides the line of credit, project design would seek to expand 
TNUDF’s financial role to include credit enhancement support through other instruments—such 
as debt service reserve funds, partial guarantees, first loss guarantees, bond insurance  and 
subordinated debt instruments which would assist the overall objective of attaining more 
commercial involvement in financing decisions. Collaboration and participation with sub-
sovereign funds such as Guarantco and IFC Municipal Fund would also be explored. 
 
D.  Project location  
 
State of Tamil Nadu. 
 
E. 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Page  3
Environment.  
The borrower’s capacity for management of environmental safeguard policies will 
need to be strengthened, particularly in relation to improving  the implementation effectiveness, 
and monitoring & reporting framework. The capacity enhancement will need to be taken up at 
the level of TNUIFSL and ULBs, including the contractors responsible for project management 
and for undertaking civil works. The borrower’s existing institutional capacity to effectively 
follow and implement the ESR guidelines including the procedures and environmental best 
practice, would be assessed as a part of the project preparation for TNUDP III, through an 
independent ‘
Review of adequacy of the existing ESR
’. This review (to be completed before the 
QER) would be the basis for undertaking revision of the existing and currently used ESR.  
 
Social
 :
In the context of TNUDP III, capacity for social safeguard policies needs to be looked at 
three levels – at the level of TNUIFSL that administers TNUDF, Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) 
which will borrow funds from TNUIFSL for their investment programs and  Tamil Nadu Slum 
Clearance Board (TNSCB) which is likely to undertake 
in-situ 
slum upgradation and/or slum 
relocation.  and Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) who will borrow money from TNUIFSL for their 
investment programs.   The institutional capacity at TNUIFSL is weak as it does not have either 
a
full time staff or consultant who is dedicated to address issues related to social safeguard.  
TNUIFSL needs to either have a full time staff or a consultant who will be solely  responsible for 
managing all processes  related to social and environmental safeguard processes of  its 
Environmental and Social Report. There is also a need to create such a capacity within TNSCB 
as it plans to undertake various programs in different Corporations in Tamil Nadu.  As far as 
capacity at ULBs is concerned,  there was a plan to organize series of  training programs for 
ULB  representatives on issues related to safeguards including social safeguards.  Though the 
Bank had cleared the ToR, the training programs did  not take place.   
 
The PMU would submit to the Bank a detailed action plan for institutional arrangements for 
environment and social safeguards within TNUIFSL and TNSCB together with a strategy and 
implementation plan for capacity building at TNSCB and ULBs. The PMU is expected to submit 
this to the Bank prior to appraisal of TNUDP III.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
 
The urban investment component is likely to include investments in water supply, 
waste water treatment, solid waste management, storm water drains, roads and 
common facilities such as transportation network, recreational facilities and 
sanitation facilities.  Many of the above mentioned components are likely to have 
varying levels of environmental impacts (during construction and operation 
stage), depending upon the specific project location, scale and the size of the 
investment components.  The project would require a revised environmental 
framework (using the existing ESR as the basis) outlining procedures and practice 
to mainstream in the project design, the environmental management plan. 
 
Page  4
[] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
)
[Y] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[N] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
)
[] Forests 
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 
–
OPN 11.03
)
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[] A   
[] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [
X
]
TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared.   
 
The PAD-stage ISDS will be prepared simultaneously with the PAD and will be in accordance 
with the revised Appendix 5, 
“Social Impact and Entitlement Framework” to Environmental and 
Social Report (ESR) of TNUIFSL which would involve  updating  it  to meet the requirements of 
OP/BP 4.12. Once the Bank has reviewed and cleared it Appendix 5,  TNUIFSL will use it to 
revise   its ESR including the  Environmental and Social Information Package   for TNUIFS 
loans,  and also  document #9 on “social entitlement framework” and document #10 on “social 
management plan.  The outline for the revision had already been discussed and agreed between 
GoTN/TNUIFSL and the Bank during the preparatory mission.  
 
TNSCB will undertake Social Assessments, which, among others, would include stakeholders 
analysis and identification of potential project impacts, both positive and adverse, in selected 
Corporations in order to help TNSCB to  prepare its plan for slum development.  Since  Social 
Assessments  are  required for  review and clearance of slum development plans by the Bank, the 
clearance of ToR  for  Social Assessment  and commitment to undertake them within a specific 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
time-frame agreed between the TNSCB and the Bank is a requirement for project appraisal. All 
required social assessments will be completed before the Bank
’s approval of any plans by 
TNSCB.    
 
The environmental safeguard requirements in the project would be addressed by strengthening 
the existing ESR that provides an environmental framework to mainstream environmental best 
practices in the design and implementation stage of the investment component. The revision of 
existing ESR by the borrower will include detailed procedures to incorporate operational policies 
on cultural properties, pest management and natural habitats; strengthening the framework for 
monitoring and reporting progress of EMP implementation; and strengthening institutional and 
implementation arrangement for improving EMP effectiveness including contractual 
requirements between the ULBs and the civil contractors. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.   
 
The specific time frame for launching and completing safeguard related studies would be stated 
in the PAD-stage ISDS
.
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Abha Joshi Ghani  
Date 
05/20/2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
Date 
05/24/2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
 
Date 
Comments 
