Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/04/2005 
Report No.:  AC1139
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  India 
Project ID:  P071160 
Project Name:  Karnataka Health Systems 
Task Team Leader:  Paolo Belli 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 23, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: August 20, 2005 
Managing Unit:  SASHD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Health (100%) 
Theme:  Health system performance (P);Child health (S);Other communicable diseases 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
131.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
14.00
14.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The program aims to increase utilization of adequate quality priority curative and public 
health services, particularly in underserved areas and amongst the vulnerable groups, to 
accelerate achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs).  
 
Priority services are broadly those which are relevant to producing improvements in the 
health outcomes prioritized in the Millennium Development Goals. They include 
immunization, safe-deliveries, prevention and treatment of diarrhea, Acute Respiratory 
Infections (ARIs) and other communicable diseases. Key indicators of improvement 
would include:  
 
o
Increased utilization of priority services, particularly in rural areas, in the poorer 
districts and for vulnerable groups.  
 
o
Improved maternal and child health, decreased prevalence and incidence of 
communicable diseases.  
 
o
Increased and more predictable real government spending on priority services.  
 
To evaluate the impact of the program in reducing existing inequalities in utilization of 
services across different parts of the state and socio-economic groups by differentially 
improving the situation for those who currently underserved, utilization indicators will be 
Page  2
collected and analyzed by geographical area and by vulnerability (e.g., gender, age, 
Below Poverty Line (BPL)/non BPL, assets, education, caste, etc.).  
 
The Karnataka Health System Development and Reform Project (KHSDRP) aims to 
support the Government of Karnataka (GoK) in achieving its health specific Tenth Plan 
goals and MDGs. The proposed Project fully endorses the KSIHP 2004 policy goals of 
improving priority health outcomes especially among the poor, disadvantaged, and 
vulnerable groups.  
 
The Project is consistent with the strategic principles and the priorities identified by the 
Country Assistance Strategy (CAS), 2004: (i) focus on outcomes as a means to improve 
governance and service delivery; (ii) selective in support of activities that have the 
greatest impact on the poor; and (iii) strengthened role of the Bank as knowledge 
provider and generator.   
 
3. Project Description 
The KHSDRP will consist of two main components and a third program management 
component, with a total estimated cost of approximately US$142.75 million (GoK?s 
contribution equal to US$15.60 million, and World Bank contribution equal to 
US$127.15) over a period of five years.  
 
Component 1 includes an Organization Development Plan, meant to strengthen the 
Department of Health and Family Welfare?s (DoHFW) stewardship and results-based 
management and a second subcomponent with most of the programs and activities that 
the DOHFW implements in the delivery of primary and secondary care services.  
 
Components 2 consists of certain key innovations along the following different 
dimensions of service delivery and health financing:   
 
o
Infrastructure development and maintenance;  
 
o
Delivery of priority curative (ambulatory care) services,  
 
o
Delivery of public health services;  
 
o
Accessibility of hospital inpatient services.  
 
Component 3 will include all program management and monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) activities.  
 
Component 1: Strengthening existing government health programs towards the 
achievement of more effective and equitable delivery of services  
 
Subcomponent 1a: Organizational Development  
 
The organizational development (OD) plan is the process envisaged to strengthen the 
stewardship role of government in the health sector and to move the senior officers in the 
department towards a results-based approach. OD means not only the acquisition of new 
skills and knowledge, which requires external technical assistance and internal capacity 
building activities, but also the adoption of ?new ways of doing things? and learning by 
doing. An organization is not developed simply by staff being sent on training programs 
and new practices being promulgated. Achieving a change of culture (of doing things 
Page  3
differently), can only be accomplished by ?winning hearts and minds? of key officials 
who can lead all other staff by setting examples.  
 
The change in culture in the DoHFW can only be obtained after a long period of 
sustained effort throughout and beyond the program? and this is one of the reasons for 
proposing a gradual introduction of Service Improvement Plans (SIPs), described below. 
It also requires leadership qualities and perseverance on the part of key officials in the 
state, district and taluka levels, who need to be supported in the process. The transition is 
heavily dependent on accelerating learning of these key officials so that they develop new 
ways of working.  
 
In order to move towards a results-based approach, a process of service improvement 
planning and implementation will be introduced. Under this process, District Health 
Officers (DHOs)  and their staff, in consultation with local governments, will articulate 
SIPs which will propose specific investment priorities in each district, and detail how 
these will result in actual increases in services, as measured by eight key output 
indicators that form the Service Level Index.  
 
These investments will initially be supported by the Service Improvement Challenge 
Fund (see description of Component 2). SIPs will also need to contain confirmation that 
human resources in the government facilities are available to achieve the agreed level of 
service improvements. The DHOs would need to detail the staffing available to achieve 
the service improvements in the plan. It would be essential that the estimates are realistic, 
for instance, doctors are actually available at all times.  
 
If there are issues preventing the achievement of service improvements, such as high 
rates of absenteeism, which the DHO feels she/he cannot change, these need to be openly 
specified in the SIPs, and discussed and resolved at the appropriate level.  
 
The organization development plan will also accompany and facilitate a process of 
internal reorganization in the DoHFW:  
 
(a) A Health Planning Unit (HPU) will be established with local branches in each 
district. At the state level, the planning unit will guide and assist districts in the process of 
formulating and implementing the SIPs .  It will also inform policy makers on strategic 
issues in the health sector, either internally or through local consultants, and organizing 
workshops and seminars; at the district and taluka levels the HPU will support the DHOs 
in finalizing the SIPs, monitoring their execution, and undertake other operational and 
policy related tasks. The KHSDRP Program Management Unit (PMU) at state level and 
in each district will be the first nucleus of the HPUs.  
 
(b) The institutional capacity of the department to organize public health services will 
be strengthened, on the basis of the proposals originally put forth by the Task Force on 
health.  
 
(c) Various existing institutes and centres, some created by previous World Bank 
projects (i.e., Indian Population Center and State Institute of H&FW) will be consolidated 
in two separate institutions, with clear mandates: (i) the Center for Health Policy and 
Development (CHPD), to act both as an external think-thank and a monitoring unit for 
department programs, and (ii) the State HRD Institute, which will be responsible for 
training activities at state and district level.  
 
Moreover, this component will progressively develop a new, evidence-based approach 
to planning, management and evaluation of primary and secondary health service 
delivery. To achieve this goal, the program will implement the Health Management 
Page  4
Information System (HMIS) in a phased manner. Establishing the HMIS will not only 
provide management with good quality information on which to base their decisions, but 
it will also provide doctors with an incentive to improve their performance now that it 
will be accurately measured for the first time.  
 
Finally, this OD process will progressively create in the government the ability to 
exercise its stewardship role over the whole sector, for ensuring both the public and 
private health systems operate and interact in such a way that all parts of society, 
particularly the most vulnerable parts of society, have access to affordable good-quality 
priority services. To achieve this goal, the program envisages a series of capacity 
building activities to enhance the ability of the government and the private sector to 
design and enforce certification-accreditation processes for health facilities, and to work 
under service agreements.  
 
Subcomponent 1b: Improving primary and secondary care services? effectiveness  
 
This subcomponent uses the mechanism of programmatic support to the government 
programs at the primary and secondary care level. The objectives of this subcomponent 
are to: (i) provide incentives to the GoK to comply with the planned increased in Health 
and Family Welfare expenditure described in the Medium Term Fiscal Plan 2004-05 
2007-08; (ii) strengthen the peripheral health services ; (iii) contribute to the ongoing 
process of organizational reform and development in the DoHFW; and (iv) most 
importantly, contribute to the achievement of the priority human development targets set 
by the GoK in the Karnataka State Integrated Health Policy (KSIHP) 2004 and in the 
Vision 2020 documents.  
 
To achieve objective (i) above only increases in expenditure beyond 5 percent per 
annum will be matched by the World Bank. To achieve objectives (ii, iii and iv), after the 
first year, disbursements will be based on fulfillment of agreed milestones. These 
identify: (a) key diagnostic tools to enhance the department?s ability to monitor its own 
performance, (b) key benchmarks in the reform process, and (c) some priority ?tracer? 
output indicators that would signal enhanced performance of the system towards the 
achievement of the program development objectives.  
 
The programmatic funding will be done in the following sequence: (i) decision on the 
total amount of this subcomponent; (ii) identification of activities eligible for financing; 
(iii) statement of financing mechanism or formula, linked to commitment of the 
government to increase expenditure on the eligible activities; and (iv) reporting of 
expenditure and Bank funding of the same as per the formula.  
 
In synthesis, a broad list of budget heads has been identified within the DOHFW budget 
,
and Bank support will be linked to increased expenditure on those items over the next 
five years. Bank support will be given on an additional basis and following a matching 
criterion. The eligibility threshold is based on the actual expenditure on those priority 
items in the preceding fiscal year, increased by 5 percent per year to adjust for inflation. 
Any actual expenditure over and above the eligibility threshold will be matched by the 
Bank annually, provided that the milestones agreed are achieved.  
 
Component 2: Innovations in service delivery and health financing  
 
Subcomponent 2a: Innovations in service delivery linked to need and performance  
Page  5
The program will invest in primary care and in public health activities  using an 
innovative approach.  Two different funds will be created: (i) Service Improvement 
Challenge Fund; and (ii) Public Health Competitive Fund.  
 
Creation and operation of a Service Improvement Challenge Fund (SICF). This fund 
will support construction, renovation and upgrading of infrastructure, as well as 
innovative schemes in the delivery of primary and secondary care services. Investments 
will be staggered in three phases and after the first phase, further investments in any 
district will depend on the development of SIPs, and success in delivering primary care 
service improvements planned for the first phase of investments.  
 
Approval of the investments proposed will be based on objective criteria that give 
priority to stepping up existing or innovative services which produce an impact on the 
MDGs in the more backward taluks . The innovative service delivery strategies would 
include:  
 
(i) 
Expansion, or rationalization and rehabilitation of existing infrastructure linked to 
need and improved performance;  
 
(ii) 
Expansion of Mobile Clinic Units for the underserved Scheduled Cases and 
Scheduled Tribe (SC/ST) populations living in remote areas. These units can also be 
outsourced to NGOs meeting qualifying criteria;  
 
(iii) 
Training and posting of grass-root nurses to serve tribal or other underserved 
populations (tribal Auxiliary Nurse Midwives (ANMs) schemes and female health 
volunteers? schemes).  
 
(iv) 
Strengthening Public Private Partnerships (PPP). The PPP options being 
considered are the following:  
 
i. 
Contracting out of primary ambulatory care services to individual providers or 
private organizations under common Service Agreements on content, coverage and 
quality of the care delivered .  
 
ii. 
Private sector engagement in management of service and support functions in 
public health facilities (contracting in).  
 
iii. 
Provision of incentives to physicians and paramedics working for the government, 
linked to their performance in improving service coverage in remote areas.  
 
Creation and Operation of a Public Health Competitive Fund (PHCF). The PHCF will 
support public health activities aimed at producing community-wide reductions in disease 
incidences. The PHCF is based on the premise that efforts at tackling community-based 
health issues ? such as disease prevention or changing social behavior ? are more likely to 
be effective if they are driven by community initiatives. At the same time, support for 
community initiatives must be based on actual results achieved, particularly in the 
medium to long term. Therefore, the purpose of the PHCF is to promote community 
involvement in tackling public health problems and by providing continued support to 
initiatives that deliver measurable results. It is proposed that the PHCF operate on the 
following principles:  
 
(i) 
This Fund will support any health related activity other than the delivery of 
curative services that seeks to improve the health status of communities, giving priority to 
poor and underserved areas. Therefore, a range of activities (e.g., communication for 
behavior change, sanitation, hygiene improvement, and others) for a variety of diseases 
(e.g., Maternal Child Health (MCH), prevention of communicable and non-
communicable diseases) may be supported. The PHCF will also support activities aimed 
Page  6
at enhancing information concerning accessibility, quality and costs of public health and 
primary health care services.  
 
(ii) 
Initial support to any proposed activity will be provided on the basis of the 
assessment of the likely impact of that activity against a set of objective criteria. 
Subsequent support will depend on results achieved during an agreed time period.  
 
(iii) 
Support will be available to any government, quasi-government, or private 
organization that meets the qualifying criteria.  
 
(iv) 
In order to reduce the likelihood of funds being ?scattered? across too wide a 
range of issues, each year the PHCF Management Committee will make available a list of 
public health priorities for Karnataka with district variations wherever they exist  
 
The PHCF Management Committee will include representatives from various 
organizations, including DOHFW, Panchayat Raj Institutions (PRIs), NGOs and private 
sector with experience in provision of public health services to ensure community 
involvement in the operation of the PHCF.  
 
Subcomponent 2b: Innovations in health financing  
 
Innovations in health financing will contribute to reduce the financial barrier to 
accessing health services, thus leading, in the long-run, to an increase in utilization of 
priority hospital services for poor (BPL) families: Two major experiments are planned 
under this subcomponent:  
 
(i) 
In collaboration with the Reproductive and Child Health (RCH) II program, 
design and implementation of a voucher scheme, to facilitate access to safe delivery 
services; and  
 
(ii) 
Design and implementation of a health insurance experiment. The Bank will 
piggy-back on the Universal Health Insurance Scheme (UHIS) proposed by the 
Government of India (GoI).  Assistance from OED has been offered in planning and 
impact-assessment of this subcomponent, which would include two major activities: (a) 
technical assistance for improving the design, monitor and evaluation of the UHIS to 
ensure its operational efficiency and financial soundness in the initial years of its 
existence, and (b) if the preparation phase is carried out successfully, financial support 
for providing additional premium subsidies and additional benefits to BPL families. The 
plan would entail co-funding premiums together with the GoI and the GoK with a target 
of 1 million BPL population covering four to five selected districts with geographical and 
communal congruity.  
 
Health insurance is one approach of providing protection to poor households against 
potentially catastrophic health risks. In recent years there has been much interest in 
Karnataka to develop health insurance schemes that could reach the poor .  However, 
most of these health insurance efforts have faced both design and implementation 
difficulties.  There are still many unaddressed questions concerning the design of a viable 
scheme, both financially as well as managerially, and therefore the first year of the 
Page  7
program will be dedicated to addressing various technical issues. Particular attention will 
be devoted to analyzing the financial feasibility of the UHIS, managerial and institutional 
constraints, and to designing different distribution channels which could guarantee 
greater coverage of rural populations, through involvement of community based groups, 
such as Self Help Groups (SHGs).  
 
This program component is explicitly experimental in nature. It is meant to be a ?pilot?, 
but if it is to serve the purpose of a pilot, then reliable lessons must be gleaned from it. 
This, in turn, means that rigorous evaluation of impact on health utilization indicators and 
poverty needs to be considered from the beginning in the design of the scheme.  
 
Component 3: Program Management (including Monitoring and Evaluation)  
 
All project management and M&E activities for the program as a whole and for each of 
the subcomponents described above will be included in this separate component. These 
activities will require staffing of the Program Management Unit at the State level and of 
the Project Support Units at the District level, the recruitment of the external consultants 
for the Strategic Planning Unit, and the creation and operation of an Engineering cell 
which will supervise execution of all capital investment by the DoHFW.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
This project is located in Karnataka, a southern state of India, and will be implemented 
across the state. The exact locations of the physical investments will be decided during 
the course of project implementation. The state has two physical characteristics that have 
an environmental relevance. First, certain regions have high forest area coverage like 
Uttara Kannada and parts of Shimoga. Primary health care facilities in these regions need 
to have the capacity to address special diseases such as the Kyasanur Forest Disease. 
Second, certain regions have black cotton soil, which is characterized by low infiltration. 
In these regions, the primary health care facilities will need to have appropriate waste 
water treatment taking the soil characteristics into account.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASES) 
Ms Ruma Tavorath (SASES) 
Mr Sankaran Vaideeswaran (SASES) 
 
Page  8
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental  
 
As the project supports multiple small investments/sub-projects to be implemented in 
each District, there will be environmental impacts that are to be addressed. Therefore, 
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered. However, given the type of 
activities, these impacts are minor, site-specific and reversible. There will be no large 
scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. An Environmental Assessment (EA) was 
carried out and particular environmental issues were identified. These include: (i) 
deficient provisions and practices in relation to bio-medical waste management; (ii) poor 
sanitation facilities; (iii) lack of adequate water supply; (iv) poor construction quality of 
building facilities and lack of adequate operation & maintenance; (v) improper placement 
of primary health care centers/sub-centers; and (vi) lack of personnel awareness on basic 
good environmental practices. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared 
to identify appropriate management measures, which will be followed during project 
implementation.  
 
The EA also revealed that Dichloro-diphenyl-trichloroethane (DDT) supplied solely for 
malaria control was being used in the primary health care centers for other purposes that 
are officially banned. Therefore, OP 4.09 Pest Management is triggered. Under this 
project, the ban in the use of DDT for other purposes will be strictly enforced through the 
EMP, which includes a specific measure in this regard.  
 
Social  
 
The key social safeguard issue raised by the project, if it is to meet its development 
objective, concerns the need to reach underserved groups such as tribal people and 
Scheduled Castes.  These groups account for about 20 percent of the population of 
Karnataka, and they are spread throughout the state.  In addition to the scale and spread, 
there are differences between districts, in part caused by the concentration of a few 
remote tribal areas and in part by the relative neglect of poor, low-productivity districts in 
Page  9
Northern Karnataka, where there is also a higher concentration of poor minorities.  The 
project aims to and must reach all these neglected groups in order to improve the state?s 
health indicators.  
 
Equity in access to project benefits is an important issue for the project.  Its design aims 
to ensure this by: (a) focusing the development objectives on the poor and vulnerable: (b) 
creating a funding incentive for the GOK to improve services where they are weakest 
(under Component I); and for (c) lower level units (districts/taluks/NGO areas/villages) 
to address pressing local issues (which, almost inevitably, would be the health problems 
affecting the poorest) through Infrastructure Challenge Fund and Competitive Public 
Health Fund.  
 
There is no risk of adverse social impacts due to the project.  A possibility of widening 
differentials arises if the project fails to do what it proposes.  The main social risk to the 
project would come from a usurping of project benefits by the better-off. However, this 
issue would be monitored through benefit incidence surveys which establish ?who gets 
what? and through community-based studies which would examine whether the poor and 
vulnerable are being left out in any way.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Environmental. The proposed activities are expected to provide positive long-term 
impacts as they would improve environmental management, particularly bio-medical 
waste management, in primary health care.  
 
Social.  The potential long-term impact would be a positive one on the underserved 
groups such as tribal people and Scheduled Castes, whom the project aims to reach.  It is 
expected that they would be better served by health care by the end of the project as well 
as having participated in its planning implementation and monitoring.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Environmental. As a part of the EA, the analysis of alternatives was undertaken with 
reference to practices that should be adopted in the primary health care centers/sub-
centers that are to be supported under the project. The analysis revealed that septic tank 
method for disposing of the placenta, the main bio-medical waste, is more appropriate 
and the use of glass syringes is preferable to disposable or auto-destructive syringes.  
 
Social.  The project encompasses several ?alternatives? because it is a blend of measures 
to improve the health of Karnataka?s population generally, and specific ones focused on 
the vulnerable groups.  For example, the general measures include support of increased 
expenditure on essential items in primary and secondary health care, and organizational 
development; infrastructure and public health funds, while the specific measures to 
increase vulnerable communities? access to good quality ambulatory care services 
include mobile health units and  recruitment and training of special Tribal ANMs   
 
Page  10
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment  
 
Environmental Assessment (EA):  An EA was carried out as a part of project 
preparation. This included a review of the national/state legislative requirements, a 
review of the Bank?s policy requirements, an overall baseline analysis with a focus on 
the deficiencies on the present status of the primary health care services and its 
environmental implications, an assessment of the impacts of the activities proposed under 
the project, an analysis of alternative options in relation to particular services and 
public/stakeholder consultations. To address the likely environmental issues and 
concerns, an EMP was prepared.  This plan included environmental management 
measures (including guidelines for design, construction and operation of primary health 
care facilities, organizational arrangements to implement the plan, training/capacity-
building requirements, communication arrangements, consultative processes/procedures, 
monitoring arrangements and special studies to be done during the project 
implementation.  
 
Pest Management: The EA revealed that selected primary health care facilities were 
misusing DDT that was issued for malaria control.  The enforcement of the ban in the use 
of DDT for all other applications will be strictly followed under this project. This will be 
included in the guidelines and periodic monitoring will focus on this aspect to ensure that 
it is strictly followed.  
 
Borrower capacity: Under this project, there will be a full-time Environmental Officer at 
the state level. This Environmental Officer will provide technical and managerial support 
in relation to environmental management, for the project as a whole. The Environmental 
Officer will be supported by district-level Assistant Engineers, who will hold a part-time 
responsibility to manage environmental issues, at their respective District Health Offices. 
In every Primary Health Centre (PHC) or sub-centre, there will be an Environmental 
Officer in charge, who will be assigned a part-time responsibility, to ensure that day-to-
day coordination pertaining to the EMP implementation is done.  
 
Social  
 
A
Social Assessment (SA) was carried out to develop a strategy and action plan to 
improve health outcomes among the poor and disadvantaged, especially Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (STs).  The assessment examined the health-seeking 
behaviors of these socio-economically vulnerable groups, their utilization of health 
services, and perceptions of the formal/informal and public/private health sectors.  These 
various findings suggested that the state needed to address the problems through a mix of 
strategies including: (a) public health measures; (b) outreach to inaccessible areas 
(particularly tribal areas) and households (usually the poorest or socially disadvantaged 
such as Scheduled Castes); (c) improvements at health facilities (including infrastructure, 
equipment, drugs, and provider capabilities); and (d) involvement of private practitioners, 
and health education.  
Page  11
The project?s focus on vulnerable communities is partly the result of the findings of the 
SA and other studies done during project preparation which highlighted the wide 
differentials in health and access to health care in Karnataka.  Accordingly a Vulnerable 
Communities Health Plan (VCHP) has been prepared including implementation and 
monitoring arrangements and a strategy for continued participation.  
 
The GOK has the commitment and adequate capacity to implement the VCHP.  The 
elected local bodies (panchayats) at village and district levels will also have a role in 
monitoring the VCHP?.  Similarly the recruitment and functioning of the tribal ANMs 
will be monitored at district and state levels.  The implementation of the VCHP will be 
monitored by the GOK through specific designated officers at the state and district levels.  
Adequate resources are available in the project for these activities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Environment  
 
As a part of the EA, public/stakeholder consultations were carried out. During the EA, a 
total of 32 centers were visited in the four administrative boundaries of Karnataka ? 
Gulbarga, Belgaum, Bangalore and Mysore ? and consultations were conducted during 
these visits. In addition, stakeholder consultations were done with selected civil society 
organizations in the state?s capital city, Bangalore. To carry forward these consultations 
during the project implementation, an explicit consultation plan has been included in the 
EMP.  
 
Once the environmental safeguard reports were completed, these were disclosed. The 
draft final executive summary, EA and EMP reports were made available in the KSHDP 
office in Bangalore. The executive summary has been translated in the local language, 
Kannada, and disclosed to all District Health Offices in the various districts. All these 
reports will also be disclosed at the Bank?s Info Shop in New Delhi and Washington 
D.C.  
 
Social  
 
The state of Karnataka has a good track record of obtaining public perceptions and of 
creating a public voice in governance. Potential project beneficiaries (the poor, women, 
adolescents, tribal people, etc.) have participated in project preparation through the social 
assessment and other community-based studies.  Different cadres of health staff and 
officials, NGOs and other private sector representatives have also been involved in the 
SA, studies and various workshops and have given their frank views. It is expected that 
efforts to obtain feedback would continue throughout the project through community-
based studies and surveys, participatory workshops, and field reviews, etc.  Primary 
stakeholders would be involved in project implementation through the oversight function 
exercised by the three-tiered panchayat system, and more directly by being able to make 
proposals to the public health fund to meet their needs.  The project would be 
implemented by a wide range of secondary stakeholders who would also have the 
Page  12
opportunity to influence it, for example, by participating in the preparation of the district 
service improvement plans.  The VCHP which focuses on vulnerable communities has 
been disclosed on the Government of Karnataka website.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/27/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/27/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/27/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/22/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/22/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/22/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/10/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/10/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
N/A 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
Yes 
Page  13
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Paolo Belli 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Ruma Tavorath 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Meera Chatterjee 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jeffrey S. Racki 
03/21/2005 
Comments:   
