Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1368 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 21, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P093720 
Project Name: Himachal Pradesh Mid-
Himalayan Watershed Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Daniel M. Sellen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 12, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 12, 
2006 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific 
Investment Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (25%); General public 
administration sector (25%); Forestry (25%); 
Sub-national government administration (25%) 
Theme: Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Other rural 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Tapas Paul, Mridula Singh 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IDA: 30; IBRD: 30 
Other financing amounts by source: Government, beneficiaries 
TBD ($m) 
B.  Project Objectives
 
The development objective of the Project is 
to improve the productive potential of natural 
resources and increase incomes of the rural households in selected watersheds in Himachal 
Pradesh using socially inclusive, institutionally and environmentally sustainable approaches. 
A
secondary objective is to support policy and institutional development in HP to harmonize 
watershed development projects and programs across the state in accordance with best practices.  
 
C.  Project Description 
 
This Project is a follow-on from the Integrated Watershed Development Project (IWDP) -- a 
five-state project that includes HP, Uttaranchal, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, and Haryana. IWDP 
closes in September 2005. It will resemble closely the new Uttaranchal Decentralized Watershed 
Project (also an IWDP spin-off). 
 
As a repeater project, the Himachal Project will resemble closely the objectives and components 
of IWDP, i.e. a focus on protection of watersheds, along with community-level capacity-building 
and promotion of livelihoods. However, there are two important changes. The first involves 
shifting from the Shivalik region (foothills of the Himalayas) to higher altitudes (the mid- and 
high-hills region). The second innovation will support the State
’s decentralization process by 
Page  2
working with and through local governments (Panchayati Raj Institutions, PRIs) rather than the 
village development committees which were created to implement IWDP. 
 
Project components are as follows: 
 
a. Institutional 
Strengthening:
This component would support capacity-building at several 
levels, including communities, PRIs, and state-level agencies. The principal activity at the local 
level would be social mobilization, i.e. training for participatory watershed planning at the 
village level along with establishment and training of watershed development committees. The 
latter would constitute sub-committees of the Gram Panchayats (GPs) and would require training 
of elected officials in administrative functions and sensitization to issues of watershed 
development and natural resource management.   
 
b. 
Watershed Development and Management:
This component would finance watershed 
treatments (sub-projects) as identified and prioritized through participatory appraisal techniques 
arising from the first component. Communities (or constituent resource user groups) would be 
required to contribute to the costs of each sub-project and be responsible to operate and maintain 
the investments. The main thrust of this component will not only be on resource protection and 
utilization but on resource regeneration. Agricultural and livestock activities, as well as a small 
number of rural infrastructure activities, will also be included. The following sub-components 
are proposed: 
 
·
Non-arable land development program:
 This includes catchment treatment (soil and 
water conservation works); biological works such as plantations; and water harvesting 
works. 
·
Arable land development program:
 including agricultural land development, crop 
demonstrations, integrated pest management, and organic farming. 
·
Fodder and livestock development program: 
covering fodder augmentation, 
development and conservation programs; livestock management improvement; genetic 
upgrading; institutional and veterinary treatment, primarily through para-vets. 
·
Rural infrastructure development program: 
covering short lengths of rural roads, 
footpaths, and foot bridges, as well as potable water supply. 
 
c. Enhancing 
Livelihood 
Opportunities:
This component would finance investment and 
training aimed at making farming systems more lucrative and supporting income-generating 
activities, primarily related to increased value-added in natural resource use from forested and 
cultivated lands. The following sub-components are proposed: 
 
·
Agricultural marketing and processing: 
would co-finance sub-projects aimed at 
introducing cost-effective pre- and post-harvest technologies and supply-chain 
development for promising farm commodities (crops, livestock) as well as non-timber 
forest products such as medicinal plants. 
·
Income-generation for vulnerable groups: 
would finance micro-enterprises for 
particular groups (women, landless, and nomadic tribal groups) who would normally not 
benefit from (land-based) watershed development activities. Tribal action plans would 
assist nomads in defining special development activities. 
Page  3
d. Project 
Coordination:
This component will finance staff training, consultancies, vehicles, 
and office infrastructure. It will establish a management information system with GIS capacity. 
The PCU will cover oversight over implementation of the environmental and social management 
framework. This component would also finance a communications strategy to increase 
awareness of the goals, modalities, and accomplishments of the project.  
 
D.  Project location 
 
Unlike IWDP, which focused on the Shivalik area (Himalayan foothills), the proposed project 
will concentrate on higher elevations. The so-called Mid-Himalayas covers about one third of the 
State and include the districts of Chamba, Kangra, Hamirpur, Mandi, Bilaspur, Solan, and 
Shimla, ranging from 800 to 16,000 masl. These areas form the catchment of major rivers of 
north India, namely the Rabai, Beas, and Satluj. Biodiversity is high with many species on the 
verge of extinction. Due to increasing population, there is a heavy pressure on natural resources. 
Village common lands and forests are badly degraded due to the high incidence of grazing, 
demand for fuel wood and timber, and soil erosion. Extraction of medicinal plans from forests is 
also an important source of income to the communities living near the forests. Over half of the 
States agricultural land is in this area. 
 
The Project team is currently in the process of identifying the micro-watersheds that will be the 
focus of this Project. This will be done using GIS mapping. Selection criteria will be weighted on 
degradation of the area (50%); poverty indicators (30%); and access to public and economic 
services (20%). 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The staff members of the HP project coordination unit are highly experienced with Bank 
projects, and most are expected to be retained for the new project. The vast majority of micro-
project investments in IWDP were clearly environmentally-friendly (e.g. soil and water 
conservation, IPM) and many were targeted specifically at vulnerable groups (e.g. women and 
tribals). However, the application of safeguards in IWDP was somewhat haphazard. The 
proposed ESMF is expected to make safeguard application more systematic. The Project 
identification mission also discussed the need to establish an Environment/Social unit in the 
Head Office, and this was tentatively agreed. 
 
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The proposed project will require an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework to ensure compliance with Bank safeguards. 
[Y] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
The Mid-Himalayas area proposed as project sites will likely include 
communities living near protected areas. 
[Y] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
Page  4
The project will directly or indirectly promote more intensive and diversified 
agriculture, which will require a Pest Management Plan. As in IWDP, integrated 
pest management, organic farming and natural pesticides will be promoted. 
[N] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
Project investments are not expected to displace people or their livelihoods, and 
locations of investments are to be decided by communities themselves. 
[Y] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
The project area includes nomadic groups such as the Gaddis and Gujjars, and 
tribal action plans will be required to ensure that these groups are able to benefit 
from the proposed Project. A Tribal and Transhumant Strategy will be developed 
as part of project preparation. 
[Y] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
Over 70 percent of the State is forested, and much of the proposed project area 
will involve communities that rely on forests. 
[N] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
No high dams are foreseen. 
[N] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
No Project interventions are foreseen that will affect cultural property. 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
There are no disputed areas involved in the Project. 
[N] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
There are no international waterways involved in the Project. 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
The rating 
of
“B” was used for IWDP (and also for the similar Uttaranchal Decentralized 
Watershed Development Project). It seems appropriate given the need for vigilance on the 
safeguards mentioned above, while recognizing that most interventions (in the IWDP 
experience) were highly beneficial to the environment. 
 
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
As a “repeater” project, no QER is required. However, the Special Review Panel which 
considered the repeater status intends to reconvene prior to appraisal to review safeguard 
issues as well as implementation arrangements for the project as a whole. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
Likely date is June, 2005 (after the ESMF is largely complete). 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The Terms of Reference for the ESMF has been completed with SASES approval, and 
Expression of Interest advertised in media on March 9, 2005. 
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Daniel M. Sellen 
March 23, 2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Eric Brusberg 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Adolfo Brizzi 
Date 
Comments 
