Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC2011 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/07/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P096018 
Project Name: Assam State Roads Project 
Task Team Leader: Ashok Kumar 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Public expenditure, 
financial management and procurement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project development objective is to provide road users in Assam with good quality 
and better managed state highways and major district roads. Progress will be monitored through 
the following outcome indicators: (i) road condition, (ii) traffic speed, (iii) level of service, (iv) 
performance of road maintenance, and (v) business procedures of the PWD (using a multi 
criteria rating approach). Road User’s Opinion Surveys will be carried out at the project start, 
mid-term, and completion to measure perception of road users.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Overall Approach: An “Asset Management System” (AMS) would be developed for theprimary 
core network consisting of SH and important MDR along with a computerized database to 
include simple road inventory and condition as well as traffic data*. The system will (i) identify 
the needs for road widening, pavement strengthening, bridges, and maintenance; (ii) prioritize 
these needs using a prioritization criteria, based on economic and other factors; and (iii) prepare 
a
multi year rolling program for network improvement and an Annual Maintenance Plan 
(AMP)** each year containing the identified needs. The available funds will be consolidated to 
implement these plans. The Bank would fund more than 75% of the network improvement 
Page  2
programs for the initial 2 -3 years. The GOA will fund the AMPs through its maintenance funds 
on an annual basis. The proposed project will fund the following two components:  
 
•
Component 1: Road Improvement (USD 220 million) including (i) Civil works fora 
combination of road widening/upgrading and pavement rehabilitation/strengthening (within the 
existing Right of Way) of about 1200 km high priority core network roads including bridges and 
road safety engineering measures; (ii) consultancy services for engineering designs and 
supervision of works; and (iii) rehabilitation assistance to project-affected people, and 
HIV/AIDS awareness initiatives (as appropriate).  
 
Component 2: Asset Management (US $10 m) Technical assistance to (i) develop and 
operationalize a simple Asset Management System (AMS); (ii) implement the annual 
maintenance plans (AMPs) for the primary core network – prepared through the AMS and 
involving new/improved methods of execution of maintenance works; (iii) develop and 
implement an action plan to improve road transport services and operations; and (iv) implement 
PWD’s Institutional Development Action Plan to modernize and strengthen the PWD so that it 
can better manage its road assets. The Plan would include development of road sector 
policy/strategy, development of a Road Management Act, revision of new PWD code, 
strengthening of Road Board functions, and measures to increase PWD’s staff 
capacity/productivity. The GOA will fundthe maintenance works under the AMPs through its 
maintenance funds.  
 
*
The data-base is being established under the Bank funded Computerization project.  
 
**
Using a Road Asset Management System (RAMS)   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The state of Assam in India - The proposed project roads will be located in many parts of the 
State. The specific roads and locations will be identified and confirmed during project 
preparation.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government of Assam (GOA) will implement the proposed project through its Public Works 
Department (PWD). The PWD has shown satisfactory performance on management of social and 
environmental aspects while implementing significant rural roads components under the Bank 
funded Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural Support project (ARIASP completed - June 
2004) and Assam Agriculture Competitiveness Project (AACP on-going). The GOA has also 
announced a Road Sector Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) policy under the AACP. That 
will be applied for the proposed project through a resettlement policy-framework and sub-project 
level resettlement plans. The PWD has formed a unit to manage social and environment aspects 
of the proposed project. The GOA has also designated officers form revenue and tribal 
development department at its headquarters and district levels to manage social aspects related to 
the proposed project.  Some PWD staff has already been trained for management of social and 
environmental aspects under the AACP. However, substantial capacity augmentation on 
environmental and social impact management is still needed to implement the proposed project.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Mridula Singh (SASES) 
Mr Tapas Paul (SASES) 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Environmental issues in this project relate mostly to the sensitive environmental settings of 
Assam and the neighboring states. Assam is geologically of recent origin, experiences regular 
floods and frequent seismic movements, and is characterized by features such as rich evergreen 
forests, floodplains, marshes, wetlands, folded hill ranges and old plateaus. Assam is part of the 
Indo-Myanmar region IUCN Global Biodiversity hotspot. Potentially, the project could impact 
the forest patches, small and medium sized wetlands, and natural habitats located outside the 
protected areas. Other relevant issues for the highways sector include drainage congestions, 
meandering rivers and erosion, and fragile flood embankments when used as roads. However, 
many of the project interventions (road preservation, and improving roads on current alignments) 
will involve limited civil works, and the consequent environmental impacts could also be 
limited.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
The project roads will be preserved or improved on the existing alignments, and should avoid 
impacting any protected natural habitats. However, substantial floral and faunal resources in the 
state (and in the neighbouring states) exist outside the formally protected areas. The environment 
assessment will determine if any such significant resources will be impacted by the project.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 
X
Some of the project roads may traverse within or adjacent to the forest areas, particularly the 
small forest patches that are located all over the state. The environment assessment will 
determine if the project will impact the forests, either directly by acquisition of forest areas, or by 
impacting the quality of forest through edge deterioration or fragmentation, etc.   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Assam has a number of cultural property sites, including sites of archaeological (prehistoric), 
paleontological, historical, religious, and unique natural values; religious properties and sacred 
groves. The environmental assessment will determine the extent of direct or indirect impacts on 
these cultural properties by the project.   
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
X
Some roads would pass through the tribal areas/scheduled areas governed by Autonomous 
Council.  The details of likely social impacts will be available during project preparation. The 
SIA will carefully assess the likely project impacts on indigenous people and evolve the 
measures to mitigate them. This will include detailed consultations with indigenous peoples to 
understand their concerns and priorities. Indigenous People Development Plans (IPDP) will be 
developed as required in consultation with representatives of the Council.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
The proposed road improvement works would mostly be along the existing alignments but 
may lead to land acquisition and displacement of adversely affected people. A social impact 
assessment (SIA) will be carried-out for first year roads and a representative sample of the rest. 
A
Resettlement Policy framework with an entitlement matrix for different types of 
impacts/losses will be prepared for the entire project. Resettlement Actions Plans will be 
prepared for each sub-project using that framework.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  06/30/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
As part of project preparation, Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and Environmental 
Assessment (EA) will be carried out to assess potential social and environmental impacts and 
prepare mitigation plans. These assessments would begin in January 2006 and finish before 
June 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ashok Kumar 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Guang Zhe Chen 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
