Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1876 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/15/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P094722 
Project Name: Gujarat Urban Development Program 
Task Team Leader: Peter D. Ellis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 11, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 20, 2007 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%);Housing construction 
(30%);General transportation sector (30%);Sub-national government administration 
(10%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
130.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the delivery and quality of urban services 
through support to investments, implementation of reforms, and capacity building of urban local 
bodies (ULBs).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
On initial assessment, the key areas in which investments and reforms would be focused are:  (a) 
infrastructure investments, including the provision of services to the poor; (b) improving urban 
planning and land management, (c) finalization and implementation of the Gujarat slum 
upgrading policy; (d) creating sound urban finances; and (e) capacity-building for State and ULB 
institutions.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Gujarat, India.   
Page  2
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The State of Gujarat has capacity to conduct the assessments required for safeguard policies. In 
some instances safeguard criteria may be mainstreamed in sectoral policies under the policy 
reforms component. Institutional capacity to implement safeguard policies/criteria will be 
assessed during project preparation.  Such capacity is expected to vary among participating 
ULBs.  As the Project aims to build capacity among State and ULB institutions, capacity to 
address safeguard issues would also be built.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Sonia Chand Sandhu (SASES) 
Ms Meera Chatterjee (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Specific investments have yet to be identified for the project.  However, some, due to their 
nature or location, may lead to significant or moderate environment impacts.  These would need 
to be identified by carrying out sub-project level EAs and environmental management plans 
would need to be prepared accordingly to minimize adverse impacts and enhance positive ones.  
 
For now, the Project is rated category "A".  However, should its structure change to a 
Municipal Fund-type instrument following the PCN review meeting, the category will be 
changed to "FI".  
 
A
full Social and Environmental Assessment and Management (SEAM) Framework will be 
developed to identify and address the impacts of sub-projects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Some sub-projects such as infrastructure expansion or rehabilitation could indirectly (by 
providing access to) or directly impact forest areas (Reserved forests or those that come under 
the purview of social forestry).   
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Activities in the slum upgrading component which are related to sanitization of areas may 
require the procurement of some chemicals.    
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Some sub-projects may affect cultural property of historical value.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As part of project preparation, the Bank will discuss the state's resettlement policies with the 
GOG and changes that could be made for the urban development sector to achieve the objectives 
of the Bank's OP.  The SEAM Framework will identify and address any 
displacement/resettlement impacts of sub-projects, and the project would build state/ULB 
capacity to carry out consultations, impact mitigation and resettlement.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/07/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The Environmental and Social assessments and preparation of the SEAM Framework are 
expected to be started in January 2006 and completed by October 2006, i.e., before Appraisal 
of the Project, which is planned for December 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Peter D. Ellis 
12/01/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Warren Waters 
12/02/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
12/15/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
