Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1613 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/18/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P093925 
Project Name: IN:Rural Telecommunications Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Rajesh B. Pradhan 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 7, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 29, 2006 
Managing Unit: CITPO 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Telecommunications (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
300.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
1. 
The objective of the proposed project is to accelerate the development of rural 
telecommunications connectivity, where improved performance is a priority for the Government.  
The project will focus primarily on accelerating rural connectivity in India through assistance in 
regulatory policy reforms, spectrum management reforms, targeted subsidies for rural expansion, 
and improved standardization and certification.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
2. 
Project Components.  In order to achieve the proposed project objective, investment and 
technical assistance support would be provided to:  
 
-
Accelerate the rollout of telecommunications services in rural areas;  
 
-
Pilot the deployment of broadband access in peri-urban and rural areas by facilitating the 
use of new and emerging technologies for broadband access;  
 
-
Strengthen the telecommunications policy and regulatory environment, including 
spectrum management and monitoring, and standardization and testing activities.  
 
Page  2
3. 
Component 1 - Accelerated rural connectivity.  This component will entail financing:  (i) 
technical assistance support for the detailed design of programs to accelerate rural 
telecommunications and broadband connectivity, through output-based aid (OBA) type 
mechanisms that incentivize private investment; (ii) technical assistance for program 
implementation, management, and monitoring support; and (iii) investment support to finance 
the rollout of telephony and broadband services in rural areas.   The lead implementing agency 
for this component is the Department of Telecommunications (DOT).  
 
4. 
Component 2 - Strengthen telecommunications policy and spectrum management. This 
component will entail financing: (i) technical assistance support for telecommunications, 
spectrum management, and standardization policy reforms, institutional capacity building, and 
organizational planning and development for the Wireless Planning and Coordination Wing 
(WPC), the Wireless Monitoring Organization (WMO), and the Telecommunication Engineering 
Centre (TEC); and (ii) investment support for upgrading and expansion of the spectrum 
monitoring system to assist in improving spectrum management, augmentation of satellite 
monitoring system capacity, and enhanced standardization activities.  The lead implementing 
agency for this component is DOT.  
 
5. 
Component 3 - Strengthen telecommunications regulatory regime.  This component will 
entail: (i) technical assistance support to enhance the institutional capabilities of the 
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) to perform its regulatory functions 
and to address the regulatory challenges related to accelerating rural connectivity; and (ii) 
requisite investment support to facilitate TRAI's ability to regulate the sector. The lead 
implementing agency for this component is TRAI.  
 
6. 
Estimated Project Cost and Bank's lending instrument.  The total cost of the project is 
estimated at around US$350 million over a five-year period.  Proposed Bank lending would be 
an IBRD loan of US$300 million over that period and the instrument is a Specific Investment 
Loan (SIL).  Government contribution is expected to be around US$50 million.  No cofinancing 
is envisaged at this time.  
 
7. 
Project management.  The DOT, through a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be 
responsible for the overall coordination, implementation, and supervision of the project.  The 
PCU will be headed by the Additional Secretary (DOT). Other members of the PCU will include 
Joint Secretary (DOT), Joint Secretary (TRAI), Joint Wireless Advisor Director (WPC), Director 
(WMO), Deputy Director General (TEC), and Joint USOF Administrator. In addition, the PCU 
will have a dedicated Project Director, Senior Finance Officer, Procurement Officer, and support 
staff to manage and implement the project.  The responsibility for project implementation at each 
of the sub-implementing agencies will lie with a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in each 
agency, namely Universal Service Obligation Fund Administrator of India (USOFA), 
WPC/WMO, TEC, and TRAI.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
8.      Selection of the locations is yet to be agreed.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Page  3
NA.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg (SASES) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
9.      Environmental issues in the project are limited and minor. However, small amounts of 
land may be acquired to build cellular telephone towers for which some physical construction 
would be necessary. The bidding documents and subsequent contracts will specify that any land 
needed for the project will be free of squatters or encroachers and will be acquired on the real 
estate market on a willing buyer-willing seller basis. No involuntary land acquisition will be 
used. Bidding documents and contracts will also assure that appropriate environmental 
assessment and management measures are put in place for any physical construction carried out 
under the project. The environment category is rated as "B", partial assessment.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  06/01/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
10. Bidding documents and contracts will assure that appropriate environmental assessment 
and management measures are put into place for any physical construction carried out under 
the project, prior to such construction.   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Rajesh B. Pradhan 
06/28/2005 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
07/08/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Pierre A. Guislain 
06/28/2005 
Comments:   
