Page  1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) 
Section I 
–
Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: June 23, 2004 
Report No.:AC923
A. Basic Project Data 
 
A.1. Project Statistics 
Country: India 
Project ID: P084792 
Project: Assam Agricultural 
Competitiveness Proje 
TTL: Robert S. Epworth 
Total project cost (by component): Investment Grant Fund: $ 67 m;  Agric Services and 
Market Chain Development  $ 37 m;  Key Infrastructure Development  $114 m.  TOTAL 
COST $218 m 
Appraisal Date: June 30, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount($m):  
IDA: $ 155 
Board Date: September 23, 2004 
  
Other financing amounts by source: 
 
NIL 
Managing Unit: SASRD 
Sector: Roads and highways 
(50%);Irrigation and drainage 
(18%);General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (15%);Agricultural 
extension and research (12%);Crops (5%) 
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment 
Loan 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency 
recovery? 
Yes?
[
]
No?
[X ] 
Environmental Category: B 
Safeguard Classification: S2 
A.2. Project Objectives: The objective of the project would be to increase the 
productivity and market access of targeted farmers and community groups.  Key 
indicators of success would be increased yields of crops, fish and livestock products - 
complemented by an increase in the proportion of marketed surplus. Although the over-
riding objective is to stimulate growth of Assam’s agricultural economy, project activities 
would be predominantly pro-poor, directed primarily at small and marginal landholders, 
poor fishing communities and the landless.   
A.3. Project Description:  The project would comprise three components, and project 
activities would be implemented to a greater or extent in most districts in Assam. 
 
Investment Grant Fund
 (US$ 67 million) 
Targeting poorer sections of farming and rural 
communities, the project would promote income generating farm investments by small 
farmer groups in irrigation, mechanization and fish ponds, and community investments in 
mini-watershed drainage and open water bodies (bezels) fisheries: (i) Irrigation 
development would involve: 60,000 shallow tube wells irrigating 120,000 ha; low lift 
pump schemes irrigating 25,000 ha; and pilot operations of drip and sprinkler irrigation. 
(ii) Mini-watershed drainage would focus on assisting communities restore natural 
drainage lines and reduce annual water logging on 20,000 ha. (iii) Farm mechanization 
would assist 750 farmer groups acquire tractors and another 1500 groups acquire power 
tillers. (iv) Fish production activities would facilitate 15,000 farme
rs rehabilitate existing 
Page  2
farm ponds covering 12,000 ha and start semi-intensive fish production; community 
groups to undertake similar development of 200 ha of community owned tanks; and 80 
fisher communities develop 3,000 ha of beels for less intensive fish production.  
Matching grants (in association with bank loans in the case of irrigation and farm 
mechanization) for development and start-up working capital, would be made by the 
project in accordance with agreed cost-sharing formulae. 
 
Agricultural Services and Market Chain Development
 (US$ 38 million)
 The project 
would promote a decentralized pluralistic extension system, upgrade livestock and fish-
stocks, and strengthen farmers linkages with markets, involving (i) introduction of the 
ATMA management concept to extension services, which decentralizes funding and 
management down to district level, facilitates increased farmer involvement in planning 
and implementing programs, and encourages partnerships with private service providers; 
(ii) upgrading dairy herds through crossbreeding facilitated by and artificial insemination 
program operated by private paravets 
–
with much smaller programs for poultry, ducks, 
pigs and goats; encouraging improved private fish hatchery operations to reduce 
detrimental hybridization of species and loss of biodiversity; improved commodity 
marketing through more effective information provision and extension focus; and 
improved milk marketing through the formation of 250 milk marketing cooperatives. 
 
Key Infrastructure Development
 
(US$ 114 million)  
Focus would be on upgrading the 
rural road and bridge network and rural markets, involving: (i) upgrading 1000 km of 
roads to blacktop standard including replacement of about 270 wooden bridges with 
concrete structures – and rehabilitation of a further 1000 km of gravel roads; and 
upgrading of 24 rural primary wholesale markets and fifty haats. 
 
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis: 
Assam, located between 24008'N-27059'N latitude and 89042'E-96001'E longitude, has 
an area of 78,523km2, and is generally composed of plains and river valleys. The state 
can be divided into three distinctive physiographic regions - the Brahmaputra Valley, the 
Barak Valley, and the Mikir (Karbi Anglong) and Cachar Hills, which divides the two 
river valleys. Assam is geologically of recent origin, and is characterised by features such 
as floodplains, marshes, beels, scattered hillocks, folded hill ranges and old plateaus. The 
state (with moderate tropical climate, temperatures 7
o
-36
o
C; the average rainfall 
2659mm), experiences regular floods and frequent seismic movements. Assam, with its 
rich evergreen forest cover (13,924 km
2
,
including 5 national parks and 12 wildlife 
sanctuaries), wetlands and river systems is part of the Indo-Myanmar region IUCN 
Global Biodiversity hotspot. A significant amount of bio-diversity rich vegetated area and 
wetlands are outside the protected forest area boundaries. 
 
The project will be implemented primarily in the Brahmaputra and Barak valleys. No 
project activity will take place within the forest areas, except a small pilot project (US$3 
million) on the community based forest management. Some aspects of the project would 
cover most districts of the state. The population i
n
the plain and the hill districts comprise 
Page  3
of Schedule caste, Schedule Tribe, Other backward caste, Bengalis, Assamees and 
Muslims. The project will not only improve the well being of the majority vulnerable 
population, but would also make assistance available to improve the planning, 
management and communications capacity of  local institutions. 
 
B. Check Environmental Category 
A
[
], B [X], C [ ], FI [ ] 
 
Comments: 
The project interventions are small-scale, and the civil works are limited. 
Therefore, large-scale modification of site features, or significant impacts on the 
ecological features is not anticipated.
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
 
Yes No 
 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
4.01) 
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Pest Management
(OP 4.09) 
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 
11.03
-) 
[
]
[X ] 
 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[ X] 
[ ] 
 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[ ] 
[X ] 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
[
X]  
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/GP 7.50) 
[
]
[
X]  
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  4
Section II 
–
Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
Environmental Assessment (OP
/BP
4.01): 
Environmental issues in the project relate to 
the sensitive ecological and natural resource base of the state. Although the individual 
project interventions would be small-scale, there would be potential risks of ground water 
depletion due to high concentration of shallow tube wells; increased levels of Fe, F and 
As in groundwater, water-logging and salinity due to excessive water use; possible 
increase in the chemical fertilizers, pesticides and growth hormones. The proposed 
mechanization of farming, monoculture, adoption of limited number of high yielding 
crop varieties and hybrids, limited crop and farm-animal diversification, increased use of 
fertilizers and pesticides the extraction of medicinal plants from the wild, and 
introduction of exotic fish species in unconfined waters may lead to genetic and species 
erosion. Due to fisheries interventions, particularly the introduction and spread of several 
exotics fish species, breeding of under size fishes, mixed spawning, lack of quality seeds, 
and hybridisation in hatcheries may lead to genetic deterioration in hatchery population, 
inbreeding depression, and thee loss of endangered and endemic fish species. Building of 
building of agricultural service centers, cold storages, transport and other facilities, 
upgrading of marketing and storage facilities would be associated with construction 
related impacts such as land clearance, site modification and deterioration, waste 
generation, and fire risk. There would be generation of solid waste and wastewater from 
slaughterhouses, dairy infrastructure, fruit processing units, medicinal plant extraction 
units, duckeries and poultry farms; generation of bio-medical wastes from veterinary 
infrastructure. These might result into health and environmental hazards due to 
contamination of surface and groundwater, specially in urban fringe areas. Proposed 
interventions in the animal husbandry and veterinary sector would be associated with 
issues such as safe handling and management of bio-medical and chemical wastes, 
packaging and disposal of the live vaccines, and increase in endemic diseases and 
parasitic infestation of animals. Dairy interventions are associated with issues such as 
wastage of water, lack of recycling in the milk processing plants, quality of the dairy 
products, especially contamination of milk. Due to the rural roads sub-projects, adverse 
environment impacts are likely to occur if selected roads are not properly planned, 
designed or constructed. The issues with the rural roads sub-projects include improper 
construction practices, inadequate drainage, material management, borrow area and 
quarry operations; siting and operation of hot-mix plants and labor camps; disposal of 
debris and bituminous waste; and embankment/slope stability. 
 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
4.04) : 
No project activity will take place with protected areas, with the 
exception of a small pilot of community forest management. However, as many biodiversity rich 
areas/habitats are still unprotected in the State, these could be affected by several of the project 
interventions. There would be risks of possible destruction of (unprotected) 
beel 
wetlands, and the 
unprotected but biodiversity rich habitats therein, due to excessive construction activity, inflow of 
Page  5
wastewater; over utilization of the wetland water for irrigation; eutrophication, inadequate weed clearing 
and desilting methods. Some rural roads may traverse near forests or other ecologically sensitive areas, 
leading to associated ecological impacts, such as fringe deterioration.  
 
Pest Management (
OP
4.09) : 
Due to increased availability of irrigation, promotion of mechanized 
f
arming, adoption of high yielding crop varieties and hybrids, crop and farm-animal diversification, 
promotion of horticulture, there would be increased use of fertilizers and chemical pesticides in the State.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
4.12): 
The project will rehabilitat
e
existing rural tracts. Even 
though the local population will benefit with better accessibility there may be some who will be 
negatively affected, including tribals. These impacts are marginal in nature and will not lead to 
loss of livelihood.  The affected titleholders may lose part of their total holding or other 
structures. In the case of non-titleholders, there may be crop loss or structures may be affected 
 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
): 
.
The population in the plain districts covers all social groups. 
Ensuring that the vulnerable including the tribals and the poor are able to access facilities and 
other benefits is a challenge. A social assessment was carried out and action plans were prepared 
to specially target tribal and other vulnerable people through targeted communication and 
information campaigns; strengthening local institutions though social mobilization and 
participatory strategy; and capacity building on group management. This approach is described in 
the project’s Action Plan.  
 
Forests
 
(
OP
/
BP
4.36): 
The small US$3 million pilot on natural resource management and integrated 
livelihood will not lead to any substantial environmental impact. However, there would be impacts on the 
quality of forests, if interventions happen in productive forest areas, or if interventions are scaled-up in 
future.   
 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
).
 There is a very little possibility of impacting cultural 
properties in the project as the project interventions and construction activities are small-scale, including 
the case of rural roads sub-projects, which involve rehabilitation works only. Chance-found cultural 
properties will be addressed through contract requirements and project’s due diligence. 
 
No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impact is anticipated in this project.
 
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area. 
 
A
long-term cumulative issue is increased biomass burning in the fields. The other 
cumulative issues mainly relate to the health and ecology of the wetlands in Assam. 
These include increasing toxicity in fishponds (due to low pH from acid sulphate soils, 
use of lime, gypsum, potassium permanganate, and pesticides in agricultural fields), 
eutrophication, algal bloom and production of toxins due to inflow of chemicals, sewage, 
wastewater, animal wastes and agricultural fertilisers. Increasing levels of As and F in 
groundwater might become an issue in future, particularly where shallow tube wells are 
also used for drinking purposes. The rural roads sub-project may also lead to long-term 
cumulative environmental impacts, especially if adequate erosion control devices are not 
implemented, or drainage is impacted in the flood plains of Assam. 
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant) 
 
Page  6
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment
:
The borrower had prepared an Environmental 
Assessment (EA) of the project, and has prepared an environmental management 
framework to address all
the issues identified by the EA. The EA was preceded by 3 
studies 
–
(i) Safe Yield of Groundwater and Levels of Iron, Fluoride, Arsenic & 
Hydrocarbon in the Groundwater of Assam, (ii) Study on the Increasing Pattern of Use of 
Fertilizers, Pesticides and other Chemicals in the Field of Agriculture in Darang, 
Barperta, Kamrup and Nagaon Districts of Assam, and (iii) Study on the Bio-diversity 
Issues associated with the Wetlands of Assam. The EA build on the findings and 
recommendation of these studies, apart from the primary surveys and analysis undertaken 
as part of the EA. Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the project consists 
of the following: (a) application of environmental screening, monitoring and 
environmental audit processes, (b) application of environmental codes of practice (ECPs), 
(c) preparation and implementation of environmental management plans (EMPs), where 
necessary. Adequate institutional arrangements had been recommended in the EMF, and 
budgets had been earmarked. 
The implementing agencies will carry out an environmental screening of the individual 
sub-projects, based on methods described in the EMF, prior to selection of the 
interventions/beneficiaries. Environmental issues identified by such screening will be 
integrated in the sub-project design and implementation.  
 
As determined by the environmental screening, “high impact” interventions will either be 
excluded from the project, or will be subject to detailed case-specific EA, as per the EMP 
format contained in the EIA Notification, 1994. For “medium impact” interventions, 
EMPs will be prepared. Five Specimen EMPs have been prepared to facilitate each of the 
implementing departments in preparing such EMP. The implementing departments will 
ensure that the EMP provisions are integrated in the plan and design of the intervention, 
and be a part of the agreement with the beneficiary (or contract document in the case of 
rural roads sub-projects). The “low impact” category interventions will be implemented 
integrating the procedures and due diligence listed in the ECPs. ECPs have been prepared 
for the following: (i) Bio-Diversity Management, (ii) Building Activities, (iii) Collection, 
Cultivation & Processing of Medicinal Plants, (iv) Irrigation Management, (v) Land 
Development Schemes, (vi) Soil and Nutrient Management, (vii) Handling & Storage of 
Fertilizer & Pesticides, (viii) Beel (Open Water) Fishery Management, (ix) Farmers 
Ponds and Community Tanks Fishery, (x) Fish Seed Production Management, (xi) Bio-
Medical & Chemical Waste Management in Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Facilities, 
(xii) On Farm Dairy Waste Management, (xiii) Management of Wastes from Milk and 
Meat Processing Plants and Abattoirs, (xiv) Guidelines for Integrating Environmental 
Issues in Training and Awareness Programs. 
 
The EMF includes an extensive Environment Monitoring Plan. Monitoring will include 
regular monitoring of the application of the EMPS and the ECPs, for medium and low 
impact interventions, respectively. In addition to the monitoring by the environmental 
officers from the line agencies, the EMU will con
duct quarterly or half yearly 
Page  7
monitoring, based on the of an adequate number of site inspections covering 
interventions in each component of the project. The content of monitoring by the line 
agencies and the EMU would include each of the provision of the EMPs, or specific lists 
of monitoring indicators for assessing application of the ECP. In addition, extensive 
monitoring of groundwater quality at-large, quality of water from the shallow tube wells 
installed by the project had been planned. Moreover, a
ll project interventions and 
processes will be subject to independent annual environmental audits. The audit will 
include confirmation that EMF processes, such as environmental screening had been 
applied uniformly and without exception, implementation gaps with reference to 
application of EMPs and ECPs, and the effectiveness, in particular, of the measures 
suggested in the ECPs. The environmental audit checklists and formats, for each project 
component, had been specified in the EMF.  
 
OP
/
BP
4.04: Natural Habitats. 
The EMF also includes exclusion criteria
for project 
interventions to avoid high or irreversible impacts, or where the knowledge base is weak. 
The following will be excluded from the project, or will be subject to detailed sub-project 
environmental assessment: (i) siting of interventions in environmentally sensitive areas 
such as reserved forests, national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, Ramsar sites, wetlands 
included in the Directory of Asian Wetlands, locations identified as hotspots in the 
Assam State Biodiversity Action Plan, designated grazing lands; (ii) culture of 
endangered fish species or nuisance fish species
;
(iii) 
collection and processing of 
endangered medicinal plants. Detailed checklists have been prepared to identify these 
issues at the sub-project identification stage. Environmental codes of practice have been 
prepared to protect the (currently) unprotected natural habitats. These include 
environmental codes for Bio-Diversity Management (applicable for all project 
interventions), and Beel (Open Water) Fishery Management. The environmental codes 
for Building Activities, Irrigation Management, and Land Development Schemes, also 
contain adequate provisions for protection/conservation of natural habitats, especially the 
unprotected wetlands.   
 
OP
4.09: Pest Management. 
The project will implement all provisions of the Assam 
State Integrated Pest Management Policy, which has been prepared based on the relevant 
GOI plan. The project will encourage use of bio-pesticides and bio-fertilizers. An 
extensive training and awareness program targeting the officers, field extension staff of 
the relevant departments, and beneficiaries/farmers has been planned for implementing 
the IPM plan. This would be supplemented by the similar extensive training proposed as 
part of the environmental training program. 
 
OP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. 
The state level Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy for road sector 
has been prepared. It lays down the procedures to enable the community to participate in the planning and 
implementation process of sub-projects.  
 
OD 4.20: Indigenous People.
 
The community-driven development approach will ensure 
that 
participatory planning will be carried out at the village level for group 
based to access the investments in agriculture, services for livestock 
management; development of water bodies to increase fish production; and 
integrat
ed rural development program in the forest fringe villages to increase 
Page  8
the livelihood of those dependent on the forest. In addition, legal literacy 
program to empower the community on the legal framework that governs the 
fisheries and forestry sector will be implemented. A legal review of the Assam 
Fisheries Rules and regulations and the fisheries Act was carried out to 
modify/amend the laws that will provide opportunities to the traditional 
fishing community to access the resource and increase their income from 
their traditional occupation.
 
Borrower Capacity: 
The GOA, through the ARIASP Society and the implementing 
departments had already implemented the Assam Rural Infrastructure and Agricultural 
Support Project, which had initially built the capacity to deal with the relevant social and 
environmental issues. The PMU already has fully operational social development unit 
(SDU) and an environmental management unit (EMU). The Borrower has some 
institutional capacity to manage the program, including planning and implementation of 
actions to meet social and environmental needs and safeguards. As part of this project 
further capacity building of the EMU and the implementing departments is proposed. The 
EMU will be supplemented by two new positions of Environmental Officers; the 5 
implementing departments will designate a senior technical officer as the full time 
environmental officer; in-country, overseas, and a series of field-based training on 
environmental management is proposed for the environmental staff. The EMU was fully 
involved in the preparation of EA/EMF. The SDU prepared the social assessment and 
action plan which includes the Operational Manual on the implementation arrangements 
in coordination with all the line departments for the project in-house. NGOs 
will be 
contracted to assist the community to participate in the overall planning and 
implementation of the project.   
With these, the borrower will have adequate capacity to manage the safeguard issues in 
the project. 
 
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
Community consultation is an integral part of the project. The planning approach is bottom-up, where 
communities and local level institutions including the village education committees are involved in 
identification, planning, design, implementation, operation and maintenance of the project interventions. 
During preparation of the EA/EMF and the social assessment and the action plan of the project, extensive 
consultation has been carried out with communities, intended beneficiaries, implementing departments,  
experts, NGOs and other stakeholders. Details of the consultations during EA and Social Assessment is 
contained in a stand-alone report, and the outcomes of consultations have been integrated in the EMF. 
Consultations will continue throughout the implementation period.  
 
The environmental and social development documents have been disclosed in the web 
(
www.assamagri.in
),
 
and in the State Public Library in Guwahati. These documents, 
including an Assamese (vernacular) translation of the EA Summary are being disclosed 
in the public libraries of each of the project districts. 
 
Page  9
F. Disclosure Requirements  Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/05/2004     or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
06/11/2004      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/25/2004      or Not Applicable 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the 
Executive Directors 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Pest Management Plan:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2004      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
06/25/2004      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/25/2004      or Not Applicable 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain 
why. 
 
Section III 
–
Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve 
the EA report? 
No  
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes  
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats: 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion  or degradation 
of critical natural habitats?  
No  
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of 
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include 
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?  
Yes  
OP 4.09 - Pest Management: 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes 
 
 
Is a separate PMP required? No 
 
 
If yes,  are PMP requirements included in project design? Yes/NA 
 
 
Page  10
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property: 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures? Yes 
 
 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? Yes 
 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples: 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? No 
 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and 
approve the plan? 
N/A  
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been 
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
N/A  
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement: 
 
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process 
been prepared? 
No  
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and 
approve the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests: 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and 
constraints been carried out? 
NA  
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome 
these constraints? 
NA  
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it 
include provisions for certification system? 
NA  
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams: 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
NA 
 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of 
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
NA  
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training? 
NA  
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways: 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
NA 
 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, then has this been cleared with the Legal Department, 
and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent? 
NA  
What are the reasons for the exception? 
 
 
Please explain: 
 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
:
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared 
with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP? 
N/A 
 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the 
OP? 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World 
Yes 
 
Page  11
Bank's Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place 
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to 
project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  
All Safeguard Policies: 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of the safeguard 
measures? 
Yes  
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost? 
Yes 
 
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project 
implementation? 
Yes  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures? 
Yes  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes  
Signed and submitted by:
 Name
Date
Task Team Leader: 
Robert S. Epworth 
06/23/2004 
Project Safeguards 
Specialist 1: 
 
Mridula Singh 
06/23/2004 
Project Safeguards 
Specialist 2: 
 
Tapas Paul 
06/23/2004 
Project Safeguards 
Specialist 3: 
 
Approved by:
 Name
Date
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Frederick Brusberg 
06/29/2004 
Comments: 
Sector Manager: 
Gajan Pathmanathan 
06/29/2004 
Comments: 
wb164731 
Q:\1 work\1PROJECTS\AACP II\Revised doc\Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet - Appraisal Stage.doc 
June 24, 2004 5:14 PM
 
