Page  1
1 
 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet            AC178 
Section I – Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 20, 2004 
A. Basic Project Data 
(from PDS) 
I.A.1. Project Statistics 
COUNTRY: India 
PROJECT ID: P084632 
PROJECT: Hydrology Project - Phase II 
TTL: E. V. Jagannathan 
APPRAISAL DATE: April 15, 2004 
IBRD AMOUNT ($m): 124(tentative) 
BOARD DATE: June 22, 2004 
IDA AMOUNT ($m): - 
MANAGING UNIT: SASRD 
SECTOR: Irrigation and Drainage 
(100%) 
Page  2
2 
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: Specific Investment 
Loan 
STATUS: Pre-Appraisal 
Page  3
3 
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS)  
The Project Development Objective (PDO) will be to extend and promote the sustained and 
effective use of the Hydrologic Information System (HIS) by all potential users concerned with 
water resources planning and management, both public and private, thereby contributing to 
improved productivity and cost-effectiveness of water-related investments in the 13 states and 
eight Central agencies
1
. The coverage of existing states under the project is to help these 
agencies from moving over from development of HIS -as in recently concluded Hydrology 
Project (HP-I)- towards use of HIS in water resources planning and management. The PDO will 
be achieved by: (a) strengthening the capacity of hydrology departments (surface and 
groundwater) to develop and sustain the use of the HIS for hydrological designs and decision 
tools thus creating enabling environment for improved integrated water resources planning and 
management; (b) improving the capabilities of implementing agencies at state/central level in 
using HIS for efficient water resource planning and management reducing vulnerability to 
floods and droughts and thereby meeting the country’s poverty reduction objectives; (c) 
establishing and enhancing user-friendly, demand responsive and easily accessible HIS to 
improve shared vision and transparency of HIS between all users; and (d) improving access to 
the HIS by public agencies, civil society organizations and the private sector through awareness 
building supporting outreach services. Greater use of an improved HIS is expected to have a 
broad but definite impact on the planning and design of water resources schemes, from which 
the rural and urban poor will have secure and sustainable access to water for multi-purpose 
livelihood uses. 
 
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS)  
 
The project would consist of three main components: (a) 
Institutional strengthening
, covering 
all 13 states and eight central agencies; (b) 
Vertical Extension
, covering the nine existing states 
and six central agencies; and (c) 
Horizontal Expansion
, covering the four new States and two 
central agencies (CPCB and BBMB). 
 
Component I
- 
Institutional Strengthening
 would comprise three sub-components, namely: (i) 
consolidation of HP-I activities in the existing states; (ii) awareness raising, dissemination and 
knowledge sharing; and (iii) implementation support. Under the consolidation of HP-I 
activities, the project would support the existing  implementing agencies (IAs) with 
continued/extended training in HIS data processing and associated software provided under HP-
I, as well as training in the use of specialized water quality (WQ) equipment. The project would 
also finance improved data processing, spatial analysis and dissemination of standard and user-
specified maps, together with related capacity building. The awareness raising, dissemination 
and knowledge sharing sub-component would provide for a management consultancy services 
to assist the HIS Coordinating Secretariat (HISCS) – previously the Project Coordinating 
Secretariat (PCS) - with the formulation of a strategy and detailed operational proposals for 
spreading awareness, dissemination and knowledge sharing among IAs and HIS users, and to 
train IA in these areas. Implementation support sub-component would include consultancies to 
assist the HISCS and State-level IAs, and logistical support and incremental recurrent costs, 
including incremental staff and operation and maintenance (O&M) costs. 
 
                                                
 
1
 
These are (i) states included in HP-I: Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, 
Page  4
4 
Component II
 - 
Vertical extension
: This component encompasses all those activities which would enhance the use 
of HIS and demonstrate real hydrological data applications for future replication. Sub-components include: (i) the 
development of hydrological design aids, (ii) the development of decision support systems; and (iii) implementation 
of purpose-driven studies. All sub-components would be supported by upgrading in remote sensing and GIS 
capacities and the provision of spatial data inputs and outputs and data visualization. The development of 
hydrological design aids in Surface Water (SW), Groundwater (GW) and Water Quality (WQ) domains would use 
HIS data for the creation/development of standardized hydrological design aids using well-established and 
internationally-acceptable methodologies. These design aids would not only facilitate and expedite hydrologic 
design but would also, for the first time, usher in a uniform approach to the hydrological assessment of both gauged 
and un-gauged catchments. This sub-component would be implemented by Central Water Commission (CWC), 
Central Groundwater Board (CGWB) and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), in conjunction with National 
Institute of Hydrology (NIH) and participating IAs, supported by various consultancies. The development of 
decision support systems (DSS), consisting of information systems linked to appropriate models, would also be 
supported to promote the use of the data generated under HIS. Three types of DSS would be included: (i) water 
resources planning and basic operational DSS for selected states and central agencies. Areas that would be covered 
could include surface water planning, groundwater planning, reservoir operation, irrigation management, drought 
monitoring and analysis/management, and conjunctive use of surface and ground water; (ii) a real-time flood 
management and advanced operational DSS for the Mahanadi basin and for the Bhakra-Beas Management Board 
(BBMB) in the  Sutlej and Beas upstream basins
2
; and (iii) special-purpose DSS development (e.g. for contaminant 
transport and waste-load allocation planning). Planning DSS are  intended to support decisions required at relatively 
infrequent time intervals, such as one week, 10 days, one month, or longer planning horizons, and are proposed for 
all nine HP-I states. The inclusion of new states would be considered at appropriate mid-term review (MTR), based 
on their performances in proposed horizontal extension. Real-time DSS for flood management and advanced 
operations are used to support operational decisions required at daily or shorter time intervals. They require 
sophisticated data acquisition systems and modeling technologies as well as technical support staff with advanced 
and specialized training.  Given the high costs of the consultancies and information technology (IT) systems 
required, and the recommendations of the implementation completion reporting (ICR) mission with regard to the 
phasing of new technologies, the real-time DSS are proposed for two pilot basins: the Mahanadi basin (in the states 
of Chhattisgarh and Orissa) - primarily for flood forecasting - and the Bhakra-Beas basin (under the jurisdiction of 
BBMB) for real-time operations. All the relevant IAs in the other states would be associated in the development and 
implementation of the real-time DSS. Lessons arising from these DSS would be used by all states to undertake 
similar activities. 
 
The state and central agencies have proposed a large number of purpose-driven studies. These proposals are to be 
reviewed and revised in light of the following three criteria: (i) the study should be related to an identified issue in 
water management in the agency’s area of operation; (ii) it should be related to specific issues of public concern in 
water management for which solutions are to be identified ; and (iii) future replication of the proposed study 
methodology is within the agency’s jurisdiction, is feasible and cost-effective.  The studies to be supported by the 
project’s Studies Fund would follow screening, review and approval by the HIS Management Group (Technical). 
This fund is of major importance, as purpose-driven studies will be the main activities directly implemented by 
recently concluded Hydrology Project (HPI) agencies, other activities relying largely on external consultancies. 
Implementation progress would be assessed during the first mid-term review ( MTR) in year 3, and 
recommendations for further studies would be made on the basis of experience and achievements 
 
                                                                                                                               
                             
 
Orissa, and Tamil Nadu; and (ii) new states: Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Pondicherry and Punjab, and (iii) Central Agencies: 
Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR); Central Water Commission (CWC), Central Groundwater Board (CGWB), National 
Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Central Water and Power Research Station (CWPRS), India Meteorological Department (IMD), 
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), and  Bakhra-Beas Management Board (BBMB).   
2
 The inclusion of the Bhakra-Beas and Mahanadi basins is based on the following considerations: (a) good option in 
view of the frequent flooding in the basin (case of Mahanadi); (b) existence of basin authority (BBMB); (c) provide 
demonstration of inter-state coordination; (d) longer lead-time available for improved use of real-time information; 
and (e) substantial related work already done.  
Page  5
5 
Component III - Horizontal expansion
: In the four new States, four sub-components would be financed: (i) 
upgrading/establishment of data collection network; (ii) establishment of data processing and management systems; 
(iii) purpose-driven studies; and (iv) training. Under the first subcomponent, existing SW, GW and WQ data 
collection/monitoring networks and WQ laboratories would be upgraded/replaced. Under the second sub-
component, data processing, management and communication systems would be established for processing and 
storing of SW, GW, WQ and rainfall/climatic data. The project also plans to develop data banks in all participating 
state agencies responsible for SW and GW hydrology, respectively. The data that is gathered by the states and 
central agencies will be shared via NICNET/internet among the states and with the respective central agencies as per 
the existing protocols developed under HP I, moving towards a vision of unrestricted transparent data exchange 
using established HIS. All data centers would be equipped with computer hardware and software for data 
processing/storage. The third sub-component, purpose-driven studies would be similar to those supported under the 
vertical extension component, and the same procedure would be followed in their selection/implementation. The 
project would also provide formal and on-the-job training using, largely, a training-of-trainers approach and the new 
state staff. NIH, NWA, CWPRS, IMD and specialist consultants would provide appropriate training in line with the 
scope, content and coverage of training courses provided during HP-I, and both professional and sub-professional 
staff would also be given formal training in hydrology. 
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics of 
the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural 
habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.) 
 
The Project would cover (i) the nine on-going states of HP-I: Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, 
Maharashtra, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Chattisgarh, Orissa, and Tamil Nadu; (ii) four 
new states: Himachal Pradesh, Goa, Pondicherry and Punjab, and (iii) eight Central Agencies: 
Ministry of Water Resources (MoWR); Central Water Commission (CWC), Central 
Groundwater Board (CGWB), National Institute of Hydrology (NIH), Central Water and Power 
Research Station(CWPRS), India Meteorological Department (IMD), Central Pollution Control 
Board (CPCB), and Bhakra-Beas Management Board (BBMB). The project covers the north-
western and southern part of India. 
 
The nature of the project is such that no adverse impacts are expected on any critical or sensitive areas. OP7.50 on 
International Waterways is not triggered as HP-II is basically  a capacity building project to ensure that reliable data 
and techniques are built into water resources project planning, design and operation. The project does not propose  
to  finance preparation or detailed engineering design or of implementation of types of projects referred in Para 2 of 
the OP.
 
B1. Check Environmental Classification 
A [ ], B [ ], C [x], FI [ ], TBD [ ] 
Comments: 
There are not expected to be any significant negative environmental or social 
consequences arising from the project and any construction/installation impacts are expected to 
be very localized, temporary and insignificant.  In fact, the project interventions and outcomes 
will contribute to better overall sustainable environmental management through generating: (i) a 
reliable and accessible hydrological knowledge base of meteorology, surface and ground water 
resources and water quality; (ii) promotion of use of hydrological models and analytical tools 
such as decision support systems to mainstream environmental issues in water resources 
planning and management; and (iii) promotion of special-purpose studies related to critical issues 
on environmental concerns in the water sector such as the pollution of surface and groundwater 
and resource conservation.  The databases and analytical tools developed by the project should 
also help in the enhancement of dam safety in many basins.  The project would also help to 
coordinate the work of various bodies (e.g. water and environmental agencies) through water 
quality data generation, verification, management and use. In particular, the Central Pollution 
Control Board will be strengthened by the creation of  a water quality data center and 
development of appropriate analytical tools to use these data,  training and outreach, and the 
harmonization of water quality measurement, analysis and reporting protocols. 
Page  6
6 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
(from PDS) 
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements 
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
 
I.C1. Table on applicability 
Yes 
No 
TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01) 
[x] 
[ ] 
[ ] 
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36) 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30) 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
*
 
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)  
[ ] 
[x] 
[ ] 
 
 
Section II – Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
II.D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
. 
Please fill in all relevant questions. If information 
is not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data. 
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
There are no significant safeguard issues associated with the project.  The activities 
supported by the project, which is primarily aimed at developing and using hydrologic 
knowledge, are not expected to have any significant safeguard issues and adverse impacts.  
The experience with similar activities during the first project has not indicated any 
significant safeguard issue and the experience with this second phase should be similar. 
 
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one 
safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.  
 
The project components are expected to improve the estimation of cumulative impacts of 
development in future projects. 
 
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the 
project area. 
 
In the long term it is expected that the strengthening of hydrological network, knowledge 
base, design aids and analytical tools facilitated by the project will contribute to better water 
resource engineering designs and related technical and environmental assessments in the 
project area. 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  7
7 
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required) 
 
Key alternatives that have been looked at for the project are described in the PAD. 
Area/state-level/water sector approach were considered but rejected because of the need for a 
strategic, broad approach to the development of a comprehensive HIS data base, the need to 
build firmer sectoral links between and among states and central governments, and to 
increase broad levels of awareness and use of HIS among both concerned government 
agencies and civil society. The inclusion of the Central Pollution Control Board was 
considered and accepted to serve as a nodal agency for water quality aspects. The more 
complex involvement of other agencies (e.g. State Pollution Control Boards) would be 
considered at a later state in project implementation. 
 
Page  8
8 
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues 
 
The following table comments on arrangements for the requirements of each safeguard 
policy. 
WB Safeguard 
Policy 
Trigger
ed 
(Yes/No
) 
Comments 
Environmental 
Assessment (OP 
4.01, BP 4.01, GP 
4.01) 
Yes 
Triggered, but the project is not expected to have any 
adverse environmental impacts.  The project seeks to 
improve the environmental knowledge base, 
environmental awareness, synergize data and analysis 
on water quality, improve access to water related 
information, develop analytical tools such as decision 
support systems and design aids that, in addition to 
the improved knowledge base and special-purpose 
studies are expected to better inform environmental 
activities and improve future environmental 
assessments at least in the project areas. 
Natural habitats 
(OP 4.04, BP 4.04, 
GP 4.04) 
No  
Forestry (OP 4.36, 
GP 4.36) 
No  
Pest Management 
(OP 4.09) 
No  
Cultural Property 
(OPN 11.03) 
No  
Indigenous Peoples 
(OD 4.20) 
No  
Involuntary 
Resettlement (OD 
4.30) 
No 
The civil structures (water quality laboratories; data 
centers; gauge sites, etc.) proposed in HP-II 
generally consist of small buildings and will be 
constructed on public land, as was the case in HP-I. 
Therefore, the safeguard policy on involuntary 
resettlement is not triggered. 
Safety of Dams 
(OP 4.37, BP 4.37) 
No 
The databases and analytical tools developed by the 
project should help in the enhancement of dam 
safety in many basins. 
Projects in 
International 
Waters (OP 7.50, 
BP 7.50, GP 7.50) 
No 
This was not triggered based on legal specialist 
advice given the nature of the project 
Projects in 
Disputed Areas 
(OP 7.60, BP 7.60, 
GP 7.60) 
No  
 
  The project supports the acquisition and use of environmental data.  Technical assistance on 
management/monitoring and technical issues is provided in this project.  Training of staff on 
environmental data generation, collation, rationalization and use is also included, as well as 
upgrading of CPCB’s training facilities.  Related environmental awareness and outreach 
Page  9
9 
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard 
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The key stakeholders of this project are the project agencies (surface and groundwater 
agencies at the state level for existing and new project states, participating central agencies), 
other state and central agencies are associated with various aspects of hydrology (climate, 
surface water, ground water and water quality) data generation, collation, analysis, storage, 
dissemination and use as well as members of civil society who use hydrology data. The latter 
including the hydrologic data user groups, private sector, academia and the general public, 
are expected to benefit from the project activities in terms of better access to both validated 
data and information, as well as tools such as design aids and DSS for planning, flood 
management and special-purposes. Such uses mobilized through the hydrology data users 
groups, would also benefit from project support for related hydrologic and environmental 
awareness activities and the improved knowledge base arising from these data, information, 
analysis and special-purpose studies.  The project includes provisions for training and 
dissemination workshops and other consultation/dissemination activities at various levels. 
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select one).
 Category is determined by the highest impact in 
any policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an 
individual safeguard policy is triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
 
[ ] S
1
. – Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and 
institutional risks in management of one or more safeguard areas  
[ ] S
2
. – One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact 
and are technically and institutionally manageable 
[x] S
3
. – No safeguard issues 
[ ] S
F
 – Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven 
development or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic 
approach to address safeguard issues.  
F. Disclosure Requirements                                        Expected Date Actual Date 
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 N/A 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
Pest Management Plan:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
Page  10
10 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
N/A 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
N/A 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
N/A 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. 
No EA or other safeguard documents to disclose given the nature of the project. 
Signed and submitted by:  
Task Team Leader: 
E.V. Jagannathan  
Date: Feb 24, 2004 
Project Safeguards Specialist 1: 
Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep   
Date: Feb 25, 2004 
Project Safeguards Specialist 2: 
 
 
Date: 
Project Safeguards Specialist 3: 
 
 
Date: 
Approved by: 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator 
Frederick Edmund  Brusberg  
Date: Feb 25, 2004  
Comments 
Sector Manager 
Gajanand Pathmanathan  
 
Date: March 5, 2004  
Comments 
N/A Not Available 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas (this disclaimer appears only for projects triggering OP/BP 8.60)
 
