Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 7, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: India 
Project ID: P083187 
Project Name: Uttaranchal Rural Water Supply and 
Environmental Sanitation Project 
Task Team Leader: Oscar Alvarado 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IDA: 100 
Estimated Board Date:  
 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment Loan 
Sector: Water Supply and Sanitation  
Theme: Rural Services and infrastructure  
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Suryanarayan Satish,--- 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 
Government of India  
Government of Uttaranchal 
Communities 
($m.) 
 
 
 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives
 
 
(i) increase coverage and improve the quality of rural water supply and environmental sanitation service delivery in 
a sustainable  manner; 
(ii) assist the state in creating and consolidating an enabling environment (statewide) for implementation of 
appropriate sector policies and  institutional reforms; 
(iii) demonstrate sustainable modalities of delivering water supply in multi-village and urban schemes; 
(iv) build capacity and strengthen the PRIs for effective planning, designing and implementing the RWSS schemes.  
 
The project would also bring associated benefits including improved health and environment,  along with 
decentralized water and sanitation services. With the piloting of multi-village and urban schemes, the project will 
also help in the preparation of   a roadmap for future investment programs. 
 
 
 
 
C.  Project Description
 
 
The proposed project will  finance a substantive portion of the state’s investment plan in rural water 
supply and sanitation for the next five years, as well as move forward  on implementation of statewide 
sector policy  and  renewed institutional framework. It will also assist in financing   multi-village schemes 
and urban area pilots. A SWAp  type of operation will be attempted.  
Page  2
 
 
The project will  have the following four components: 
 
(i) Policy and institutional reforms: Main policy changes required would be in establishing and 
consolidating a single policy for RWSS in the state; planning a new institutional framework; revisions in 
the financial schemes; policy framework for multi-village and urban local bodies.  
 
(ii) Investment component : Augmentation or construction of water and sanitation schemes covering 
around  2,700 villages in about 1,000 Gram Panchayats.  The water supply component will incorporate 
catchment area protection measures. This component will also include local capacity building, hygiene 
programs, and overall program management, and monitoring and evaluation systems. 
 
(iii) Pilots of multi-village and urban schemes : Construction of schemes and new institutional set ups in 
about four multi-village schemes and two ULBs.  
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Rural /urban areas of Uttaranchal state of India. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
 
 
[Guideline: Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
 
 
The project will scale-up the reform approach to the State’s entire RWSS program.  Uttaranchal already 
has significant experience with demand responsive and participatory approaches (Swajal I). GoUA can 
take credit for being at the front of sector reform in India. In fact, Uttaranchal was one of the first states in 
India to prepare and adopt a consistent rural water policy, within the framework of an earlier Bank 
financed Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal RWSS project (Swajal I) which was successfully evaluated (both 
by the GoUA and the Bank). Swajal I (UA component) actually introduced and showed key policy 
elements including demand responsive approach, high level of community participation and financial 
contribution and operations via village-level  water and sanitation committees (VWSC). These same 
principles are now included in the recently issued (Sept. 2003) Government of India’s (GOI) Swajaldara 
program and central policy which is now a national vehicle for reform and is being institutionalized via a 
MOU with the states.   
 
The project will also draw from the experiences of the World Bank assisted pilot projects implemented 
over the past six years, especially Kerala, and Karnataka I, II.  The project will design appropriate 
capacity support programs as well as implement the project in annual batches to learn and strengthen 
implementation mechanisms for addressing the social and environmental issues.  
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (OP/BP 4.01) 
A Sector Environmental Anal
y
sis 
(
SEA
)
 will identif
y
 the environmental issues related to 
Page  3
 
 
the project and recommend appropriate measures to address these.  The SWAp also 
provides an opportunity for reviewing rural drinking water and sanitation sector related 
policies and institutions, including environmental policies/institutions for addressing the 
environmental concerns in this sector.  
Typically, the rural water sector related environmental issues in Uttaranchal are: (i) 
Habitations with access to safe water 
 :  According to Jal Nigam, 98 % habitations have 
been covered with drinking water schemes designed for 40 lpcd.  However, the actual 
coverage appears to be much lower, with more than 30 % partially / fully defunct 
schemes. (ii) Source sustainability issues :
 There is an increasing problem of source 
depletion
 
which is affecting the water availability in the hills of UA, especially during the 
summer months (March - May). The Jal Sansthan Garhwal and Kumaon have enlisted 300 
sources in which the availability of water has drastically reduced by 75% over the past 
four years.  (iii) Natural calamities like earthquakes and flash-floods
 are a risk to the 
success of the schemes.  (iv) Water quality issues : bacteriological contamination of 
drinking water sources
.  Bacteriological contamination is an important water quality issue, 
based on sample water quality tests undertaken by the Jal Sansthan.  Although 
chlorination is generally carried out, there is no information regarding the effectiveness of 
such programs.  The physio-chemical contamination is not an issue for UA, except for 
excess iron in specific areas. (v) Household and Environmental Sanitation Issues
 : 
personal hygiene, health, household environment and sanitation issues.  Sanitary latrine 
coverage is very low, with less than 10% households having access to latrines in the State; 
the wastewater management (soak pits / drainage) and solid waste management (garbage / 
compost pits) are generally not practiced in the rural villages.   
 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
 
[X ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12)  
Investment component comprise broadly two elements: (i)  
RWSS
-- Augmentation or 
construction of water and sanitation schemes covering around  2,700 villages in about 
1,000 Gram Panchayats; and (ii) 
Multi –Village & Urban WSS
 –Pilot Experimentation in  
four multi-village schemes and two Urban Water Supply Schemes.  The first element viz., 
RWSS do not warrant triggering OP 4.12 as it is not necessary to acquire lands 
involuntarily. In the second element, while multi-village RWSS does not warrant 
triggering of OP 4.12, the same is to yet to be determined in the case of Urban WSS. Need 
for triggering OP 4.12 would depend upon the choice of a scheme. The piloting of Urban 
WSS (up to 2 schemes) is expected to take place during the second year of project 
implementation. Hence, a decision on this could be arrived at only after the selection of 
the schemes.
 
 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)    
Identification of IPs:
  Preliminary discussions has brought to the fore that   Government of 
Uttaranchal accords special attention to Scheduled Tribes as well as some Nomadic 
Tribals and/ or Pastorals. Separate habitations inhabited by these three groups will come 
under the purview of the OD 4.20
 
 
Scheduled Tribes.
 The state has a  population of about 212,000 STs ( 3 %) and are spread 
across the Blocks of Chakrata, Kalsi (Dehradoon District); Munshari, Darchoola 
(Pithoragarh district); Joshimath (Chemoli District); and katima ( U S Nagar) and 
Page  4
 
 
Chorgalla in Nainital district.   living in 1,441 habitations (2% of the total) and are 
concentrated in 13 districts.   
Nomadic Tribal People
 are found in in the districts of Uttara Kashi, Chemoli and 
Pithoragarh.  
Apart from the above two group, another group, Gujjars, permanently settled within the 
boundaries of Rajaji National Park (a sanctuary) may also require special attention.  
 
O D 4.20 Application
. While the  project interventions will not affect adversely the STs/ 
Nomadics, these groups may require special attention from  the view point of ensuring 
inclusion and equity.  A Social Assessment study, planned as  a part of the Project 
Preparation would let us know whether a separate Indigenous (Tribal ) People 
Development Plan (IPDP) will need to b e prepared to not. 
 
[ ] 
Forests (OP 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X ] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the classification:    
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
 
[Guideline: Refer to sections 5 and 6 of the PCN] 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
A Sector Environmental Analysis (SEA) will be carried out to assess the safeguard issues and prepare an 
Environment Management Plan and Performance Indicators, according to the Bank guidelines (OP/ BP 
4.01).  The proposed project is expected to bring about positive health and environmental benefits by 
supplying ‘safe’ drinking water from sustainable sources, and creating sanitary conditions in villages.  
However, if the project is not designed/implemented properly, it could result in some adverse impacts and 
for this reason an environmental management plan will be prepared and implemented.     
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
 
Social Safeguards
:  
 
Indigenous Peoples
. 
A comprehensive Social Assessment study will be initiated for identifying  all the  
stakeholder groups and develop a framework for  their participation in, and enable/solicit their 
contributions towards the program  intervention’s design and delivery mechanisms.  Main elements of the 
social assessment study will include beneficiary assessment, stakeholder analysis, social impacts and risk 
analysis. In particular, the study will also cover Panchayat Raj Institutions, Water Supply Utilities and  
other concerned  departments/ agencies. Consequently, a decision to prepare, or otherwise, an Indigenous 
Peoples Development Plan (IPDP) christened, “Tribal  Development Plan” will also be made. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be 
addressed? 
 
Consultations
:
 
 
 
OP/BP 4.01. Public consultations will be carried out in representative project districts, as part of the 
environmental screening process for the preparation of the SEA.  Preparatory meetings to organize the public 
consultations will be held with field officers of PMU and district officials of various departments, including 
Panchayati Raj, RDD, Health, Groundwater, Watershed, etc., as well as target groups at the village/panchayat 
level.  Advance notices in local language, including details of the proposed project components will be 
distributed to the rural public, elected representatives and other functionaries at GP and district levels.  The 
notices will be displayed in local panchayat offices and public places like village temples, schools and bus 
stops.  Representative stakeholders will be invited for the public consultations. 
 
Social safeguards: 
Several rounds of consultations will be held with relevant stakeholders as a part of the 
Social  Assessments and preparation of IPDPs. 
 
Disclosure
:
 
. Both the Social and Environmental Assessments and IPDPs will be summarized and 
translated in to local language.  Copies of these will be shared with the PR institutions at the three levels – 
DPs, BPs and Village Pancnhayats – and local government and non-government agencies including 
NGOs and academics.  Once the project becomes effective, special campaign towards creating awareness 
on the IPDP provisions will be made through NGOs among the tribal communities and PRI 
representatives.  The summary (in local language) of the draft EA report, including environmental issues, 
proposed mitigatory measures and performance indicators will be placed at GP offices of the districts, 
public health sub-centres, bus stops and big shops
.   
 
 
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN 
REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Page  6
 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review:  
 
 
 
 
