                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC556
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/23/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: INDONESIA                                            Project ID: P074290
Project: Second Eastern Indonesia Region Transport            Task Team Leader: Hatim M. Hajj
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 22, 2004                   IBRD Amount ($m): 200.00
Bank Approval: June 17, 2004                                  IDA Amount ($m):
Managing Unit: EASTR                                          Sector: Roads and highways (80%); General
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            transportation sector (20%)
Status: Lending                                               Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); Rural
                                                              markets (P); Decentralization (P); Small and medium
                                                              enterprise support (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

This is the second of two complementary transport projects whose primary development objective is to
support efforts to stimulate economic growth and improve social welfare in the 15 provinces and about 150
kabupatens and kotas (districts and municipalities) of the Eastern Indonesia Region (EIR) through
improved access to road transport facilities, reduced road transport costs, and more efficient use of
resources. The first project, Eastern Indonesia Region Transport Project (EIRTP-1, Loan 4643- IND),
which was approved by the Bank in December 2001 and is currently under implementation, focuses on the
preservation and development of primary arterial and other strategic road assets that are the responsibility
of the central government. The proposed Second Eastern Indonesia Region Transport Project (EIRTP-2)
will focus primarily on lower level links in the primary road network that are the responsibility of regional
governments and on other regional transport assets. The specific objectives of the project are to:

(a) improve conditions of the strategic road network in order to reduce transport costs and enhance
    regional accessibility;
(b) support decentralization of planning and management responsibilities for works on Provincial and
    Kabupaten roads to the respective Provincial and Kabupaten governments; and
(c) increase the efficiency, quality and transparency of works procurement and implementation.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

 The Project consists of three components:

1.       Civil Works for Roads and Bridges and Improvements to Non-Road Transport Facilities
(US$ 217.8 million).      This component covers a three year program (2005-2007) of rehabilitation,
betterment, and bridge replacement on kabupaten roads and bridges, provincial roads and bridges, national
urban and inter-urban roads, as well as improvements to facilities serving interfaces between road and
non-road transport facilities, such as small sea ports, ferry terminals and local airports. Those are located
in eight provinces and 37 kabupatens in the Eastern Indonesia Region that elected to participate in the
project. The resulting program consists of:

                                                         2
                                                                                                             ISDS


(1) National Roads and Bridges ($ 40.8 million). This comprises the rehabilitation of about 125 km and
betterment of about 90 km, and replacement of 700 meters of bridges on inter-urban roads; and 60 km of
periodic maintenance and 50 km of betterment of urban national roads;

(2) Provincial Roads and Bridges ($ 84.4 million). This consists of the rehabilitation of about 370 km
and betterment of about 440 km of provincial roads and replacement of about 1150 meters of provincial
bridges;

(3) Kabupaten Roads ($ 86.5 million). This includes rehabilitation maintenance of about 1050 km and
betterment of about 940 km of kabupaten roads, and the replacement of 25 bridges longer than 15 meters,
totaling about 500 meters; and

(4) Improvements to Transport Terminals and Facilities ($ 6.1 million). This includes improvements to
non-road transport facilities (still to be identified, such as ferry terminals and river and small sea ports, and
local airports) valued at about $5.0 million.

2.       Implementation Support ($ 29.0 million). This component covers consulting services and a small
amount of equipment required to support implementation of the project as well as provision of funds to
meet the incremental operating costs to be incurred by the Project Management Unit and the Directorate of
Technical Affairs in the Directorate General of Regional Infrastructure (DGRI) in the Ministry of
Settlements and regional Infrastructure (MSRI).

3.       Road Sector Support ($ 8.7 million). This component consists of technical assistance and
training required to support the road sector in the Eastern Indonesia Region with emphasis on facilitating
the ongoing decentralization process.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

The Eastern Indonesia Region (EIR) includes all of Indonesia with the exception of the islands of Java and
Sumatra. It covers a wide expanse with three main island groups (Kalimantan, Sulawesi and the Eastern
Islands) which include the poorest, least populated and least developed areas of the country. It has a
population of about 44 million (2000) and a population density of 26 per km2 or one tenth of that in
Java-Sumatra, 75% live in rural areas and more than half the labor force have no more than elementary
education. The region is rich in natural resources, including minerals, forestry, crops and oil, and
biodiversity. Surface transport is mainly provided by roads and to a lesser extent by rivers. But, the road
networks are sparse and provision of access is expensive. Topography is varied and the environment
fragile and under stress - Kalimantan has extensive wetlands, rivers and soft soils in the populated areas;
Sulawesi is dominated by steepland with some fertile plains; the smaller islands have high diversity coastal
resources and steeplands and are generally arid; and Papua (Irian Jaya) has a full range of steepland and
wetlands, with many remote isolated settlements and critical areas of threatened species and biodiversity.
About 330 sub-projects currently proposed for EIRTP-2 funding have been screened and minimal or
manageable environmental and/or social impacts have been identified to date. These screening results and
Annual Works Programs will be subject to confirmation with the local Environmental Impact Management
Agencies (BAPEDALDA). The detailed engineering designs and bid documents as well as environmental
documents for most of the first year sub-projects will be ready by Board presentation.

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS




B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: It is expected that no sub-projects requiring the preparation of a full environmental assessment
(ANDAL) or involving capacity expansion or new construction will be proposed for funding under the project.
On that basis, the project is given an environmental Category "B" rating.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                          Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes   No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes   No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes   No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes   No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes   No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes   No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes   No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                              Yes   No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                   Yes   No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                        Yes   No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The EIR as defined by the project contains many environmentally sensitive areas and is one of the most
species diverse areas in the world. The main environmental issues for the rehabilitation sub-projects are
relatively localized impacts on air and water quality, and noise pollution (especially in case sub-projects
include roads in and close to urban areas). These effects can be managed by the application of standard
operating procedures (SOP) during construction. Land acquisition will be minimal, as most of the work
will take place in existing rights of way. Little if any resettlement is anticipated. Bridge replacement and
betterment may have somewhat more extensive impacts: soil erosion, interference with drainage or stream
flow, obstruction of traffic and increased accident risk. These also can normally be managed by standard
operating procedures, but there may be need for site-specific Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plans (UKL / UPL) in some cases. No sub-projects involving capacity expansion and/or new roads are
proposed for funding under EIRTP-2. Any potential sub-projects which fall into the World Bank's
Category "A" and thus require the preparation of a full environmental impact assessment (ANDAL) will be
excluded from EIRTP-2 funding. In Papua, special emphasis should be placed on recognition of local and
"adat" rights and provisioning of compensation for acquired land. While all proposed sub-projects involve
existing roads and traffic levels, EIRTP-2 could potentially involve some areas occupied by isolated
vulnerable people (i.e., indigenous peoples) and some of them might be adversely affected as well as
benefited.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or

                                                        4
                                                                                                           ISDS


 due to multiple project component.

 None anticipated

 II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

 None anticipated

 II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

 No major capacity expansion and/or construction of new roads is proposed under the project, which limits the
 need to develop and evaluate alternatives. The project involves rehabilitation or betterment of existing roads
 and bridges which will serve to minimize potential environmental impacts and the need for land acquisition and
 resettlement of displaced people.

 II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

(i) OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). Project preparation provides for a two-stage environmental
screening process to identify actual sub-project requirements for environmental assessment, including:

·Any potential sub-projects which fall into the World Bank's Category "A" and thus require preparation of a
full EIA (ANDAL) will be excluded from EIRTP-2 funding consideration unless agreed in advance with the
Bank. Local consultations, reviews and approvals by the respective provincial or Kabupaten Environmental
Impact Management Agency (BAPEDALDA) are also a condition of including a sub-project in the annual
work programs.

·Those sub-projects which fall into the World Bank's Category "B" but under the current Indonesian EIA
System would require the preparation of site-specific Environmental Management (UKL) and Monitoring
Plans (UPL) are also subject to BAPEDALDA reviews and approvals. Copies of the UKL/ UPL will be
furnished to the Bank for review and comment.

(a) For disclosure purposes a sample completed UKL/UPL would be translated into English and included as
part of the English language EIA/EMP which has already been reviewed;
(b) For subsequent sub-projects in subsequent year work programs, EASES field staff will review
sub-projects requiring UKL/UPL or LARAP or simplified LARAP. Once sub-projects are reviewed and
found acceptable, task team would issue a brief memo confirming that the sub-project is endorsed by the
safeguards specialists on the task team; and
(c) UKL/UPL for subsequent year work programs would not need to be translated into English but should
be disclosed in-country in accordance with Bank disclosure requirements.

· Of about 330 sub-projects identified for inclusion under EIRTP-2 only 21 required secondary screening,
of which 8 are in AWP-1. Two of those sub-projects were excluded from EIRTP-2 because of shortage of
funds and 6 required the application of standard operating procedures. Of the remaining 13, four were
originally proposed for AWP-1. Those have now been transferred to AWP-2 to allow adequate time for
preparation of UKL/ UPL and consultation with BAPEDALDAs and local people. The remaining proposed
sub-projects (the majority) require Standard Environmental Operating Procedures which are prescribed in
the bidding documents for all EIRTP-2 sub-projects, including:

         - Environmental Aspects (Section V, Section 1.17),

                                                         5
                                                                                                             ISDS



         - Discoveries (Section III, Conditions of Contract, Section 20.1), and

         - Road Safety (Section III, Conditions of Contract, Section 19.1).


(ii) OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats). The identification, preparation, design and environmental screening of
sub-projects to be included in EIRTP-2 must ensure that the project will not be financing conversion of any
critical natural habitat or conversion on a large scale of natural habitat. Sub-projects that might involve the
capacity expansion of existing roads or construction of new roads in designated protected areas (none so far
foreseen) will need detailed environmental assessment before being accepted for funding under the project.

A range of sensitive habitats and land use types are specifically included in the EIRTP-2 environmental
screening criteria. For sub-projects that may involve such areas, further site-specific studies, management
and monitoring plans (UKL/UPL or ANDAL) will be required and will include mitigation measures to
prevent or minimize habitat degradation. All proposed sub-projects requiring preparation of an ANDAL
study will also require Bank review and approval prior to issuance of a no objection letter (NOL). However,
those will not be funded under EIRTP-2.

(iii) OP 4.11 (Cultural Property). The environmental screening and AWP approval processes will ensure that
the project will not adversely affect sites having known archaeological, palaeontological, historical, religious
or unique natural values. The EIRTP-2 Standard Bid Documents address "Discoveries" under Book III,
Conditions of Contract A: General, page CC-6, Section 20.1 as follows:

         Anything of historical or other interest or of significant value unexpectedly discovered at the Site
         shall be the property of the Employer. The Contractor shall notify the Project Manager of such
         discoveries and carry out the Project Manager's instructions for dealing with them.

In addition, a number of existing national and local laws address these potential concerns.

(iv) OD 4.20 (Indigenous People). The environmental screening process specifically includes consideration
of Indigenous People, which are referred to under the project as "Isolated Vulnerable People" or IVP. This
screening process will be based on available information, consultations with concerned groups, including
local NGOs, and site surveys as needed, for all sub-projects for which sensitive IVP issues may be present.

A detailed social impact assessment (SIA), prepared by appropriate experts, will be required for all
sub-projects that involve the physical presence of IVP communities living within ten (10) kilometers of the
sub-project alignment. SIAs are to be cleared by the Bank, and the most critical aspects of the SIA Plan will
be implemented before signing of the contract with the successful contractor for such sub-projects, according
to the framework incorporated in the EMP.

Additional details and requirements, including the need to conduct consultations in the local language, are
provided in the agreed Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework for the project.

(v) OP 4.12 and BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). A screening approach is required to identify
sub-projects that involve land acquisition and/or resettlement of displaced people. For any sub-projects that
require land acquisition and resettlement, the process will be carried out in accordance with the Land
Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework adopted for the project, incorporated in the EMP, and
attached to the Loan Agreement.

                                                         6
                                                                                                            ISDS


For any proposed sub-projects that would displace more than 200 people or affect more than 10% of the
productive assets, a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan (LARAP) which meets the World
Bank's OP 4.12 and BP 4.12 will be prepared, cleared by the Bank and implemented to the point where
payment of compensation is substantially complete, prior to signing of the contract with the successful
contractors for such sub-projects. Every project displaced person must have been compensated and/or
provided with a resettlement site and moving allowance prior to the taking of his / her land and related
assets. However, so far no such sub-projects have been identified.

Because of the nature of the civil works included under the project, no persons are expected to be displaced
as a result of the implementation of AWP-1. However, this can not be confirmed till the detailed engineering
designs are completed, especially in the case of sub-projects for bridge replacement.

 II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
 policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The EMP-2 for EIRTP-2 is directly based on the EMP for EIRTP-1 which involved an extensive
consultation process, involving national and local government agencies, institutions and NGOs. A series of
consultations and workshops have continued during the preparation of EIRTP-2 and its EMP.                     A
presentation and copies of the draft EMP-2 were provided to nearly 60 participants to the April 23
­ 25, 2003 workshop held in Makassar, South Sulawesi, involving senior BAPEDALDA
representatives (Department Heads) from all 15 EIR provinces.                   Two consultative workshops
were held in Banjarmasin and Jayapura in March 2004 to finalize reviews of the EMP-2 and
confirm screening results of proposed EIRTP-2 sub-projects. This will be followed by another two
workshops that will be held in Manado and Denpasar in April 2004. The workshop in Jayapura
involved consultations with the concerned environmental institutions and NGOs in Papua and was
attended by representatives of the Bank. The EMP-2 will be revised to reflect the results of the
consultations and submitted to the Bank by April 24, 2004. The revised EMP-2 will then be made
publicly available (in both English and Bahasa Indonesia, in accordance with Bank disclosure
requirements) at the central DGRI offices, proposed EIRTP-2 provinces and kabupatens, and Public
Information Centers (PICs) maintained by the Bank's Washington and Jakarta offices.

However, the most meaningful stakeholder consultations on screening will be those to be conducted in the
provinces
and kabupatens as individual sub-projects are proposed for implementation.             The objective for such
consultations is
to involve interested and affected persons and groups from the planning stage through implementation of
sub-projects, consistent with the project's objective of shifting from centralized to decentralized planning and
management of roads.

The mechanism for sub-project-specific consultations is detailed in the EMP. Among other features, it calls
for each provincial and kabupaten BAPEDALDA to establish appropriate mechanisms for regular
consultation and stakeholder liaison with civil society and NGOs.

In the event that a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan (LARAP) should be required for a
sub-project, the EMP provides that the planning and implementation take place with full involvement of the
displaced persons as required in OP 4.12 and BP 4.12. These provisions were included in the "Land
Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework" which was developed for EIRTP-2 on the basis of the
corresponding framework for EIRTP-1.

                                                      7
                                                                                                           ISDS




E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               3/31/2002         2/18/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           4/26/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            4/13/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               2/15/2003         2/18/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           4/26/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            4/13/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               3/31/2002         2/18/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           4/26/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            4/13/2004

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Hatim M. Hajj                                         04/14/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Glenn S. Morgan                                       04/14/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Bruce M. Harris                                       04/14/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

                                                  8
                                                                     ISDS


Approved by:                     Name                      Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan           04/14/2004
Comments
Regional Safeguards Unit Director Maria Teressa Serra    04/15/2004


Sector Manager/Director           Jitendra N. Bajpai       04/15/2004
Comments

