Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1161 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/05/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P089479 
Project Name: Early Childhood Education and Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Mae Chu Chang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 1, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: May 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Pre-primary education (100%) 
Theme: Education for all (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
27.50 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.50
7.50 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project developmental objective is to increase the proportion of poor children who are 
prepared to enter primary school through the creation of an Indonesian integrated ECED system 
which promotes the holistic development of young children that includes education, health, and 
parental involvement.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project aims to achieve the developmental objective through three components: (1) 
Strengthen the integrated early childhood education and development system at the national 
level, (2) Institution Building at the district and provincial level for provision of technical 
assistance and professional development to the communities (3) Service delivery of integrated 
community-based early childhood education and development initiatives in poor districts.  
 
Component 1 (US 9 million): Strengthening the integrated early childhood education and 
development system developed by the Ministry of National Education (MoNE). This component 
will: (a) develop program performance standards for IECED programs and strengthen existing 
regional and provincial learning development centers, i.e. province; (b) set up a professional 
development system in collaboration with universities/ ECD-related professional associations; 
Page  2
(c) institutionalize the Forum PADU and Consortium PADU; (d) establish a monitor and 
evaluation system to assure performance standards are met and conduct project evaluation; (e) 
develop and conduct an awareness campaign for province and districts policymakers on the 
importance of IECED, develop and conduct a campaign targeting parents in beneficiary districts 
(Kabupatens), and develop a quality IECED program through television.  
 
Component 2 (US 22 million): Institution building at the district and provincial level. District 
responsibility is to implement, finance, and supervise the implementation of IECED programs. 
This component will develop districts' capacity and willingness to perform such functions. 
Specifically this component will: (a) train and develop the capacity of a 'mobile' team of trainers 
(trained by universities) who will conduct outreach activities at the kecamatan level to sensitize 
parents about the importance of IECED, conduct pre and in-service training at the village and 
kecamatan level, and ensure that existing and new community-based IECED interventions 
respond to the minimum quality performance standards; (b) support the establishment of a fully 
functioning district IECED forum and Consortium at the district level; (c) facilitate the selection 
process of the community competitive grants to be supported under component 3; and (d) 
implement the monitor and evaluation system for which outcome data on children's school 
readiness can be combined with other community level information.  
 
Component 3 (US 39 million):  Community competitive grants for IECED initiatives in 200 
poor eligible districts. The objective of this component is to develop inexpensive but effective 
IECED interventions at the community level. Criteria for the selection of participating districts 
include (i) government classification of poor districts and (ii) district willingness and readiness to 
implement and sustain component 2 activities. Earmarked grants for IECED will be channeled 
directly to the community using existing similar KDP (Kecamatan Development Program) 
approaches.  Communities will have flexibility in the use of grant funds for differentiated 
approaches relevant to children's developmental needs - ages zero to six- and including home-
based, center-based, parent education suitable to local circumstances). This component will be 
implemented in three phases: 50 districts in the first phase and 75 districts in phases 2 and 3. A 
total of 600,000 poor children (2 percent of children ages 0 to 6 in the country) will be covered a 
total of 10,000 villages in 200 kabupatens. It is expected that a total of 600,000 children ages 0 to 
6
will be reached through this component. The size of the grant has been calculated to be about 
US$4,000. These grants will cover teacher's salary and a minimal package of resources and 
materials. Training costs of teachers and volunteers are covered under component 2.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Location will be determined through poverty mapping.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Under the current ECD project, the borrower has prepared an environmental safeguard manual  
 
and is following these guideline in all construction activities.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (EASES) 
 
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  01/15/2006 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
NA   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mae Chu Chang 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Christopher J. Thomas 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
