Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/02/2005 
Report No.:  AC640
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Indonesia 
Project ID:  P071296 
Project Name:  URBAN SECTOR DEVELOPMENT AND REFORM PROJECT 
Task Team Leader:  Hiroaki Suzuki 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 17, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 7, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General industry and trade sector (69%);General transportation sector 
(22%);Central government administration (4%);Other social services (3%);Sub-national 
government administration (2%) 
Theme:  Municipal governance and institution building (P);Access to urban services and 
housing (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
45.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
12.00
12.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project?s development objective is to improve urban services in the participating 
ULGs. This is the first step toward achieving the GOI?s long-term goal to develop self-
sustaining cities. To achieve this objective, the project focuses on reforming municipal 
governance, developing institutional capacity and financing priority urban investments. 
More specifically, the project will:  
 
(a) improve municipal governance through: (i) enhanced civic participation in key 
municipal decisions and monitoring/supervision of their implementation; (ii) adoption of 
extensive public information disclosure policies; and (iii) reform of procurement and 
financial management practices;  
 
(b) strengthen municipal institutional capacity to formulate long-term urban 
development strategies and plans, including local economic development and urban 
poverty reduction strategies;  
 
Page  2
(c) build municipal institutional capacity and professionalizing municipal managers and 
staff;  
 
(d) enhance fiscal capacity by rationalizing expenditures and increasing revenues;  
 
(e) finance priority urban investments; and  
 
(f) Implement at the central level, the Urban Institutional Development Program (UIDP) 
for supporting urban reforms and institutional capacity building.  
 
The achievement of the project development objective will be measured by the 
improvement of priority urban services supported through the project. It is expected that 
at least three quarters of participating ULGs will achieve this objective. The performance 
of governance reforms and institutional capacity development will be measured by the 
indicators defined in the reform action plans developed by the ULGs and agreed with the 
Bank. The timely implementation of reforms will be regularly monitored.  
 
The performance of UIDP at the national level will be measured by: (a) quantitative 
indicators, such as volume and coverage of delivered services, including their cost 
effectiveness; and (b) qualitative indicators such as responsiveness to client demand, 
measurement of proactive approach, and overall impact. UIDP?s performance will be 
evaluated according to the performance criteria to be defined in its management contract 
or Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) as well as the feedback of the central and 
local governments and the Urban Forums.   
 
3. Project Description 
USDRP will support both the ULGs and the GOI to achieve the project objective of 
improving urban services through the following two project components: A. Urban 
Reform and Institutional Support Component and B. Urban Investment Component.  
 
A. Urban Reform and Institutional Support Component US$ 9.0 million (IBRD US$ 2.5 
million, PHRD Grant US$ 5.0 million, GOI US$ 0.9 million, ULGs US$ 0.6 million)  
 
A.1 Urban Institutional Development Program (UIDP)Sub-component US$ 6.89 million 
(IBRD US$ 0.69 million, PHRD Grant US$ 5.0 million, GOI US$ 0.6 million, ULGs 
US$ 0.6 million)  
 
The UIDP will support the ULGs with the implementation of urban reform programs in 
the following areas: (a) core governance reforms in the areas of civic participation and 
transparency, procurement and financial management; (b) long-term urban development 
strategies and plans, including local economic development and urban poverty reduction 
strategies; and (c) institutional and capacity development programs identified by ULGs, 
including professionalization of municipal managers and staff as well as e-governance. 
At the central level, the UIDP will help the GOI formulate national urban policies on key 
strategic areas, particularly urban finance, poverty reduction and local economic 
development. The UIDP will finance TA, studies, training, associated equipment, 
workshops and dissemination of the national and global knowledge and experience on 
urban and governance reforms. The framework of UIDP is available in the project file.  
Page  3
A.2 Project Implementation Support US$ 2.11 million (IBRD US$ 1.81 million. GOI 
US$ 0.3 million)  
 
This sub-component will provide TA to the Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) 
for project management, coordination and supervision. The assistance will cover 
consultant support, essential equipment, workshops and training.  
 
B. Urban Investment Component US$ 52.12 million                (IBRD US$40.27 million. 
ULGs US$11.85 million)  
 
This component will finance prioritized investments for improving urban services in the 
participating ULGs. The IBRD loan proceeds of US$ 40.27 million will be on-lent to the 
ULGs as loans for cost recovery subprojects as defined by KMK35. The total investment 
amount of US$ 52.12 million has been estimated, taking into account the capacities of 
ULGs to borrow and to provide counterpart funds as well as their actual investment 
demand. The PJMs (5-year development plan of local governments) prepared by the 
ULGs include a long list of potential priority subprojects. From this list, 18 subprojects 
were identified and prepared. These subprojects were screened on the basis of 
predetermined generic eligibility criteria (such as borrowing capacity, project viability 
and the implementation status of the ULG core governance reform action plans, and the 
social and environmental safeguard framework. ) Most of the ULGs have selected 
municipal markets and bus terminals as GOI has decided that USDRP will support only 
cost recovery projects.  
 
C. Borrower?s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Executing Agency and some of the urban local governments have experienced with 
various investment projects (particularly IUIDP-type of projects) that cover a wide 
spectrum of environmental impacts and land acquisition and resettlement. Therefore, it 
relatively has an understanding on the GOI?s regulations and Bank?s requirements on 
environmental management and resettlement. At the urban local government level, the 
technical agencies and the environmental management agency (BAPEDALDA) have 
staff with certain level of capacity, although this varies across different ULGs. NGOs and 
members of civil society at the ULG level have different levels of capacity in 
understanding environmental management. With regard to land acquisition and 
resettlement, the majority of ULGs will still have to increase their awareness and capacity 
to meet the Bank?s requirements, through intensive socialization, dissemination and field 
training. NGOs and civil society members at the ULG level have limited capacity in 
understanding the Bank?s requirements on land acquisition and resettlement. There is a 
need to improve the understanding of the ULGs and relevant members of stakeholder 
forum that the whole cycle of land acquisition process ? identification, social economic 
surveys, preparation of the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARAP), and its 
implementation - should be integrated with the preparation of the mid-term development 
plan (PJM) and the annual budgeting process, in a participatory manner. As part of the 
capacity building component, the project will strengthen the capacities of sub-project 
managers and other staff, including BAPEDALDA staff, and NGOs as well as members 
of civil society, to prepare, implement and monitoring the environmental management as 
well as land acquisition and resettlement.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be located in 13 urban local governments (ULGs): 8 Kotas 
(Municipalities: Cimahi, Depok, Semarang, Yogyakarta, Blitar, Palu, Pare-Pare, and 
Palopo; and 5 Kabupatens (Districts): Musi Banyuasin, Sleman, Manokwari, Parigi 
Moutong, and Sidenreng Rappang   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Isono Sadoko (EASRD) 
Ms Farida Zaituni (EASEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Although the project is considered as category A in consideration of the possibility that 
the project could include a category A subproject, all the subprojects identified for the 
USDRP are category B and would have no large scale adverse impacts.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Most of the investments supported under USDRP are market and bus terminal 
subprojects, and would not have major significant long term impacts. Several long term 
impacts such as pollution in the air and ground water are identified as anticipated 
environmental issues, however, mitigation measures including monitoring wells are 
already being considered.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For possible resettlement and temporary relocation caused by the project, timing of the 
relocation and alternative market location has been identified.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Ministry of Public Works has prepared an Environmental Management Framework which 
is consistent with national policies and the Bank?s safeguard policies, particularly 
OP.4.01 and B.P. 4.01. This framework was cleared by the Bank. ULGs have prepared 
EAs for proposed subprojects, acceptable to the Bank, in accordance with these 
guidelines. These documents have been disclosed to the stakeholders and consultations 
on have been held on them.  
 
Indonesian involuntary resettlement regulations and procedures have also been found 
comprehensive and largely consistent with Bank procedures. In Indonesian terminology, 
LARAP (Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan) corresponds to the Bank?s 
Resettlement Action Plan. Five out of 18 USDRP supported subprojects include small 
scale land acquisition involving less than 200 project affected people. LARAPs for these 
subprojects have been prepared in consultation with the stakeholders, in accordance with 
the safeguard framework and cleared by the Bank. Eight subprojects include temporary 
or permanent relocation of vendors from the existing markets or bus terminals to 
rehabilitated or newly constructed markets or terminals. While these relocations will not 
involve land acquisition, the participating ULGs have prepared action plans for relocation 
which were agreed to by the affected vendors and have been cleared by the Bank.  
 
Safeguard framework on isolated and vulnerable people was prepared, however, it is 
concluded that the issue is not applicable for the identified subprojects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Disclosure on the safeguard policies was done through the Ministry of Public Works? 
website and municipalities? website (where available). Direct consultations were done 
between the local government with the project affected persons on the LARAP and its 
implementation and negotiation of the compensation.  
 
During the Project preparation, the Bank envisioned that there is unlikely critical social 
issues may arise later in the implementation of the proposed sub-projects. The Bank will 
include the monitoring of potential social issues that may arise during Project 
implementation and address these issues, if any, during the regular supervision missions  
 
During the first year and the mid-term of the project, Social Assessment (SA) will be 
conducted to evaluate the social impacts and provide feed-back to make the project more 
effective in addressing social issues.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/21/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/21/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/28/2004 
 
Page  6
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/02/2004  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/21/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/21/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/28/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Hiroaki Suzuki 
06/07/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Isono Sadoko 
06/07/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Farida Zaituni 
06/07/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
06/07/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
06/07/2005 
Comments:   
