Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1168 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: February 8, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Indonesia 
Project ID: P090257 
Project Name: Marginal Fishing 
Communities Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Pawan G. Patil 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
September 9, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and 
forestry sector (40%);Micro- and SME 
finance (20%);Vocational training 
(20%);Agricultural marketing and trade 
(20%) 
Theme: Other environment and natural 
resources management (P);Biodiversity 
(S);Rural non-farm income generation 
(S);Personal and property rights (S);Small 
and medium enterprise support (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 40 
IBRD: 40 
Other financing amounts by source:  
GOI(10m); 
GEF ($10m) 
Page  2
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
 
A.  Project Development Objective 
 
The development objective for the proposed Indonesia Marginal Fishing Communities Development 
Project is the reduction of poverty in rural coastal communities in participating districts through 
sustainable utilization and collaborative management of coastal ecosystems.  This will be accomplished 
by (i) assisting local governments and rural coastal communities (and particularly youth, indigenous 
people and women living in these communities) to sustainably co-manage the associated coastal 
ecosystems and fisheries resources, on which they are often dependent for their livelihood, and (ii) 
establishing public-private partnerships to promote economic diversification and sustainable growth in 
order to lift them out of poverty and provide economic alternatives to continued overexploitation of the 
depleted coastal resource base.   
 
The rationale behind this objective is that by the nature of their remote location, the approximately 5,500 
rural coastal communities in Indonesia are often marginalized from the economic development process 
and they have few livelihood opportunities outside of a dwindling fisheries resource base.  They often 
lack access to markets, appropriate technology, education, economic opportunities, and microfinance to 
improve their lives, and capacity to sustainably manage natural and coastal resources.  The project will 
support participatory approaches that will protect the coastal ecosystems that support critical biodiversity, 
and promote public-private partnerships to stimulate sustainable economic growth in these same coastal 
areas, particularly in opportunities outside of the fisheries.  One theme that will run across the entire 
project is its focus on the vulnerable members of rural coastal communities, including youth, women, and 
indigenous peoples. 
 
At a reduced scale, the above approach  is currently being piloted through the Indonesia Marginal Fishing 
Communities Development Pilot, funded by a $1.6 million Japanese Social Development Fund grant to 
the Government of Indonesia.  The Government has requested that the Bank assist in scaling-up this pilot. 
 
B.  Global Objective  
 
The global objective of this project is to establish viable collaborative coastal ecosystem management in 
participating districts.  The proposed areas under collaborative management are globally significant 
coastal and marine ecosystems (including key species) which contribute to the livelihood and food 
security of resource dependent users.    
 
This objective responds to the guidance provided by the first Conference of the Parties to the Convention 
on Biological Diversity, reflected in the GEF뭩 Operational Program 2: Coastal, Marine and Freshwater 
Ecosystems.  OP2 prioritizes projects that promote the conservation and sustainable use of biological 
diversity of coastal and marine resources under threat.  Throughout the rural coastal areas of Indonesia, 
communities are directly dependent on critical coastal ecosystems for the livelihood, the same ecosystems 
which support a wide array of globally significant biodiversity, such as sea grasses, mangroves, sea 
turtles).  However, these critical ecosystems are under threat from the vary populations dependent on 
them.  The project will promote an ecosystem-based  approach (community-based marine protected 
areas). 
 
Page  3
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
A.  What are the alternative development interventions or approaches being considered?  If an 
approach is favored, what is the rationale for it? 
The alternatives to the proposed interventions, which utilize a CDD delivery mechanism for 
empowerment and service delivery, with a sectoral overlay and technical assistance to address the 
predominant common issue of sustainable use and management of the coastal resource base, include: 
 

A
Sectoral program only
 to address the needs of coastal fishing communities, which would just 
be focused on the coastal resource base, the fisheries they support and sustainable resource 
management.  However, past lessons from the first phase of the World Bank-financed Indonesia 
Coral Reef Rehabilitation and Management Program (COREMAP), as well as numerous other 
examples throughout the country and indeed the world, demonstrate that it is extremely difficult 
to address the sustainability of coastal resource use and the health of these resources, without also 
addressing the economic incentives driving the use of these resources, and the often limited 
opportunities for employment outside of fishing in many rural coastal fishing communities. 
 

A
CDD project only
 to address the needs of coastal fishing communities, which would just be 
focused on empowerment for delivery of basic services, and potentially expanding economic 
opportunities.  However, surveys and discussions with coastal communities revealed that the 
main source of livelihoods in many coastal fishing communities is the coastal resource base, so 
that without addressing the use and sustainability of that resource, CDD projects will not be able 
to prevent the continued overexploitation and decline of the resource base and the livelihoods that 
it supports. 
 
B.  What lending instrument is being proposed and why; or what alternative instruments are being 
considered? 
A
specific investment loan (SIL) is being proposed, as the simplest and most efficient instrument to 
deliver the proposed projec
t뭩 objectives. 
 
C.  If the proposed operation is to support a sector program, what would be the key elements of the 
program and how would the proposed project fit into it? 
The proposed project will support the Government of Indonesia뭩 coastal and fisheries sector: specifically 
the  efficient and sustainable management of maritime resources, the rehabilitation of damaged coastal 
and marine ecosystems, and the improvement of socio-economic conditions of coastal communities as 
well as GOI뭩 regional development sector.  Similarly, the proposed project supports the sectoral program 
outlined in the World Bank뭩 Fisheries Approach Paper: Saving Fish and Fishers (2004), which 
emphasizes assistance for improved governance of coastal and fisheries resources in developing 
countries, and the promotion of alternative livelihoods to fishing.  
 
D.  What project components are being considered?  Can indicative costs be identified? 
 
Component A: Co-Management of Coastal Ecosystems and Fisheries Resources  
The objective of this component is to establish viable collaborative management partnerships for coastal 
ecosystems and fisheries resources between local governments and rural coastal communities and based 
on each partner뭩 comparative advantage to undertake various roles and responsibilities.  This component 
would likely support: 

Strengthening government and local institutions in support of co-management;  
 

Support to rural coastal communities in support of co-management
,
such as (i) providing legal 
support in the form of access/use rights and/or management rights to the coastal ecosystems and 
Page  4
fisheries resources, as well as technical and facilitation assistance to develop community-based 
resource management plans; (ii) providing scientific and monitoring support to obtain the information 
necessary for communities to make informed resource management decisions (e.g. monitoring and 
evaluation of the baseline resource situation and the impacts of co-management upon the resources); 
and (iii) providing participatory surveillance and enforcement support to help patrol and enforce 
community management plans. 

Critical habitat management and protection in  rural coastal areas, 
in order to assist the intended 
beneficiaries to manage and protect the key ecosystems and habitats that support the natural resource 
base.  These activities would include: (i)  specific support for marine protected areas (e.g. 
identification, guidance on establishment, delineation, boundary markers, mapping, etc.); (ii) mapping 
of critical coastal habitats near intended beneficiaries; and (iii) specific critical habitat restoration 
activities (e.g. coral reef rehabilitation, mangrove reforestation, wetland restoration, etc.). 

Public awareness activities, 
to inform rural coastal fishing communities about the benefits and 
opportunities presented by the project, as well as the need for sustainable coastal resource use. 
 
Component B: Economic Diversification and Sustainable Growth  
The objective of this component is to promote economic diversification and sustainable growth in rural 
coastal communities, which would both ease current pressures on the depleting natural resource base and 
expand private sector investment in these areas.  A special emphasis will be placed on the most marginal 
of coastal inhabitants (youth, women/widows, and indigenous people).  This component would likely 
include the following activities: 

Public services and infrastructure
 in rural coastal fishing communities, through block grants 
identified and chosen by the communities as necessary to support economic diversification and 
sustainable growth.  

Support for small and medium-sized private sector enterprises 
in rural coastal areas, such as (i) 
technical assistance and pilots to help demonstrate innovative, cost-saving and sustainable 
technologies appropriate for specific communities; (ii) technical assistance and capacity-building for 
small to medium-size enterprise development (e.g. extension and technical assistance for better 
business management, business planning, accounting, cash flow management, etc.; (iii) assistance to 
enterprises to form production cooperatives and outgrower schemes with linkages to value-added 
processors and other potential markets; (iv) assistance to enterprises to improve the reliability, 
volume and quality of the product, etc.); and (v) promotion of linkages to local or venture capital 
finance for such enterprises. 

Facilitate access to microbanking services
 (credit and savings products) for rural coastal communities 
and small and medium-size enterprises in these areas. This may include capacity building to 
strengthen local banking and micro-credit institutions for transparent governance, financial 
accounting and reporting, that would increase their creditworthiness and facilitate capital flows from 
larger banks;  investments to reduce impediments to extending existing commercial microbanking 
operations to rural coastal areas. 

Livelihood and Development
 
for Vulnerable Groups (youth, women/widows, indigenous people).
 
The 
objective of this component would be to reduce unemployment (23%), underemployment (43%) and 
increase employability of youth in rural coastal areas, and improve the lives of women/widows, 
indigenous peoples and other vulnerable people living in coastal areas.  For example, the project will 
help create a new generation of successful young entrepreneurs in coastal areas by providing them 
with the educational opportunities, targeted financial resources, skills, training and business 
development services necessary to start youth-led micro-enterprises and small businesses, which will 
in turn, serve as engines of growth and job creation in their communities and as a result, reduce 
pressure on coastal ecosystems.  Lessons from PEKKA and COREMAP will be used to design 
interventions to support women/widows and indigenous peoples.   
 
Page  5
E.  What issues are there at this stage, if any, regarding possible partnerships and co-financing with 
other international agencies? 
Because the proposed project would focus on establishing collaborative management partnerships 
between local governments and rural coastal communities in Indonesia to sustainably manage coastal 
ecosystems containing globally significant biodiversity, the Global Environment Facility (GEF) is 
expected to be a key partner.  Likewise, the United Kingdom development agency (DFID) could be a 
potential co-financier, due to their interest in decentralization and focus on the global fishery crisis.   
However, support from both need confirmation.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Marginal Fishing Communities Development PILOT is currently being implemented within 6 
Districts:  Tapanuli Tengah (SumUt), Serang (Banten, Java), Dompu (Sumbawa, NTB), Kepulauan 
Sangihe (SulUt), Bantaeng (SulSel), Muna (Sultra).  The larger project is likely to be concentrated in key 
Districts where the need is greatest and the chance for successful implementation is highest.  
 
E.  Borrower뭩 Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Satisfactory. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[X] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Pawan G. Patil 
02/31/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Rahul Raturi 
02/08/2005 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
