Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)                                    <    , i
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 15, 2004                          Report No.:AC1022
A. Basic Project Data
A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: Indonesia                             | Project ID: P077175
Project: Domestic Gas Sector Restructuring      TTL: Noureddine Berrah
Total project cost (by component):
Appraisal Date: November 30, 2004               Loan/Credit amount ($m):
IBRD: 80
Board Date: February 2005
Other financing amounts by source:                 ($m.)
FOREIGN SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED)
Managing Unit: EASEG                            Sector: Oil and gas (100%)
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery?  Yes?  []          No?   [X]
Environmental Category: A
A.2. Project Objectives
The proposed project aims at expanding the supply and utilization of natural gas, the cleanest fossil fuel, in
Indonesia's domestic market to improve economic efficiency and reduce pollution resulting from the heavy
reliance on fuel oil and diesel.
A.3. Project Description
The proposed project financed by the World Bank consists of: (i) a gas distribution component to expand gas
utilization in Banten/West Java region, and (ii) a capacity building component to strengthen PGN's (the project
owner) financial, planning, engineering and management capability. The project is linked to a Japan Bank for
International Cooperation (JBIC) financed gas transmission project to bring gas from South Sumatra to
Banten/West Java region.
The distribution component comprises: (i) construction of class 300 steel pipelines of 4 to 16 inch diameter
(about 235.2 km) along with control valves and corrosion control facilities; (ii) construction of class 150 pipelines
of 4 to 16 inch diameter (about 71.4 km) along with control valves and corrosion control facilities; (iii)
installation of five off-take and two pressure regulation stations; (iv) installation of around 210 customer metering
and regulating stations; (v) installation of SCADA system; and (vi) provision of radio/telecommunication
equipment, IT support and emergency response equipment.
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Report and the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the
distribution component, prepared in 1998, were updated and approved by the MOE in 2003. A written statement
provided by PGN shows that land acquisition and relocation of people will not be required. Therefore, a full RAP
is not required for the Bank financed project.
For the JBIC-financed transmission project linked to the Bank financed distribution project, project preparation
activities are well under way with construction planned to commence in January 2005. The EIA Report was
prepared and approved by the Ministry of Environment (MOE) in 1999. It has been discussed and approved by
JBIC, and disclosed to the public following The Government of Indonesia (GOI) and JBIC's disclosure
procedure. The approval of MOE was re-confirmed in December 2003 and copies of EIA Report, EMP and the
minutes of discussions between JBIC and PGN were provided to the Bank during preappraisal. A social
assessment report and a resettlement action plan (RAP) were prepared in 1998 to comply with GOI and JBIC's
requirements. The RAP was recently updated by PGN at JBIC's request. The implementation of the RAP is
underway. A summary report on the history of the resettlement process, the consultation process and status of the
implementation of RAP have been prepared by PGN and submitted to the World Bank.
A 129 km section of the gas transmission pipeline between Bojonegara and Cimanggas, however, has not been



included in the EIA of the transmission component. The World Bank requested and it has been agreed, that a full
EIA will be carried out for this section. PGN has agreed with JBIC on the process and has scheduled to complete
the complementary EIA Report and, if required, the RAP. The work on the EIA is progressing well and the EIA
Report is expected to be submitted to the Bank prior to the proposed project appraisal.
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The distribution project would support construction of new pipelines and branch lines to extend PGN's gas
distribution system in West Java (Provinces of West Java and Banten). PGN's existing distribution system in this
region is readily divided into three Zones: 1- Jakarta, 2- Tangerang, and 3 - Karawang. The proposed project will
be implemented in Zone 2 and Zone 3.
In Zone 2, the new distribution pipelines will traverse industrial development corridors between West Jakarta and
the Cilegon/Merak area, including Anyer, Serang, Cikande, Balaraja, Jatiuwung and Tangerang. In Zone 3
expansion, the new distribution lines will service industrial development zones east of Jakarta including Bekasi,
Karawang, Cikampek and Purwakarta.
All of these areas are heavily urbanized or industrialized. There are no protected areas or critical natural habitat
sites in the vicinity, and none of the lines are routed through culturally or socially sensitive areas. The proposed
distribution pipelines will follow existing national, provincial and district roads.
The gas transmission pipeline, linked to the Bank financed project, will bring gas from Parardewa in South
Sumatra, precisely from the outlet of Pertamina's (the owner of gas field) Gas Treatment Center to Kabupaten
Serang in West Java, through on-shore route to East Lampung (Labuhan Maringgai), then off-shore route (west
part of the Java Sea) to Serang, West Java. A 129 km transmission pipeline will also be built between Bojonegara
and Cimanggas.
Most of the areas along the transmission pipeline routes are plantation fields, farm fields, fish farms, human
settlements and industrial areas. There are no protected areas, or critical natural habitat sites in the vicinity, and
none of the lines are routed through culturally or socially sensitive areas.
B. Check Environmental Category A [X], B [],C [F], I[]
Comments:
The proposed project will pose no significant negative impacts. The Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for
the project has been completed to accommodate any incremental environmental impacts.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Yes                  No
Environmental Assessment (_P/BP/GP 4.01)                  [X]                   [I]
Natural Habitats (_P/BP 4.04)                              [ ]                  [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                  [1                   [X]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-)             []                   [X]
Involuntarv Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                      []                   [X]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                               []                   [X]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                       []                   [X]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                []                   [XI
Proiects in Disputed Areas (_P/BP/GP 7.60)                 [ ]                  [XI
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)       I[]                   [XI
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D. 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The distribution project is not expected to have any significant impact on natural habitats, forests or protected or
sensitive areas, indigenous people, or cultural property. Furthermore, there will be no involuntary resettlement
under the project. During the construction phase, the major negative environmental impacts will be temporary
interference to the traffic in the project area and some temporary air, water pollution, as well as vegetation
removals during the construction of the project. On the social side, some local businesses along the pipeline
routes are likely to suffer temporarily due to physical obstruction caused by construction activities. But none of
the impacts are major, sustained or irreversible. During the operation phase of the system, threats to the
environment and safety of the population are negligible but could materialize during major accidents.
The transmission project's (linked to the Bank financed project) major impacts include: (1) Pre-construction: a)
the increase of pest population and floral disease on the pipeline route due to land property acquisition; b) the
decrease of the communities income due to land acquisition; c) the increase of dust and noise levels, and
disturbance to local communities and local traffic due to mobilization of equipment and materials. (2)
Construction Phase: a) soil erosion rate increase; b) disturbances to wild animals and attacks by wild animals to
project workers and communities; c) threat to the pipeline safety from potential land subsidence. (3) Operation
Phase: a) illegal use of right-of-way (ROW); b) threat to the pipeline safety in fault areas.
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
area.
There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts in the project area. The substitution of natural gas for
petroleum products in the region will reduce emissions and contribute to the improvement of the ambient air
quality.
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives : The following alternatives were sequentially considered during the
project design and preparation:
Without project alternative: Prior to engaging in this important investment program, PGN considered to continue
a business as usual approach entailing a less aggressive strategy of conversion to gas of small industries and
businesses and therefore a low growth of the Banten-West Java gas market. The "without project alternative" has
been rejected for three reasons: (a) the expansion of the gas market was in line with the government energy
strategy to develop the domestic gas market because of its economic and environmental advantages over oil
products and coal; (b) a market scoping study showed a strong preference of small industries and businesses for
gas; and (c) expansion of the gas market would strengthen the financial situation of the company.
Choice of gas supply: Two alternatives were considered for gas supply: gas fields in South Sumatra or onshore
and offshore small fields in West Java. An Asian Development Bank (ADB) study found that, delivering gas
from the South Sumatra fields to the West Java market was preferable to relying on closer but limited and more
costly to develop fields in West Java onshore and offshore. The gas reserves in South Sumatra fields have been
formally certified by a reputable international company (D&M), which has issued certification indicating 3.85 tcf
in the Proven and Risk Adjusted categories. This level of reserve could easily support up to 500 mmcfd of gas
supply for the economic life of the proposed project (20 years). The option of transmitting gas from South
Sumatra to West Java was selected.
Expansion of the distribution system: PGN considered alternatives for the expansion of its distribution system
taking into accounts: (a) the capability of the existing system; (b) the locations and demand of the potential
consumers (demand nodes); (c) the quantities and input locations of gas supply to the system (supply nodes); and
(d) severe constraints on the right of way in highly urbanized areas. The latter reduced the number of alternatives
for expansion to two, mainly differentiated by the pipeline diameters along the same routes to satisfy a demand of
500 mmcfd in the first case and a demand of 800 mmcfd in the second case.  The first option would have



required further reinforcement of the system after 5-7 years to meet the full potential demand of 800 mmcfd by
2016. It was rejected because it was less cost effective and would have entailed more temporary negative
environmental and social impacts.
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the distribution project, an EMP has been developed as part of the EIA. According to the EMP, all the
negative impacts can be mitigated satisfactorily by applying PGN's established standard operating procedures for
design and construction and specific guidance to PGN's contractors. These procedures include (a) no more than
100 m section of trenching will be open at one time; (b) each section will be refilled within 24 hours, (c) all
excavations will be restored to their original or better condition; (d) water used for hydrostatic testing must be
clean water without any additive chemicals, etc. PGN has adequate safety and emergency procedures. These
have been reviewed during preappraisal and found to be adequate but given the important expansion of the
system, the project includes acquisition of SCADA equipment to improve monitoring and control of the system
and enhancement of PGN's safety and integrity management system. In addition, PGN will establish a Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) with overall responsibility for coordinating and managing the project, and an
environmental coordinating office (ECO) to oversee and support the monitoring and mitigating activities. The
ECO will serve as the core unit for environmental management and monitoring. Its capacity will be strengthened
under the environmental management capacity building program proposed in the EMP. These arrangements are
regarded as adequate.
For the transmission project linked to the Bank financed project, an EMP was developed to identify the
procedures and measures to be taken to mitigate the negative environmental and social impacts. These procedures
and measures include: 1) pre-construction period: (a) utilizing the acquired lands as soon as possible; undertaking
cleaning on the lands which have been covered by bushes and allowing the previous land owners to use the land
until commencement of the land cleaning activities; (b) providing compensations to the inhabitants whose
properties are affected as soon as possible and directly; (c) low speed driving of vehicles; using tarps or plastic
cover of the vehicles; and transporting project equipment and materials during off-peak periods when passing
through populated areas. 2) construction phase: (a) in the outer left and right sides of the ROW ditches for
containing the erosion exiting from the ROW will be made; the ROW surface will be undertaken as soon as
possible after the gas piping is installed/buried; and the inside of the ROW will be replanted with legume species;
(b) installing signs for saving wild animals; conducting training for construction workers for not disturbing wild
animals; (c) undertaking soil compaction for base along the pipeline or soil material change. 3) Operation phase:
(a) installing signs restricting the illegal use of ROW; cooperating with local government and undertaking regular
surveillance along the pipelines; (b) the piping installation at the locations of faults will employ the technology
suitable for the volcanic and tectonic earthquake areas. The EMP will be implemented by PGN which has a solid
record in building and operating transmission gas projects in an environmentally sound manner. During the pre-
construction stage, the business development unit will be responsible for implementing the procedures of EMP.
During the construction stage, quality assurance, quality control and environmental, health and safety managers
under the project manager will be responsible for implementing the EMP and monitoring plans. During the
project operation, the environment & community manager under the project coordinator will be in charge of
environmental management.
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Major stakeholders of the project include national and local governments, local communities and businesses
affected by the projects and related NGOs at both national and local levels. Public consultation and information
disclosure will follow the Indonesia's AMDAL processes and meet the World Bank's requirements. Public
hearings involving representatives of interested government agencies, the business community, and local NGOs
have been held to review the EAs. No significant new issues have been raised during these consultations. PGN
plans to conduct further hearings at the district and municipal level only after project approval and
commencement. For all the subcomponents and activities likely to be conducted under the Project, public
consultation will be carried out at local level in the kecematan (sub- districts) where the project activities will take
place, as required by Indonesia's AMDAL process.



F. Disclosure Requirements    Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  06/01/04  or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ...1...1...  or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               ...1.../...  or Not Applicable
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
../... 1... or Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  ... ...1  or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ... ...1 or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               . . ..    or Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  .    ...  or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              .. ./ ...  or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               .../ ...  or Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  .../ ...  or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              .../ ...  or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               .../ ...  or Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                  ...   1   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure              ... /. .  or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop               ...  ...  or Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Section III - Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                              Yes      No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                  X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?   X
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?         X
OPIBP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                                                     Yes     No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical)
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                         Yes     No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:                                     Yes     No
Does the EA include adequate measures?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on
physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                                      Yes     No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation with the
Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and approved by
the Regional Social Development Unit?



OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                              Yes     No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan / policy
framework / policy process?
OPIBP 4.36 - Forests:                                                               Yes     No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried
out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for
certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                                        Yes     No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) been
reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been made for
public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                                      Yes     No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then has this
been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                               Yes     No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the project,
including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue,
been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                                       Yes     No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language
that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                             Yes     No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the
implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard
impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same
been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
Signed and submitted by:                                Name                           Date
Task Team Leader:                    Noureddine Ber4ihK                          0o/; L1 Z  St c
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:     Bekir Onursal                                      A / cq
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:     Bruce Harris'1/Z /2 .
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:                          U                        I'2A/O'
Approved by:                                       A    Nine                           Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:     Glenn Morgan /4,,,iM ,  -
Comments:                                                 /
Sector Manager:                      Junhui Wu 
Comments:                                       'OV *71C2c+1
Leiping Wang
N:\BERRAH\Indonesia\Domestic Gas Sector Restructuring\ISDS\ISDS - Appraisal Stage (REVISED) 09-10-04.doc
September 11, 2004 12:08 PM



