Page  1
 
 
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC230 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  March 23, 2004 
I.  
BASIC INFORMATION 
A.  Basic Project Data 
Country:  
Islamic Republic of Iran 
Project ID:  
P071170 
Project Name:
  IRAN - Integrated Land and 
Water Management 
Task Team Leader:  
Satoru Ueda 
Estimated Appraisal Date:
 May 8, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 120-140 
Estimated Board Date:  
September 16, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: 
MNSRE 
Lending Instrument: 
Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: 
Irrigation and drainage (80%); General 
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%) 
Theme:  
Decentralization (P);Civic 
engagement, participation and community 
driven development (P);Rural services and 
infrastructure (P);Water resource management 
(P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
Allan Rotman, Helen Shahriari, Tjaart 
Schillhorn-Van Veen, Ulrich Schmitt, Satoru Ueda 
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m.) 
B.   Project Objective 
The development objective of the proposed project is to enhance current government efforts to 
achieve sustainable integrated land and water management at the river basin level through:  (i) the 
rehabilitation and development of irrigation and drainage infrastructure to improve water use 
efficiency and increase productivity; (ii) improvements in land and soil conservation in the upper 
watershed to reduce erosion and sedimentation; and (iii) training and capacity building and 
stakeholder participation in sustainable management of water resources. 
The project will enable water resources in the Alborz River basin to be managed in a sustainable 
manner by addressing the concerns described above.  Improving management of arable and 
rangeland in the catchment area of the Alborz Dam (currently under construction with funding 
from the Government of Iran) will reduce the risks of siltation from watershed degradation. 
Benefits will accrue to all stakeholders in rural and urban areas.  The primary beneficiaries are 
farmers, livestock herders, urban residents and forest dwellers.  By including users from farm-level 
Water Users Associations (WUAs) and micro-catchment level watershed management/forest 
cooperatives, the project will support decision making on water resources management down to the 
lowest appropriate levels.  A comprehensive river basin management approach will facilitate 
solutions to basin-level water allocation and water quality problems, leading eventually to better 
natural resource management and conservation.  This will provide valuable lessons for replication 
in other river basins of the country. 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description 
The project envisages the following components:  
1.  
Upper Watershed and Forestry Management (US$15 million): 
This will include: (a) technical 
assistance, master planning and capacity building in the upper watershed; (b) forest and 
rangeland rehabilitation and management (51,500 ha); (c) soil and water protection measures 
over the upper watershed area; and (d) assistance for community-based forestry and rangeland 
management.  In the alpine rangeland and forest areas, overgrazing and illegal timber cutting 
have caused serious pasture and forest degradation, which has led to increased soil erosion and 
sediment yields downstream.  The component aims at establishing effective soil and water 
protection measures and improving sustainable and participatory community-based forest and 
rangeland management including the establishment of cooperatives in the upper watershed;  
2. 
Irrigation and Drainage Management (US$155 million):  
This will include:  (a) rehabilitation 
and construction of irrigation and drainage systems covering a total area of about 52,000 ha, of 
which 33,000 ha are traditional irrigation areas and 19,000 ha are new irrigation areas 
(currently being irrigated by ground and rain water); (b) capacity building and technical 
assistance for establishment of WUAs and their increased O&M/cost recovery function; and  
(c) agricultural extension and research activities to support farmers for improved water 
management and crop diversification.  The component aims to enhance irrigation water use 
efficiency and agriculture production/income by rehabilitation and modernization of the 
irrigation/drainage systems and improved O&M through development of participatory water 
management including training and agriculture extension/research support;  
3. 
Integrated Basin Water Management (US$9.0 million):
  This comprises:  (a) establishment of 
a Basin Water Committee (BWC) and Basin Water Fund (BWF); and (b) establishment of a 
GIS-based information dissemination and optimized water distribution system on a basin scale:  
 
- 
The former sub-component will include:  (i) establishment and technical support for the 
BWC, comprising the key stakeholders, including: Regional Water Authority of 
Mazandaran and Golestan (RWAMG); Mazandaran Jehad-e Agricultural Organization 
(MJAO); and end user representatives; (ii) establishment of the BWF to provide WUAs, 
forestry cooperatives, and other communities and informal groups with support for 
community-based land and water conservation and income generating activities under the 
guidance of the BWC.  This sub-component aims to support both integrated land/water 
resources management on a basin scale and community-based initiatives for improved 
land/water resources management. 
 
-  The latter sub-component includes: (i) technical assistance for detailed system 
development; (ii) capacity building and training of the core management unit within the 
RWAMG and associated entities; and (iii) provision of monitoring equipment and 
decision-making tools.  This sub-component aims to enhance inter-sectoral coordination 
through the GIS-based system and the optimized water distribution system on a basin scale 
and enable distribution of stored water to farming areas in the most efficient manner.  
4. 
Environment Management (US$5.0 million):  
This pertains to the implementation of the 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) of the Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA), 
including water quality monitoring, integrated pest management, and other mitigation 
measures.   
 
Page  3
 
 
5. 
Project Implementation and Coordination Support
 (
US$5.0 million
): This involves:  
(i) project implementation and coordination support for the PMUs (Project Management Units) 
and PIUs (Project Implementation Units) and (ii) their monitoring and evaluation (M&E), 
reporting and auditing activities. 
 
Regarding institutional arrangements, community-based WUAs based on Iran’s Cooperatives Law 
were successfully piloted at the farm level in the previous Irrigation Improvement Project.  This 
project will replicate WUAs up to the secondary level of the irrigation network.  In the previous 
Irrigation Improvement Project (IIP), Water Users Groups (WUGs) were established up to the 
tertiary and quarterly levels which would mean an area of approximately 300 ha.  This project aims 
to go a step higher and establish WUAs up to the secondary level which would cover a wider area 
(for instance 3,000 ha instead of 300) in all irrigated areas of the project.  Furthermore, the 
project’s team and the government are conducting an institutional analysis and preparing a 
mechanism to operationalize the BWC concept with adequate civil society participation by 
appraisal.  
Total costs of the project are estimated at about US$189 million.  It is expected that the IBRD loan 
would be of the order of US$120-140 million, with the remainder funded by Government 
counterpart financing and beneficiary contributions.  
D.  Project Location (if known) 
The project is located in the Alborz River basin of Mazandran Province, which drains into the 
Caspian Sea. 
E.   Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
The GOI has established a PMU comprised of the Ministry of Jihad and Agriculture (MOJA) and 
Ministry of Energy (MOE) representatives and two PIUs in Mazandaran. The PMU will be 
responsible for:  (i) overall project coordination and management; (ii) procurement and financial 
management; (iii) implementation of the EMP; and (iv) staff training, research and knowledge 
management.  The PMU will be guided by the Steering Committee for the project composed of the 
key representatives of the Ministry of Economics and Finance (MOEF), MOJA, MOE, the 
Management and Planning Organization (MPO), and other central government agencies. 
Project implementation will be handled by the PIUs of RWAMG and the MJAO.  The MJAO is 
responsible for work on both the upper watershed/forestry management component and the 
irrigation and drainage management component.  The RWAMG is responsible for the trunk 
drainage and irrigation component as well as overall water resources management. The Department 
of the Environment (DOE) will supervise the implementation of the environmental management 
component in compliance with the EMP.  The two PIUs will need to have adequate implementation 
capacity and work in close coordination in order to ensure successful implementation.  
The BWC and BWF will be established in order to:  (i) facilitate inter-sectoral consultation on a 
basin scale; (ii) prepare a basin master plan and monitor its implementation and progress in 
coordination with MJAO and RWAMG, as well as stakeholders within a basin; and (iii) provide 
direct support for WUAs, forestry cooperatives, and other communities and informal groups to help 
improve their land/water resources management and sustain their livelihood through income 
generating activities.  Technical assistance and outreach programs will be provided to empower 
WUAs, forestry cooperatives and the BWC to support community-based land and water 
management activities.   
Page  4
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
The present project, categorized as Category A under OP4.01, triggers seven (7) safeguard 
policies—environment assessment, pest management, involuntary resettlement, forests, safety of 
dams, cultural property and projects on international waterways — for which mitigation measures 
will be undertaken as will be described in the Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) report 
that is under preparation by the Government.  
The project includes in its area of influence the Alborz Dam (height = 80meters), which is not 
financed by the project.  The dam and its reservoir area are currently under construction, under a 
separate project that is fully financed by the Government.  A separate environmental assessment 
report was previously prepared for the dam project, which has been approved by the Iranian 
Department of Environment (DOE).  
Project investment activities are planned in the forested upper watershed area that comprises the 
catchment area for the Alborz Dam.  The area downstream of the dam is a well developed 
agricultural plain that also will have investment activities.  Water quality and quantity will be 
monitored under the project, and community activities will be arranged for environmental 
improvements in both the upper and lower watersheds. 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[YES] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01):
 In order to take into account the new activities 
for the upper and lower watersheds as proposed under this project, additional work is being 
carried out to prepare an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) Report that will 
comply with all Bank Safeguard policies, including OP 4.01.
 
[NO] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04): 
As there are no critical natural habitats of international 
significance affected by the project, or significant conversion of natural habitats, OP4.04 is 
not triggered. The cleared reservoir area for the dam comprises agricultural land and 
degraded forest. Conservation of the upper forests and habitats is addressed through the 
conservation and sustainable forest management activities of the upper watershed and 
forestry management component. 
[YES] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
): 
As this project will develop new irrigated agricultural areas 
and the use of pesticides is an existing issue, OP 4.09 is triggered. A project specific 
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPM) is being 
p
repared to address this policy and will be 
incorporated into the ESA.
 
[YES] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12): The ongoing construction of the Alborz Dam in 
the project site (financed by the government) has resulted in the displacement (in process) 
of about 4000 people in 18 villages. The task team is in the process of reaching an 
agreement with the government regarding a course of action to retrofit the resettlement 
process for those that have already been compensated and relocated from the project area, 
so that the revised Resettlement Plan (RP) will be consistent with the provisions of OP 4.12 
for all affected people. In addition, two of draft Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPF) are 
being prepared by the government for the potential land acquisition under the 
irrigation/drainage component (agricultural plain) and livestock reduction under the upper 
watershed and forestry management component.  
Page  5
 
 
[NO] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
The ongoing social assessment has not indicated any data to 
trigger this policy. 
[YES] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36): 
The above mentioned ESA Report will address this policy and 
p
rovide recommendations.  The policy is triggered as there are many small communities 
with a total of approximately 7000 people in the upper forested watershed actively using 
forest resources.  A forestry management plan will be prepared in a participatory manner to 
introduce sustainable forestry management practices.     
 
[YES] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37): 
An independent Panel of Experts (POE) has been 
constituted to oversee the preparation and implementation of the dam safety aspect in such a 
way that its recommendations will be incorporated into the ESA Report.
 
[YES] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
The existing environmental assessment 
report addressed cultural property in the dam site and upper watershed areas through a field 
b
ased inspection and prior review of the project by the Sari Cultural Heritage Organization. 
Several shrines (approximately 10) and tombs (approximately 6) are being protected from 
flooding by the reservoir. Chance find procedures were also used during the construction 
activities. 
 
For the downstream irrigation areas, the initial construction of some structures has started. 
Currently, the alignment of the irrigation structures is being designed to avoid cultural 
property sites identified by a field based inspection.  To conform with 
Iranian regulations, the 
conservation and buffer zone distances from cultural property sites must be respected during the 
construction activities.  The ESA will review all actions carried out to date and ensure appropriate 
additional mitigation measures are implemented.
 
[NO] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60) 
 
Not applicable. 
[YES] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
As this project involves construction of irrigation and drainage systems, and one dam on a 
river flowing into an international waterway (the Caspian Sea) as specified under the policy, 
and to conform with this policy, a notification of the proposed project will be issued to the 
riparian states. 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
  
[X] A [ ] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:  
III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and 
prepare to mitigate them? 
To address the multiple safeguard issues in this project, the task team initiated scoping and review 
of the major potential impacts in late 2002.  The environmental assessment prepared for the Alborz 
Dam project was reviewed, and site visits were conducted to the full project area.  Based on the 
scoping, terms of reference for additional environmental and social assessment studies were 
discussed with the government, which are now underway.  Discussions between the Bank and the 
government indicate that the latter is in the process of deciding on the approach to mitigate possible 
adverse impacts on those who have already received cash compensation under the dam project and 
Page  6
 
 
have moved out of the project area, but may not have found sustainable livelihoods after 
resettlement.  The study area of the ESA now under preparation includes the Alborz Dam, the 
upper watershed and the downstream areas where the irrigation works will be constructed. 
Given the multidisciplinary nature of the project and the limited capacity of national consulting 
firms, the quality of the ESA is being closely supervised by the task team.  A consulting firm has 
been recruited to assist the task team with compliance and quality control for the Bank’s safeguard 
policies.  In addition, several Bank safeguard specialists are working with the Government to 
ensure compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies, and this is being overseen by the MNA 
Regional Safeguards Adviser, with support from the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit of 
the Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Development Network (ESDQC).  
B.   How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
Initial consultations have already commenced in the project area on the potential impacts of the 
project, through a combination of interviews with farmers and other residents, and through 
meetings with technical specialists in the government agencies. A second set of public 
consultations was held in February 2004 during preparation of the Draft ESA Report.  The Final 
Draft ESA Executive Summary will be available in Farsi and disclosed at appropriate locations in 
Iran.  The draft Resettlement Plan and the draft Resettlement Policy Frameworks for the 
downstream irrigation area and the upper watershed area, which are included in the draft ESA, will 
also be disclosed in Farsi at appropriate locations. 
IV. AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
The project is classified as Category A in accordance with OP 4.01, and triggers seven safeguards 
policies.  During recent missions, the Regional Safeguards Advisor and the task team discussed 
with the Government the key requirements for the ESA Report in order to comply with the Bank's 
safeguards policies.  The Bank has also engaged consultants to provide support to the task team so 
that the Draft ESA (including Executive Summary) is presented in draft by early April 2004.  
Once the issues noted in the table in Section II are addressed, the project itself will lead to 
improvement in water resources management. 
 
Agreed Target Date for Quality Enhancement Review 
A Quality Enhancement Review (QER) meeting to address issues related to safeguard policy issues 
is expected to be held in April 2004.  
 
Signed and submitted by 
 
 
Name
 Date
 
Task Team Leader: 
Satoru Ueda 
March 23, 2004 
Project Safeguards Reviewer 1: 
Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Project Safeguards Reviewer 2: 
Stephen F. Lintner 
 
Project Safeguards Reviewer 3: 
Maninder Gill 
 
 
Approved by:
 Name
 Date
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Sherif Kamel F. Arif  
 
 
Sector Manager: 
Vijay Jagannathan 
 
Page  7
 
 
 
