Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  33921 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10/18/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P087734 
Project Name: IQ-EMERGENCY ELECTRICITY 
Task Team Leader: Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 31, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (100%) 
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
120.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objectives of the project are to: (i) alleviate the current power supply shortfall by restoring 
the base load generation capacity of the Hartha Power Station Units 2 and 3 to 400 MW, and (ii) 
lay the groundwork for future institutional development and improved power system planning by 
providing the tools and other support necessary to enhance in-house capability to prepare, 
implement and operate current and future projects.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project will consist of completing supply of materials, rehabilitation and 
commissioning of Units 2 and 3 of the Hartha Power Station to restore their original capacity of 
400MW and ensure an additional operational life of 20 years.  It also consists of support in bid 
evaluation and construction supervision up to the end of the defects liability period, and 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and implementation of recommended mitigation.  
Moreover, the project has a support services component in terms of consultancy support to Iraqi 
staff in the preparation of least cost reconstruction and expansion plans and feasibility studies for 
future projects; planning tools and support to supplement those already provided or to be 
Page  2
provided through alternative financing; regional and overseas training for staff in the technical 
areas of operations, maintenance, planning, and project management, as well as in financial, 
legal, environmental and general management aspects of power utilities; independent audits for 
the project; office equipment for the Project Management Team of the Ministry of Electricity 
(MoE); and various advisory services that may be required, such as an independent review of 
project implementation, as well as other advisory services for the power sector that may be 
required by the MoE.  
 
Although the power station is designed to operate on natural gas as the primary fuel, it can 
operate on HFO and crude oil.  Because of fuel supply problems, Units 1 and 4 are currently 
operated on crude oil, which has potential negative environmental effects. There is a risk that 
units 2 and 3 will have to use HFO or crude for some time if gas cannot be made available. A 
more precise time frame for the delivery of natural gas to the Hartha power station is currently 
under exploration. As part of project preparation, a rapid assessment is being done to assess the 
potential health risks of this mode of operation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Hartha Power Station (800 MW) is located at the Shatt Al-Arab river, about 33km from Basra 
and 25km from the Iranian border.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The proposed project is classified environmentally as a Category A project.  As this project is 
being processed under emergency procedures, this implies that the EIA can be carried out during 
project implementation, but that construction should not start before the EIA has been approved 
by the Bank.  The EIA will be prepared by consultants financed from the proceeds of the Credit. 
Moreover, no resettlement of people is involved, as the work will be done on an existing site 
owned by the MoE.  A focal point for the environmental and social safeguards at the MoE will 
have to be identified to follow up on the preparation and implementation of the ESIA.  In 
addition, basic training and capacity building on environmental and social safeguards will be 
provided.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Oroub El Abed (MNSRE) 
Mr Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSIF) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
An EIA will be carried out during project implementation; however, construction will not 
start before the EIA is approved by the Bank. No resettlement of people is involved, as the work 
will be done on an existing site owned by the MoE, thus O.P. 4.12 would not be triggered.   
Page  3
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
The Hartha Power Station is located at the Shatt Al-Arab international waterway, which is 
shared between Iran and Iraq. However, considering the nature and focus of the project, the 
exception to the external notification requirements of OP 7.50, set forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP 
7.50 is fully applicable.  The proposed project involves the rehabilitation of existing units which 
were in operation before the first Gulf war without increasing the original design capacity of the 
power station.  Thus, it is not expected to adversely change the quality or quantity of water flow 
to the other riparians compared to the situation which existed before the destruction of Units 2 
and 3.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
A
-
Full Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/01/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
A
rapid assessment to determine the health impacts due to the use of crude oil as a fuel will 
be undertaken prior to appraisal.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tjaarda P. Storm Van Leeuwen 
10/18/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
10/18/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jonathan D. Walters 
10/18/2005 
Comments:   
