Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1237 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/21/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Iraq 
Project ID: P087735 
Project Name: IQ-EMERGENCY  ROAD REHABILITATION 
Task Team Leader: Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector: Railways (30%);Roads and highways (30%);Ports, waterways and shipping 
(30%);General transportation sector (10%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Conflict prevention and 
post-conflict reconstruction (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
135.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The Development Objective of the proposed Emergency Road Rehabilitation Project’s (ERRP) 
is to improve the condition of road assets by rehabilitating highly damaged segments of the 
country’s highway and rural road network, reestablishing critical river crossings, and restoring 
the capacity to manage and maintain road assets.  This would contribute to the country’s 
economic and social recovery.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The ERRP consists of two parts: (i) Part A, which covers the 15 central and southern 
Governorates; and (ii) Part B, which focuses on sub-projects in the three governorates of the 
Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG).  
 
Part A of the proposed ERRP, which covers the 15 central and southern Governorates, would 
have five components:  
 
Page  2
Component A1: Highway Pilot Rehabilitation Program. This sub-component consists of 
rehabilitating priority sections of the highway network (about 500 km) through a pilot program.  
The identified road sections, which are on highways connecting main cities, are in very bad 
condition and cause major travel delays. The works consist mainly of pavement repairs and 
strengthening, but also shoulder stabilization, road furnishings, including lane marking and 
traffic signs, new guardrails, drainage repairs.  
 
Component A2:  Village Access Roads Pilot Program. This sub-component would upgrade 
about 200 km of village access roads in several locations, including reconstructing and 
rehabilitating, on a pilot basis, a large number of access roads between isolated villages in a 
number of Governorates.  Improvements to these rural access roads will facilitate travel and 
commerce by reducing travel time and costs.  
 
Component A3:  Bridge Replacements Pilot Program. This Program would provide a limited 
number of critical river crossings with safer and permanent structures by replacing their old 
decaying floating bridges with permanent two-way concrete bridges.  The amount available 
under this sub-component may limit the number of bridges that can be constructed, but this will 
depend on span lengths and construction costs.  
 
Component A4:  Road Asset Management and Road Rehabilitation Programming. This 
initiative would develop road maintenance and management strategies and establish a road asset 
management system.  This would include support for preparing a multi-year national road 
rehabilitation and maintenance program with a financing plan and associated capacity building 
measures.  
 
Component A5: Project Management. Financial support would be provided to manage project 
activities and provide on the job training in project management.  The Credit would finance the 
costs of setting up a Project Management Team (PMT) under the Ministry of Housing and 
Construction in Baghdad, including necessary office equipment, materials, technical assistance, 
training, and other related costs.  
 
Part B of the ERRP would be implemented in the three northern Governorates and have four 
components:  
 
Component B1: Rehabilitation and Upgrading of the 43 km long Erbil 
–
Altun Kopri Road. 
Proceeds from the Credit would be utilized to widen and rehabilitate 43 km (about half) of the 
main Erbil to Kirkuk road in the Kurdistan Region, which is a priority for the Regional 
Government.  The section from Erbil to Altum Kopri (Perdi) (43 km) is part of the Erbil to 
Baghdad highway that serves as a critical trade corridor for the regional economy.  Due to severe 
deterioration of the pavement and frequent overtaking, there are about twelve serious road 
crashes daily, resulting in numerous injuries and fatalities every year.  
 
Component B2:  Village Access Roads Pilot Program. A portion of the Credit would be utilized 
to rehabilitate up to 100 km of rural roads connecting remote villages in the Kurdistan Region.  
Around 30 km to 35 km of roads in each of the three northern Governorates would be upgraded.  
 
Page  3
Component B3:  Road Asset Management and Road Rehabilitation Programming. This 
initiative would develop road rehabilitation and maintenance management strategies and 
establish a fully functioning road asset management system for the northern Governorates. This 
would entail preparing a highway rehabilitation and maintenance program, as well as a village 
access road program.  
 
Component B4: Project Management. Financial support would be provided to manage project 
activities using the PMT concept and provide on the job training in project management.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will be implemented at various locations throughout the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
To help build local capacity, Environmental Specialists will be appointed to the Project 
Management Teams in Baghdad and Erbil. They will receive training in the preparation of 
Environmental Impact Assessments, and proper monitoring techniques to ensure that 
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) are implemented satisfactorily and in accordance 
with Bank guidelines and policies.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Hocine Chalal (MNSRE) 
Mr Colin S. Scott (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Works proposed under the ERRP will involve reconstructing or rehabilitating existing assets 
and improvements will be undertaken within existing alignments.  Most of the sub-projects are 
Category Bs, which will be processed in accordance with relevant guidelines set forth in the 
Environmental and Social Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF).  For those sub-projects 
involving significant improvements, such as road widenings or the replacement of floating 
bridges with permanent structures, Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) will be carried out 
in accordance with OP 4.01.  However, since this is an emergency operation, and because the 
first year’s projects are Category Bs, EIAs will not need to be completed prior to appraisal.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Land acquisition and resettlement is not anticipated.  However, in the event that it is required, 
all land acquisition and resettlement activities would be carried out in accordance with relevant 
guidelines set forth in the ESSAF, and no land or asset acquisition may take place outside of the 
ESSAF guidelines.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/01/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The ESSAF was completed on November 17, 2005.  
 
EIA's for specific projects and a Resettlement Policy Framework (ARP or RP), should they 
be needed, would be completed prior to the commencement of works and must be acceptable 
to the Bank.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
11/10/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
11/10/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Zoubida Allaoua 
11/10/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
