Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC997 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  October 12, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: JAMAICA 
Project ID: P091299 
Project Name: JM Inner City Basic 
Services for the Poor 
Task Team Leader: Abhas Kumar Jha 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 29, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSFU 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Urban Water supply 
(30%);Sanitation (30%); Urban Transport 
(20%); Other social protection (20%) 
Theme: Access to urban services for the 
poor (P);Other urban development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  José Ramón Gómez Guerrero, Bernice 
Van Bronkhorst  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 25.0 
Other financing amounts by source:  
Local Community Counterpart Contribution 
($m) 
5.0 
B.  Project Objectives  
The project aims to improve access in targeted poor inner-city communities to basic services including 
reliable potable water, sanitation and solid waste management.  Additionally, the project aims to improve 
public safety in target inner city communities.   
 
Specific objectives include: (i) significantly increasing coverage in poor households within the selected 
communities to water, sanitation, storm water drainage and solid waste management facilities; (ii) 
creation of employment opportunities for low-income groups through the use of labor-intensive 
construction, operation and maintenance methods for urban infrastructure; and (iii) improving community 
safety as measured by reduced crime rates and public perceptions of safety. 
 
C.  Project Description 
The team proposes use of a Specific Investment Loan.  While the proposed project will incorporate 
several innovative integrated development features, the infrastructure works to be financed are traditional 
ones. 
 
Implementation
Page  2
The project will be executed through JSIF.  To ensure buy-in from other stakeholder agencies the project 
will have a high-level steering committee that would give strategic guidance to the project and ensure a 
coherent and harmonized policy environment. This committee would ensure harmonization of all 
government, non-government and international donor partner interventions in the project areas aimed at 
inner-city renewal. It would be chaired by the Director General of PIOJ, with representation at the Head 
of Department/Agency level of ministries and agencies including but not limited to the Ministry of 
Finance and Planning, Ministry of Local Government, JSIF, National Water Commission, National 
Works Agency etc. 
 
The project will develop a sub-project facility
through which JSIF will approve, fund and supervise 
monitor community infrastructure improvement sub-projects.  This project design will enable 
communities to be directly involved in the design, implementation and management of community-based 
programs.  In developing the sub-project facility JSIF will benefit from and build upon past successful 
experience with  community contract management under the community based contracting system that 
has been rolled-out as part of the NCDP. 
 
The overall project coverage and implementation approach will be phased 
–
starting with those 
municipalities and communities most capable and in the greatest need 
based on a set of objective 
eligibility criteria.  The eligibility criteria to be used to select participating inner-city communities will be 
developed during the preparation phase.  The selection strategy for the project aims to target poor and 
service-deprived neighborhoods with patterns of crime and violence.  Additional eligibility criteria will 
include a high number of women-headed households, demonstrably strong social organization, 
community willingness to participate in basic infrastructure development and maintenance (through in-
cash contributions and in-kind involvement), and the ability to link communities to trunk infrastructure in 
a
cost-effective manner.  The number of beneficiaries is expected to be about 20,000 in no more than two 
neighborhoods. 
 
CBO involvement and NGO intermediation will be important elements of project implementation
.
The 
complexity of working in Jamaica’s poor and often conflict-ridden inner city communities will require 
strong community organization and effective social intermediation.  The project will aim to include 
locally trusted NGOs and CBOs with demonstrated capacity to work in inner-city neighborhoods as 
implementing partners for sub-project activities. These organizations will facilitate community 
consultations, participation in implementation activities and insure smooth implementation by managing 
the day-to-day coordination required between residents, JSIF representatives, contractors and other actors 
with roles in implementation. 
 
Flow of Funds
The GoJ will be the Borrower and will pass funds to JSIF as a grant.  JSIF will have overall 
administrative responsibilities which are already clearly spelt out in JSIF’s operation manual developed 
for the NCDP.   
 
Components
The proposed loan will finance three project components:   
 
(1) Urban Infrastructure and Basic Service Provision
:
This primary component will support a series of 
integrated basic infrastructure investments in target inner-city communities.  The project will offer a 
menu of core and auxiliary infrastructure services that can be selected by target communities based on a 
participatory decision-making process.  The menu of potential infrastructure services
will be established 
during project preparation and will likely include – sanitation services; household and public water 
Page  3
connections; drainage; solid waste collection and management; tertiary and secondary road network 
widening and improvements; and sidewalks and street lights. 
 
The project will aim to provide access to the most socially, economically and technically appropriate 
basic infrastructure services
.
Public water standpipes will not be installed, for example, in communities 
where residents indicate a social preference for alternate forms of water service.  Concurrently, the project 
will aim to provide a level of service that communities are willing to pay for and maintain over a period 
of time.  Community ownership will be ensured by providing up-front for at least 20 percent community 
contribution in-cash or in-kind and agreements with the communities on operations and maintenance of 
the created assets. The project will also attempt to provide low-cost alternatives to traditional technical 
standards for basic services to ensure optimal project coverage and affordability.  Additionally, the 
component will support the use of labor-intensive infrastructure development
methods in target 
communities to provide short-term employment opportunities. 
 
The component will support the development of secondary, off-site trunk infrastructure where applicable.  
In such cases target communities may lack access to nearby primary trunk infrastructure for water, 
sanitation or drainage.  Similarly, the mobility of local residents may be severely restricted by the poor 
quality of an off-site secondary road.  The component will assist in the development of secondary or off-
site infrastructure development based on the factors of affordability and participation of responsible 
federal and local agencies. 
 
(2Public Safety Improvement
:
The component aims to assist inner-city neighborhoods to improve the 
public safety situation through a series of innovative and tested community-based methodologies.   In 
particular the component will support preventive community based multi-sectoral interventions including 
community based diagnostics, situational prevention including adaptation of fencing, street lighting, street 
addressing and social prevention.  The component will focus particular attention on issues of gender in 
the development of interventions.  Women play an important role in inner-city communities given the 
high percentage of female-headed households in these settlements.  
 
(3) Community-Based Infrastructure Management Capacity Building
:
The third component will aim to 
build the capacity of community organizations to implement, manage and maintain community-based 
infrastructure.  The component will aim to enhance the sustainability of investments by strengthening 
community capacity to manage and participate in maintenance mechanisms for local systems for solid 
waste, water, sanitation, drainage and other basic infrastructure systems.  
 
Conditional on good implementation of the first project and continued interest by GoJ, this project could 
be rolled-out nationally through a series of repeater projects every two-three years. 
 
Safeguards Policy Approach
Minor environmental and resettlement issues are expected to arise from the proposed operation.  
Operations policies for Environmental Assessment and Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered.  
Appropriate frameworks will be prepared in accordance with Bank procedures.
 
Partnerships
From inception, the team has worked closely with major IDPs working in Jamaican inner-cities like 
USAID, DFID, IDB, EU and CIDA. We had useful preliminary meetings with all these agencies during 
pre-identification mission in July. DFID has put a staff on the project preparation team. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Page  4
The project will be implemented in inner-city communities in four of the most highly urbanized parishes 
in the country 
–
Kingston and St. Andrews, Clarendon, St. Catherine and St. James.  The selection of 
settlements for project implementation will take place during preparation and will be based on an 
evaluation of poverty, public safety, willingness to participate and ease of operation criteria. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The proposed Executing Agency, Jamaica Social Investment Fund (JSIF), has established a set of steps 
and procedures for compliance with the Bank’s safeguard policies.  It has also established a system to 
appraise and monitor environmental impacts of projects under preparation and implementation.  In 
addition, it has executed two Bank's projects in the past. Therefore, it has demonstrated capacity to ensure 
compliance with safeguard policies.  The project’s environmental impacts are associated with 
construction activities for improved access of communities to reliable and sustainable basic urban 
services.  It is also associated with  the improvement of physical mobility through more efficient and 
secure traffic management.  Environmental guidelines for construction activities and environmental site 
screening criteria will be enhanced from the current implementing agency existing guidelines.   This will 
address urban construction, safety, disabilities, cultural property, and to very small extent, involuntary 
resettlement.  JSIF has built up an enormous credibility across the political and technical spectrum in 
Jamaica with its efficient and transparent operational practices.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
Construction activities linked to the improvement of access for communities to reliable 
and sustainable water and sanitation projects are expected to cause minor environmental 
impacts. The impacts are associated with the dust and noise from construction activities; 
storage and disposal of construction debris; disruption to traffic and increased traffic, 
interruption of public utilities; and safety of workers and road users. All these activities 
will be addressed by JSIF’s enhanced Environmental Guidelines adjusted for this project. 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
The project intervention triggers OP 4.12, the Resettlement Policy. The 
project is expected to cause a positive social impact, due to the 
improvement of 
physical mobility through a more efficient and secure traffic management. A resettlement 
framework will be designed for this project.
 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
Page  5
[X] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
Given the fact that construction in inner circle areas activities will take place, chance find 
procedures will be included in the JSIF Environmental Guidelines.
 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared.  July 2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Abhas Kumar Jha 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Juan D. Quintero 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
John Henry Stein 
Date 
Comments 
L:\Jamaica\Project 2\ISDS PCN Stage  8 30 04. c 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
