Page  1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Preparation) 
Report No: 
AC921
 
Section I - Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/22/04 
A. Basic Project Data 
(from PDS) 
I.A.1. Project Statistics 
Country:
 KAZAKHSTAN 
Project ID:
 P078301 (Bank) and P087485 
(GEF) 
 
Project:
 Forest Protection and Reforestation Project 
Task Team Leader:
 Jessica Mott 
Authorized to Appraise Date:
 
October 25, 2004
 
IBRD Amount ($m):
 25.0 
Bank Approval:
 
April 26, 2005
 
GEF ($m):
 
5.0 
 
Managing Unit:
 ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:
 Specific Investment Loan (SIL) 
 
Status: 
Lending 
Sector:
 Forestry (80%);  General public 
administration sector (15%);  Animal 
production (5%) 
Theme:
 Land management (P);  
Environmental policies and institutions (P);  
Rural policies and institutions (S);  Other 
environment and natural resources 
management (S);  Civic engagement, 
participation and community driven 
development (S) 
 
I.A.2.  Project Objectives (From PDS): 
Project objective
.
The project objective is to develop cost effective and sustainable 
environmental rehabilitation and management of forest lands and associated rangelands, with a 
focus on the Irtysh pine forest, the dry Aral Seabed, and saxaul rangelands.  The development 
objective is both local and global in nature.   
 
Outcome indicators.
 
The key outcome indicators will comprise  
·
Land degradation from  wind erosion, wind-blown pollution, and loss of tree cover reduced 
or prevented in 
·
Irtysh pine forest including 48,000 ha of rehabilitated forest (of the total 147,000 ha 
burned area) and reversal of fire and other degradation trends on the entire 642,000 ha 
area 
·
Dry Aral Seabed:  more than 150,000 ha of current total 2.6 mln ha dry seabed area 
within Kazakhstan covered by vegetation (from pre-project coverage, project 
planting, and natural spread) 
·
6,000
ha
of
saxaul rangelands:   
·
Capacity and decisions to upscale investment programs for forest lands based improved 
knowledge of performance, costs, and impacts as demonstrated by decision to scale up post 
project investment program (aiming by 2025 for some 180,000 ha Irtysh pine to be replanted, 
800,000 ha of dry Aral seabed covered by vegetation, 180,000 ha saxaul rangelands in good 
Page  2
2
condition, and organizational and procedural arrangements facilitating sustainable and cost-
effective results applied to management of other forest lands and other public expenditure 
investment programs) 
·
Increased net present value of timber assets preserved and dust-related health costs foregone 
·
Number of people benefiting through employment or by receiving improved environmental 
services 
·
Habitat protection and improvement as reflected in population trends of key species in 
project areas 
·
Improved knowledge of natural resource dynamics and management, active policy 
development, and capacity for cost effective and results oriented public expenditure on forest 
lands 
·
Project reputation for integrity and public support for improved forest and associated 
rangeland management as reflected in public opinion surveys and government budget 
 
Output indicators
.
Implementation will be assessed mainly on the basis of output indicators 
including:   
·
48,000 ha of Irtysh pine replanted during project period, and by year 6 unit costs of 
replanting reduced (from pre-project US$210 per ha) to less than US$200 per ha with 
survival rate increased from 60% to 85%;  knowledge of productivity parameters acquired; 
and revised arrangements for flexible, performance based budgeting and contracting 
·
642,000 ha of Irtysh pine under improved fire management: 
·
programs to address illegal logging of Irtysh pine designed and initiated 
·
59,000 ha of dry Aral seabed planted during project period, with year 6 unit costs reduced 
(from pre-project US$207 per ha) to less than US$175 per ha with survival rate no less than 
55% and a natural spread consistent with doubling in ten years, using revised arrangements 
for flexible, performance based budgeting and contracting    
·
30
demonstrations of participatory saxaul rangeland rehabilitation completed, covering a 
total area of approximately 6000 ha 
·
small demonstration grants to address other forestry issues implemented 
·
expansion of capacity of the Forest and Hunting Committee and associated organizations 
(e.g., mapping, planning, monitoring, policy analysis, human resource development, and 
financial management). 
 
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS): 
Project costs  total about US$47 m over six years.  Project activities comprise: 
Component I:  Irtysh Pine Forest (US$27 m including contingencies) 
·
Component IA
:
Improved reforestation through re-establishment of seed production areas, 
applied research on cost-effective nursery and planting technologies (e.g, greenhouses, 
containers, seeding), and expansion of program to enable completion of reforestation of 
180,000 ha by 2025.  48,000 ha replanted during project period, and by year 6 unit costs of 
replanting reduced from US$210 to less than US$200 per ha with survival rate increased 
from 60% to 85%;  knowledge of productivity parameters acquired; and  revised 
arrangements for flexible, performance based budgeting and contracting. 
·
Component IB:
 
Development and implementation of improved forest fire management 
through: (i) effective fire prevention system with bare earth fire breaks and fuel reduced 
Page  3
3
buffer zones accompanied by public education campaigns; (ii) more effective fire detection 
system with obsolete towers replaced and new towers where needed; and (iii) improved fire 
suppression capability through better equipment, fast-attack vehicles, replacement of 
obsolete fire trucks and improvement of key forest roads. 
·
Component IC:
 
Other forest management including annual program of thinning and 
cleaning including a 15-year backlog, vehicles for more effective patrolling to reduce illegal 
activities, feasibility and pilot of support for alternative agriculture on periphery of national 
reserves, and feasibility of forest processing industries utilizing reserve thinning in 
combination with production from oblast forests.   
 
Component II:  Expansion of Saxaul in Kyzyl Orda (US$16 m including contingencies)
 
·
Component IIA:
 
Dry Aral Seabed:  Vegetative planting.  59,000 ha planted during project 
period, with year 6 unit costs reduced from US$207/ha less than US$175/ha with 55% 
survival and a natural spread consistent with doubling the vegetated area in ten years, using 
revised arrangements for flexible, performance based budgeting and contracting    
·
Component IIB:
 
Participatory saxaul rangelands rehabilitation:  herder agreements to enable 
restoration and development of degraded saxaul rangelands, community management of 
grazing pressure, and provision of water resources for compensatory rangelands.  Thirty 
demonstrations covering a total approximately 6000 ha.   
 
Component III:  National Institutional Development and Project Management (US$4 m 
including contingencies)
 
·
Component IIIA
:
Improvements in policy, legal, organizational, and information framework 
through: (i) expansion of GIS facility in Almaty for mapping, monitoring, and planning; 
leading to streamlining of planning procedures; (ii) establishment of a policy analysis unit of 
FHC in Astana; (iii) HRD plan and in-service training program; and (iv) improved financial 
management system.   
·
Component IIIB:
 
Competitive grant fund for pilot demonstration investments (e.g. timber 
usufruct sharing, ecotourism, value addition processing of birch, community involvement in 
reforestation or environmental education, private plantations, tungai floodplain protection, 
etc.) 
·
Component IIIC:
 
Project administration and management 
 
Implementation.  
Most of the project activities will be implemented either directly by the Forest 
and Hunting Committee itself and its subsidiaries, government forest enterprises (e.g. leskhozes), 
research institutes, or through contracts, depending on the specific activity.   
·
The FHC special reserves will manage the most of the Irtysh component.  There will be 
increasing emphasis on the use of external contractors for reforestation and fire 
management works, with oversight provided by the reserves.  The reserves will also 
directly acquire improved firefighting and fire prevention facilities.  The Irtysh 
component will also include contracted consultant studies on the feasibility of forest-
based industry development, and design of interventions to increase employment in the 
project area.   
·
On the dry Aral seabed, the initial nursery and field establishment program will be 
implemented by a former leskhoz under the Oblast forestry agency. As the program 
develops, other former leskhozes are expected to become involved on a contract basis. 
Page  4
4
The coordination and management of this component requires further discussions. 
Government research institutes will carry out the research and development program as 
well as the monitoring program.   
·
The institutional development component will be implemented partly by FHC in Astana 
and partly by associated forest planning and monitoring organizations in Almaty, with 
contractual assistance from specialists where necessary.   
 
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social 
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or 
sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.) 
The Project areas are located in  
(a) two northern oblasts i.e. Pavlodar and East Kazakhstan which are dominated by pine forests that, 
among others, and protect the city of Semey from sand dune encroachment. The areas is dominated by 
pine forests, interspaced with grassland, and occasional salt pan and salt lake. It is inhabited by (state 
paid) forest workers, some other forest workers and farmers; most are ethnically Russian.  
(b) the southern oblast of Kyzyl Orda with saxaul and tamarix woodlands on the north and south side of 
the Syr Dara river irrigation system and adjacent dry Aral Sea coast.  The project areas are rural and are 
seasonally populated with mainly Kazakh or Uzbek livestock herders; some parts were abandoned during 
the transition due to the lack of employment.  There are also villages of former fishermen, railway 
workers, and rice farmers.   
 
The project does not include parks, although in January 2003 the Government designated the eastern 
Irtysh pine forest ( a major target of the project) as two national forest reserves.  Unlike national parks, in 
natural reserves timber harvesting can still take place as sanitary fellings or for thinning immature stands.   
 
B. Check Environmental Classification: 
 
B
(Partial Assessment) 
Comments:
 
No significant adverse environmental impacts are foreseen.  Environmental benefits are 
fundamental to the project development objective and outcomes.    These beneficial environmental 
impacts include reduced desertification, salt and dust control, reforestation of degraded lands, improved 
conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in selected ecosystems, and reduced use of potentially 
harmful pesticides.   The reforestation is expected to utilize native species of pine, saxaul, tamarix, poplar, 
willow, aspen and other.  The forest planning and management activities (including fire management 
strategies) will address natural habitat considerations in both the site-specific and landscape context.   
The project will help develop more environmentally acceptable pest management strategies, if required 
during the course of the project. There is a possibility of using a limited amount of pesticides in preparing 
planting stock in nurseries and in major pest outbreaks, but overall pesticide use is likely to be reduced in 
favor of biological controls.   
 
The Irtysh Forest may have been affected by fall-out of 1949-1962 nuclear tests on the nearby 
Semipalatinsk testing grounds.  Preliminary data indicate that currently the dose contribution of most 
radionuclides is low.  The risks associated with this nuclear contamination and the implications for forest 
management and related aspects such as soil erosion, fire management, and use of forest products will be 
assessed in an analysis to be carried out by a multi disciplinary Kazakh team and peer reviewed by an 
expert from the International Atomic Energy Agency 
 
or another internationally recognized center of 
excellence in issues related to radiation.  The study will be part of the environmental assessment.  
 
Temporary minor impact (dust, minor soil loss) can be expected from planting activities, building 
construction and other works.  Within the Irtysh forests r
oads radiating from each main fire fighting 
Page  5
5
base within the forest are envisaged, but these would not increase external access.  
Improvement 
of shelter and access to water in the woodlands that could increase livestock movement and lead to 
trampling and some loss of topsoil will be carefully managed with necessary safeguards to prevent 
environmental deterioration.  
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS) 
(click on 
for a detailed desciption 
or
click on the policy number for a brief description) 
 
Policy Triggered 
 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01) 
Yes 
 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04) 
TBD 
 
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36) 
Yes 
 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
Yes 
 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
No 
 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
No 
 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
TBD 
 
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37) 
No 
 
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50) 
No 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)* 
No 
 
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management 
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not 
available, describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data. 
 
II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
The project is not expected to carry significant safeguard risks. 
 
In view of possible minor risks the safeguards on forest and pest management are triggered, and 
safeguards on natural habitats and involuntary settlement may be triggered. Environmental Assessment is 
triggered as explained above under Section II B.  
 
(i)  Forest is triggered because the project is intended to affect forested areas. It will be implemented in 
accordance with the Bank's operational policy.  It will support investment in rehabilitation of existing 
degraded forests and woodlands to restore protective cover and to make these and other forests more 
productive.  The project would not finance plantations that involve any conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats.  The project would not finance industry-scale commercial harvesting 
operations. Any harvesting by local communities or other local entities supported by the project 
would adhere to a time-bound action plan for achieving a standard of forest management developed 
with the meaningful participation of locally affected communities, consistent with the principles and 
criteria of responsible forest management.  
 
(ii) Pest management is triggered because the project would help to develop more environmentally 
acceptable pest control strategies. The possibility of using a limited amount of pesticides in preparing 
planting stock in nurseries, and in major pest outbreaks. In such cases the possibility of using 
biocontrol products will be explored before considering chemical interventions. Project preparation 
will include an evaluation of current patterns of pest management and pesticide use and make 
recommendations where needed on introducing/expanding integrated pest management tools, 
Page  6
6
strategies and skills improvement  Action plans, including pest management plans will be 
incorporated into the overall forest management plans.  
 
(iii) Natural habitats may be triggered.  The project is not expected to convert or degrade critical natural 
habitats.  The process of site selection would include a field visit by a qualified biologist to further 
confirm that the project would not adversely affect endangered species or habitats.   
 
(iv) Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered, since the project may limit access to forest resources 
which could potentially curtail existing legal or illegal incomes of vulnerable people, at least on a 
temporary basis.  There is no encroachment of human settlements in the project area forests and 
project itself will not cause involuntary physical displacement of people.   The project would not 
include support for national parks.   
 
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy 
or due to multiple project component.  
No cumulative negative impact expected.  In the aggregate, the project is expected to have significant 
positive environmental impacts.  The quality of Kazakhstan's natural habitats and forests, and associated 
environmental services is likely to improve, especially in contrast to the continuing decline which would 
likely take place in the without project scenario.  Similarly, on forest management and social aspects, 
local people are likely to begin to participate in forest management in a meaningful way, gain more 
control over their destiny (empowerment and security) and to receive livelihood benefits.  The principles 
underlying the safeguard policies are 
imbedded in the project’s logical framework.  
 
II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area. 
No negative long term impact expected. 
 
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required) 
The project design integrates provision of environmental services with more classic forest production. 
This choice reflects the significant economic impacts of the environmental services resulting from the 
project, particularly those concerning desertification control. The project does not focus exclusively on 
environmental services because (a) sustainable multiple-use management approaches to the two project 
areas are possible and appropriate, and (b) economic utilization is likely to be essential to a  politically 
viable and fiscally sound incentive framework for resource management. 
 
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues 
The Borrower will carry out an environmental assessment conforming to Bank procedures and Kazakh 
environmental regulations. The EA will identify possible environmental impact and the mitigation of 
risks. The Environmental Management Plan (including a Pest Management Plan) will be included as an 
annex of the Project Appraisal Document.  The preparation work will include drafting guidelines and 
procedures for the preparation  of improved site-specific forest and rangeland management plans in the 
project areas that would be developed and initiated during the project implementation period.  It will also 
include specialized consideration of legal aspects, pest management aspects, sustainable harvesting 
considerations, natural habitat considerations, and other environmental issues.  A social assessment field 
survey will be carried out based on a combination of participatory rural appraisal methods, in-depth 
interviews, focus groups, and secondary data.  The social assessment will also include an estimate of the 
number of affected people and the number of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, ethnic affiliation, 
level of wealth, age, and other social indicators. If the social assessment finds that vulnerable people are 
likely to be affected by restrictions of access, 
An Access Restriction Process Framework (ARPF)
 would 
be prepared prior to appraisal which would describe the participatory process by which the project was 
prepared and will be implemented, providing guidelines for designing site specific mitigation measures 
Page  7
7
on the potential adverse impacts of restrictions of access on vulnerable people and developing an 
institutional arrangement for the implementation of mitigation measures.   
 
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders will include the rural people living in and around the forests,  livestock-herder families, 
forest users, forestry staff, as well as environmental NGOs.  Interactions to date include workshops in 
Astana, and the project areas with environmental NGOs and other stakeholders who are very interested in 
the project concept, and informal group meetings with villagers and foresters in the proposed project 
areas.  Regional working groups of key stakeholders have been formed in for the two project areas.  
Project preparation will  involve a process of ongoing consultations (with local communities, NGOs, 
Academic Institutions, and other government agencies) that would elicit the input of key stakeholders and 
incorporate their views throughout the design period and during implementation. Prior to the departure of 
the appraisal mission, a Russian version of the EA report will be disclosed within Kazakhstan, and 
Russian and English versions will be made available in the Bank's Infoshop.   
 
E. Safeguards Classification
 (select in SAP).
 Category is determined by the highest impact in any 
policy. Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard 
policy is triggered the provisions of that policy apply. 
 
[
]
S1. 
–
Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional 
risks in management of one or more safeguard areas  
[X] 
S2. – One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are 
technically and institutionally manageable 
[
]
S3. – No safeguard issues 
[
]
SF. – Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or 
similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address 
safeguard issues.  
 
F. Disclosure Requirements  
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:  
 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2004 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
10/27/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2004 
 
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the 
Executive Directors 
(For category A projects) 
Not Applicable 
Not Applicable 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:
 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2004 
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
10/27/2004
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/27/2004
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable 
Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
Page  8
8
Pest Management Plan: 
 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
10/15/2004
 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
10/15/2004
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
10/31/2004 
 
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
 
Expected
Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank 
Not Applicable 
Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
 
 
 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.  
 
Signed and submitted by 
 
Name
Date
Task Team Leader: 
Jessica Mott 
6/22/2004 
Project Safeguards Specialists 1: 
Janna Ryssakova 
6/22/2004 
Project Safeguards Specialists 2: 
Tjaart Schillhorn-Van Veen 
6/22/2004 
Project Safeguards Specialists 3: 
 
 
 
Approved by:
Name
Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ron Hoffer 
6/22/2004 
 
Comments
Cleared 
 
Sector Manager 
Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
6/22/2004 
 
Comments
The ISDS has been updated to reflect the more recent developments in the evolving project design.  . 
 
