Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/14/2005 
Report No.:  AC1711
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kazakhstan 
Project ID:  P078301 
Project Name:  Forest Protection & Reforestation Project 
Task Team Leader:  Jessica Mott 
GEF Focal Area: L-Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID: P087485 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 15, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 22, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Forestry (80%);General public administration sector (15%);Animal production 
(5%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P);Other environment and natural resources 
management (P);Environmental policies and institutions (S);Participation and civic 
engagement (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
28.80
28.80 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project objective is to develop cost effective and sustainable environmental 
rehabilitation and management of forest lands and associated rangelands, with a focus on 
the Irtysh pine forest, the dry Aral Seabed, and saxaul rangelands.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would include: (a) rehabilitation and effective management of 650,000 ha of 
damaged Irtysh pine forest in the northeast (Pavlodar and East-Kazakhstan Oblasts), 
including replanting of about 41,000 ha, fire management, and a small social forestry 
pilot; and (b) accelerating the spread of vegetative cover by planting of 44,000 ha of dry 
Aral seabed and pilot rehabilitation of 6,000 ha of saxaul rangelands (Kyzyl-Orda 
Oblast); and (c) capacity building of the Forest and Hunting Committee and associated 
organizations (e.g., policy analysis, information systems including mapping, human 
resource development, and a competitive grant program).  The project is intended to 
reduce, prevent, or ameliorate land degradation with a focus on restoring and maintaining 
Page  2
tree and other vegetative cover.  Benefits will include increased amenity values, increased 
recreation values, preservation of pasture and arable land, increased biodiversity, 
improved sheltering from wind, improved air quality, as well as the wood and fodder 
products themselves.  The project will not only address land degradation, but also 
establish revised arrangements for flexible, performance based budgeting and 
contracting.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The two main project areas are located in  
 
(a) two northern oblasts i.e. Pavlodar and East Kazakhstan which are dominated by pine 
forests which, among others things, protects the city of Semey from sand dune 
encroachment. The areas is dominated by pine forests, interspaced with grassland, and 
occasional salt pan and salt lake. It is inhabited by (state paid) forest workers, some other 
forest workers and farmers; most whom are ethnically Russian.  
 
(b) the southern oblast of Kyzyl Orda with saxaul and tamarix woodlands on the north 
and south side of the Syr Dara river irrigation system and adjacent dry Aral Sea coast.  
The project areas are rural and are seasonally populated with mainly Kazakh or Uzbek 
livestock herders; some parts were abandoned during the transition due to the lack of 
employment.  There are also villages of former fishermen, railway workers, and rice 
farmers.  
 
The project also includes a small competitive grant program which would support 
forestry activities anywhere in the country.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Janna Ryssakova (ECSSD) 
Ms Jessica Mott (ECSSD) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental Assessment.  No significant adverse environmental impacts are foreseen.  
The project will have beneficial environmental impacts including reforestation of 
degraded lands, improved conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity in selected 
ecosystems, improved sheltering from wind and associated better air quality, and reduced 
use of potentially harmful pesticides.  Environmental considerations are mainstreamed 
into the project objectives and components, and will be integrated in planning, 
implementation, and monitoring at both the local and national levels.  The reforestation is 
expected to utilize native species of pine, saxaul, tamarix, herbaceous plants and grasses 
for the main components and also include native species of poplar, willow, aspen, etc. for 
the competitive grant fund.  The forest planning and management activities (including 
fire management strategies) will address natural habitat considerations in both the site-
specific and landscape context.  Where possible the project will include the development 
of knowledge and monitoring of good environmental practice. Temporary minor impact 
(dust, minor soil loss) can be expected from planting activities, building construction and 
other works.  Within the Irtysh forests roads radiating from each main fire fighting base 
within the forest are envisaged, but these would not increase external access. 
Improvement of shelter and access to water in the woodlands that could increase 
livestock movement and lead to trampling and some loss of topsoil will be carefully 
managed with necessary safeguards to prevent environmental deterioration.  
 
Pest management.  The project will help develop more environmentally acceptable pest 
management strategies. There is a possibility of using a limited amount of pesticides in 
preparing planting stock in nurseries and in major pest outbreaks, but overall pesticide 
use is likely to be reduced in favor of biological controls.  
 
Consideration of Radiation Issue.  The Irtysh Forest may have been affected by 
radioactive fall-out of 1949-1962 nuclear tests on the nearby Semipalatinsk testing 
grounds.  Preliminary data indicate that the radionuclide levels in the relevant regions are 
low and that the project activities are not likely to pose a significant risk of radiation 
exposure.  The risks associated with this radioactive fallout and the implications for forest 
management and related aspects such as soil erosion, fire management, and use of forest 
products have been assessed in an analysis carried out by a multi disciplinary team.  This 
analysis has been peer reviewed by an international specialist and has been publically 
disseminated along with the EA report.  The project includes support for additional 
measurement and analysis of radionuclide levels in the project area.  Disbursement of 
Bank loan funds for forestry and infrastructure works in the Irtysh component is subject 
to completion of a study satisfactory to the Bank involving field sampling, lab analysis of 
radionuclide levels, and interpretation.  If levels exceeding accepted norms are 
encountered in some part of the project area, the Borrower will take appropriate 
management measures.  
 
Page  4
Forest Policy.  The forests policy is triggered because the project is intended to affect 
forested areas. It will be implemented in accordance with the Bank's operational policy.  
It will support investment in rehabilitation of existing degraded forests and woodlands to 
restore protective cover and to make these and other forests more productive.  The project 
will not finance plantations that involve any conversion or degradation of critical natural 
habitats.  The project will not finance industry-scale commercial harvesting operations. 
Any harvesting by local communities or other local entities supported by the project will 
be within a standard of forest management developed with the meaningful participation 
of locally affected communities, consistent with the principles and criteria of responsible 
forest management.  
 
Involuntary Resettlement.  The project would not involve physical involuntary 
resettlement.  There is no encroachment of human settlements in the project area forests 
and the project itself will not cause involuntary physical displacement of people. Overall, 
the project is likely to actually increase the access of local people to natural resources, 
and would impose increased restrictions for only limited areas, as part of participatory 
resource management schemes.  However, existing restrictions applicable to the project 
areas may also affect the reputation of the project.  An Access Restriction Process 
Framework (ARPF) has therefore been prepared which describes: the project components 
potentially associated with restrictions of access, the people likely to be affected, and the 
participatory processes by which the project was prepared and will be implemented.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative long-term impact is expected.  In the aggregate, the project is expected to 
have significant positive environmental impacts.  The quality of Kazakhstan's natural 
habitats and forests, and associated environmental services is likely to improve, 
especially in contrast to the continuing decline which would likely take place in the 
without project scenario.  Similarly, on forest management and social aspects, local 
people are likely to begin to participate in forest management in a meaningful way, gain 
more control over their destiny (empowerment and security) and to receive livelihood 
benefits.  The principles underlying the safeguard policies are imbedded in the project's 
results framework.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Various technologies, including the use of rolling choppers for site preparation, the use of 
pelletized seeds instead of seedlings, and the planting of additional native species on the 
Dry Aral Seabed, will be tested during the first portion of the project, and if found to be 
managable within the capacity of the implementing agencies and potentially successful 
under Kazakhstan's challenging field situation, will be replicated on a larger scale during 
the second half of the project.   
 
Page  5
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environmental Management.  The EA includes an environmental management plan for 
the project, which specifies the preventive actions/mitigation measures, monitoring and 
institutional strengthening activities that should take place during implementation of the 
project to ensure sound environmental management. A brief description of the key 
provisions of this plan follows:  
 
Preventive Actions/Mitigation Measures. The EA identifies a number of actions and 
mitigation measures to address the potential adverse impacts of the project. This includes 
standard measures for addressing the direct physical impacts of project activities (e.  g. 
planting, construction, roadwork, etc.) in environmental management guidelines. It also 
highlights actions/measures that should enhance the environmental and social benefits of 
the project (e.g. public awareness, training, mapping).  
 
Monitoring. The EA identifies a number of key ecological and social indicators for 
monitoring project impacts (e.g. localized incidence of water pollution, soil erosion, 
habitat disturbance; trends in forest fires and vegetative cover.). These include several 
indicators of the global benefits of project interventions that justify GEF financing (e.g. 
indicators of sustainable land management, improved biodiversity or natural habitat 
conditions, etc.) supported by mapping and field surveys.  
 
Radionuclide monitoring and management.  The project includes support for 
radionuclide monitoring.  If levels exceeding accepted norms are encountered, 
appropriate management measures, such as avoiding project activities in the hot spot and 
raising public awareness of risks associated with contaminated forest areas and products, 
will be implemented.  
 
Institutional Strengthening. The EA recognizes the of the need to develop institutional 
capacity for effective forest protection and management and recommends a range of 
institutional strengthening options, including training, study tours, consultant services, 
special studies, etc., for building environmental management and monitoring capacity in 
the local forestry and/or environmental institutions. These include measures for building 
pest management capacity.  
 
Pest Management.  Basic project interventions that will improve overall forest 
management, by upgrading fire control measures and by enhancing forest health through 
thinning, will likely result in a much less favorable environment for pest and disease 
development.  project interventions in integrated pest management, international 
cooperation, and biological control demonstration will place the Irtysh forest in better 
condition to withstand periodic pest and disease events, improve the capacity of local 
forest staff to practice IPM, establish a better pest management planning framework and 
provide a demonstration of biological insect control methods that should reduce the 
future use of insecticides in the Irtysh forest.  
 
Page  6
Access restriction framework.  Overall, the project is likely to actually increase the 
access of local people to natural resources and would impose increased restrictions for 
only limited areas, as part of participatory resource management schemes.  Support teams 
established under the project for participatory initiatives in the Irtysh pine area and the 
saxaul rangelands area will help to mediate any conflicts that might arise between 
vulnerable users and government agencies or other stakeholders.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders will include the rural people living in and around the forests, livestock-
herder families, forest users, forestry staff, as well as environmental NGOs.  Project 
preparation included a series of stakeholder consultations, including a consultation 
focused on the draft environmental assessment report, the access restriction framework, 
and the overall project design on May 21, 2005 in Kzyl Orda. Now that the radionuclide 
report has been completed, a similar consultation took place in Semey on September 2, 
2005. A Russian version of the EA report has been disclosed within Kazakhstan, and 
Russian and English versions are being made available in the Bank's Infoshop.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/21/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/15/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/21/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/22/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
05/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/21/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
08/23/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
Yes 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
Yes 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jessica Mott 
08/23/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Jessica Mott 
08/23/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Janna Ryssakova 
07/22/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Jessica Mott 
08/23/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
08/23/2005 
Comments:  As acting regional environmental safeguards coordinator, I clear the ISDS for the above 
project. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
08/25/2005 
Comments:  I clear the ISDS 
