Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1549 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08/02/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P088600 
Project Name: Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable Land management 
Task Team Leader: Berhane Manna 
GEF Focal Area: Land degradation 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 1, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: January 12, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTS2 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Agricultural extension and research (100%) 
Theme: Land administration and management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
50.00
60.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The proposed project seeks to promote sustainable use of natural resources by the rural producers 
of Kenya for higher productivity and improved incomes as well as the maintenance of critical 
ecosystem functions in fragile areas. It will address land degradation issues in selected priority 
watersheds in order to ensure continued ecosystem functions and sustain rural livelihoods. This 
will be accomplished through the promotion of sustainable land management technology 
packages and practices that have local and global benefits and will involve the integrated 
utilization of soil, water, air, and floral and faunal bio-diversity for physical and socio-economic 
development, paying particular attention to the maintenance and restoration of ecosystem 
integrity.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project aims to achieve the following expected outputs and outcomes:  
 
Page  2
*
Establishment of a baseline and monitoring of socio-economic and environmental data 
relevant to improving land and natural resources management. It would include a database and a 
network of practitioners/stakeholders on the issue.  
 
*
Methods of restoring and sustaining land management and best management practices for 
increased net benefits (including both ecosystem and livelihood benefits) developed, adopted and 
scaled-up. This would include an understanding and addressing of constraints, and opportunities 
to the adoption of SLM practices (soil and water conservation, nutrient management including 
integration of crops, trees and livestock developed.  
 
*
Understanding of the socio-economic and policy factors which affect land management and 
adoption of sustainable land management best practices deepened and methodology and models 
to assess impacts of policies on natural resource management developed.  
 
*
Institutional capacity of stakeholders to undertake participatory and multidisciplinary land 
resource management activities sustainably enhanced.  
 
*
Exchange of information on land resource management and best management practices 
among farmers, communities, policy makers and the global fraternity markedly fostered.  
 
*
Better marketing channels for farm produce and value-added products for improved 
livelihoods (on-farm/off-farm linkages strengthened).  
 
In order to facilitate the achievement of the above outputs and outcomes, the project will 
strengthen the capacity of producers and communities on SLM and NRM; promote sub-projects 
towards addressing key SLM concerns and improved NRM in the operational areas; strengthen 
the services, both range of services and service providers, available to producers and 
communities in the areas of SLM and NRM; strengthen institutional capacity and facilitate 
institutional and financial mechanisms with a focus on improved land and natural resources 
management.  
 
Component 1. Promotion of best management practices and best management technologies for 
improved livelihoods:  
 
KARI and other sister institutions such as KEFRI have over the years developed many SLM 
practices and technologies that are suitable for scaling-up.  These include soil and water 
conservation measures, water harvesting techniques, reseeding of degraded lands, high yielding 
and ecologically adapted crop and livestock varieties and genotypes, soil fertility maintenance 
practices etc.   
 
Assessment of changes in land use and restoration to sustainable levels: An integrated approach 
to natural resources management in the utilisation of soil, water, air, faunal and floral 
biodiversity for physical and socio-economic development, would provide the most sustainable 
means towards improved agriculture productivity and the preservation of ecosystem functions. 
However, it is important that all stakeholders understand adequately the consequences of past 
and present changes in the farming systems and their effects on agricultural and socio-economic 
Page  3
development with associated changing natural environment. This would be approached through 
conducting environmental impact assessment (EIAs) in selected areas where ecosystem stability 
is threatened using known techniques such as reference to old land use maps from GIS and 
remote sensing in relation to current demographic changes. This approach would assist in the 
development and promotion of priority interventions for the country.  
 
Soil erosion control: Reducing the amount and concentration of sediments containing nutrients 
and toxic materials being washed from crop lands into water sources (thereby contaminating 
both domestic and international water ways) will result in community access to cleaner water for 
both domestic use and irrigation and will ensure the continued functioning of watersheds and 
riparian systems.  
 
Water harvesting: Three quarters of the country is classified as arid and semi arid, yet people 
have migrated to these areas and are practising farming with poor results. To empower these 
farmers, water harvesting and storage should be encouraged both for domestic and livestock 
uses.  
 
Reseeding of denuded pastures and de-stocking: The drier areas are characterised by low 
quality fodder species during the rainy season which quickly dry up during the hot spells.  It has 
been shown in previous studies in Kiboko through Agricultural Research Support Programme 
(ARSP II) activities funded by the EC that such pastures can be greatly improved by a deliberate 
reseeding process using selected indigenous grasses and legumes.  Furthermore, higher 
production on reseeded pastures allows for harvesting of grass seeds for expanded reseeding as 
well as harvesting of better quality hay for livestock. Community interest in improving pasture 
through such measures is increasing and the demand for better quality grass seeds is also rising 
giving a potential for commercialisation and expanded reseeding scheme.  It would be expected 
that there will be higher carrying capacity as well as reduced rate in resource degradation.  There 
is need to continue collection of forage germplasm in the ASAL to provide study materials for 
future breeding and improvement of indigenous fodder species.  
 
Sustainable management of wetlands: The role of water in human habitation cannot be over-
emphasized. Unfortunately, the majority of the Kenyan population rely on untreated river water 
for domestic and livestock use. While Kenya is basically an agricultural country, there are a wide 
range of agro-industrial and other conventional manufacturing industries using the same water 
and releasing toxic or potentially toxic wastes back into the same rivers. Expertise will be sought 
for appropriate technologies for the utilisation of the swamps and irrigated areas if found lacking.  
 
Riverbank protection and water catchment areas:  Many streams and rivers in Kenya are drying 
and disappearing as farmers cultivate all the way to the edge of the rivers and destroy their 
sources. This not only accelerates erosion, but it also leads to destruction of critical riparian 
habitats, loss of species, flooding, siltation of waters, and less water. Many riparian areas and 
catchments have been degraded and the project will attempt to rehabilitate areas which are 
already severely eroded using suitable techniques and indigenous species. Suitable agro-forestry 
species and grasses will also be encouraged.  
 
Page  4
Promotion of crop and livestock productivity and integration: Sustainable promotion of crop 
and livestock production to very large extent depends on adequate soil and water conservation 
measures and judicious use of organic and inorganic fertilizers. There is a wealth of theoretical 
and practical information on inorganic fertilizers, as well as improved crop and livestock 
varieties and genotypes bred for specific ecological zones. The uptake and wide adoption of the 
various recommendations has however not been commensurate to the research efforts. This 
project will encourage the uptake of these recommendations using a community-based, 
participatory process.  
 
Conservation and utilization of indigenous trees and other germplasm: In spite of the current 
rate of deforestation, Kenya is still richly endowed with a wide range of high value tree 
germplasm, ranging from timber tree species, through fruit and fodder tree species to medicinal 
tree species. Some of these species have potent medicinal ingredients; there is need for novel 
methods of germplasm conservation, regeneration and propagation / multiplication. Trees such 
as Jetropha carcus, Prunus africana, Gum arabica are native to the tropics and have high 
economic value. Adaptability of Herbal hibiscus which is being used in beverages could be 
explored. This will increase opportunities for the development of sustainable livelihoods.  
 
Biodiversity conservation: Biodiversity conservation of plant genetic resources will form a 
major area of concern. Inventories will be compiled of various species and their uses (e.g. 
treatment of livestock diseases). Tree and crop improvement and diversification will conserve 
and enhance biodiversity. This component will identify, document, evaluate and test existing 
best practices, pilot selected technologies that enhance conservation, restoration and sustainable 
use of biodiversity and disseminate, promote and facilitate the adoption and implementation of 
best practices and proven technologies.  This will foster improved and integrated soil, water, 
nutrient, vegetation and livestock management technologies to achieve greater productivity of 
crops, trees and animals to enhance food security and ecosystem resilience.  
 
Component 2. Promotion of alternative livelihoods systems  
 
This component will develop an inventory and document economically viable livelihood 
options. It will create an environment conducive to the adoption of improved plant nutrient 
technologies through programs that promote a more efficient procurement, distribution, and 
marketing of inputs and programs that enhance effective utilization of farm outputs through the 
development of micro enterprises. It will increase the local awareness and use of the indigenous 
products, processing and enhanced marketing strategies, develop markets for non-timber forest 
products and other products, and examine ways to add value to the outputs from the farm in 
order to increase the farmer?s income.  
 
For the rural communities to get out of the poverty cycle, they need alternatives to their current 
livelihood. The project will promote value adding and alternative sources of livelihoods such as 
apiculture, promotion of trees such as jetropha carcus, date palm, herbal hibiscus, gum arabica, 
prunus africana etc which have products that can be sold locally and internationally. Farmers 
who plant maize every season with minimal returns will be encouraged to diversify into more 
high value crops. Matching of adopted and adapted crop and livestock varieties to niches where 
they are best suited will be encouraged.  
 
Page  5
Component 3. Community empowerment and capacity building  
 
KARI though the Agricultural Technology and Information Response Initiative (ATIRI) has 
demonstrated that empowering farmers does result in better uptake of technologies. This project 
will strive to continue empowering farmers, community based organizations, extension providers 
and the implementers both in knowledge and resources to better implement natural resource 
programs. For example, in order to take advantage of the demonstration value of this project, 
community-based awareness building and knowledge sharing will be supported through farmer-
led extension and farmer-to-farmer information sharing.  
 
Component 4. Institutional and policy analysis  
 
Legislative and policy frameworks will be examined in order to identify inconsistencies, 
perverse incentives and opportunities for further policy support for sustainable land management. 
Through a participative process involving government agencies and national level institutions, 
this component will seek to remove the broader policy and legal barriers to improved land 
management.  
 
Project Management and M&E:  Project implementation, will be managed by KARI, through a 
unit in HQ and will be closely coordinated with that of the IDA project. Overall coordination 
will be under a Secretariat staffed by individuals from the key lead implementing agencies, as 
well as from the Kenya National Federation of Agricultural Producers and other client 
representatives, including NGOs and local representatives. The Secretariat is composed of 
carefully identified/selected individuals able to add value to the process while bringing 
experience, insights and contacts from their line departments. The role of the Secretariat is to set 
the basic structure of project implementation or the ?rules of the game?. This will include a 
monitoring framework and evaluation/learning feedback loop. Each operational area (or 
catchment) will have a regional coordinator, located in the KAPP-DSU (district service unit) 
who will be responsible for coordination and follow-up of activities. The demand driven nature 
of the activities and the community participation are key elements for implementation.  
 
Institutional level and policy dialogue will be implemented through the inter-ministerial 
steering committee of the Permanent Secretaries of the Ministries of Agriculture Livestock and 
Fisheries Development, Cooperatives, Water, Environment and Natural Resources, and Lands. 
This will be composed of Permanent Secretaries and will report to the Economic Sub-Committee 
of the Cabinet that is chaired by the Vice President. The executive implementation of the 
decisions of this high-level policy group will be the duty of individual ministries and government 
institutions and will be coordinated by the secretariat.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will therefore focus on 5 watersheds across the country, which are environmentally 
threatened by lack of environmental management and human encroachment.  
 
a) Kinale/Kikuyu catchment: The Kinale/Kikuyu catchment is situated in Kiambu District in the 
Central Province. The catchment houses the Kinale Forest, one of the few indigenous forests. 
During the recent past, people have been settled in the areas and allocated parcels of land within 
the forest. The results has been massive destruction of the forest to clear land for cultivation and 
Page  6
search of fuel wood, cultivation on steep slopes without adequate soil and water conservation 
measures and use of inappropriate crop varieties leading to crop failure. The broad land use 
systems include agroforestry, tea and coffee. The cropping systems are monocropping, 
intercropping and irregular crop rotation. Cultivation of horticultural crops is also increasing 
because of the ready markets in Nairobi and beyond. The soil productivity depends on human 
activities and management systems. The common management systems that can be promoted in 
the watershed include taungya systems, bench terraces, agro-forestry, high value crops, and 
integration of crop and livestock for better land management.  
 
Proposed BMP and BMTs for NMR issues:  
 
*
Promotion of BMPs for restoration of the forest and the subsequent reduction in soil erosion;  
 
*
Sustained use of soil fertility management inputs;  
 
*
Promotion of BMP and BMTs for the integrated conservation of soil and water.  
 
b) Tugen Hills Catchment (including Perkerra):  This is located in the Baringo district Rift 
Valley province. This area is inhabited by pastoralists. There is need for better management of 
grazing lands to suit the pastoralists and avoid the loss of ecological productivity through 
overgrazing. De-stoking would also alleviate the pressure exerted on the land and vegetation. 
Additionally, ethno-veterinary practices are more common in pastoralist areas due to lack of 
veterinary/medical services.  It will be beneficial to take stock of such practices/concoctions used 
with a view to validating and making recommendations on therapeutic doses. These areas are 
also natural farms for some of the plant materials/organics as well as high quality honey all of 
which are in great demand by industrialists such as gum arabica, herbal hibiscus, Jatropha carcus 
and these could be inventoried and sustainably exploited for purposes of alternative livelihoods 
and diversification.  
 
Proposed BMP and BMTs for NMR issues:  
 
*
A
rapid appraisal of environmental status and monitoring of trends in land resource 
management;  
 
*
Development of a checklist of key biodiversity loss, medicinal plants and other flora and 
fauna;  
 
*
Appropriate grazing and livestock production systems (e.g. reseeding of grazing lands and de-
stocking) to reduce the negative effects of livestock on soil erosion and compaction and the 
disruption of hydrological flows;  
 
*
Alternative livelihoods such as apiculture, Jojopa, herbal hibiscus, honey, hides and skins etc. 
to reduce pressures on pasture land;  
 
*
Land resources inventory;  
 
*
Introduction herbaceous vegetation to cover the soil during the dry seasons in order to reduce 
soil erosion and the siltation of waterways.  
 
c) Taita Hills Catchment: Taita hills are situated in Taita Taveta District, Coast Province. The 
Taita hills are important rain catchment areas, feeding rivers that flow down to the dry lowlands. 
The catchment areas are threatened as agricultural land expands through encroachment of the 
new areas and clearing the natural vegetation. Though there is a highland-lowland 
interrelationship, less water is flowing to the lowlands because of the negative impacts of these 
Page  7
developments on the hydrology of the area. Nevertheless, there is potential for forest products 
and eco-tourism in the remaining forests of the hills.  
 
Proposed BMPs and BMTs for NMR issues:  
 
*
Enhance sustainability via alternative livelihood systems (e.g., Jojoba);  
 
*
Promote water harvesting, storage and irrigation;  
 
*
Monitoring of trends in land resource management;  
 
*
Increasing vegetative cover on cultivated land during fallow periods in order to reduce soil 
erosion and nutrient leaching;  
 
*
Land resources inventory.  
 
d) Yala Watershed: Yala area is situated in Siaya District, Western Kenya.  
 
Proposed BMPs and BMTs for NMR issues:  
 
*
Sustained use of organic manures, green manures and improved fallows to improve soil 
fertility;  
 
*
Use of more efficient land management technologies in  specific niche;  
 
*
Upscale AHI watershed management work to the whole of Yala catchment to reduce erosion 
and siltation;  
 
*
Monitoring of trends in land resource management;  
 
*
Land resources inventory.  
 
e) Cherangani Hills/Turkwell River Catchment: The area is situated in the Rift Valley Province 
of Kenya. The Cherangani hills are mainly forest with some extensive grazing and some small-
holders farming. Both sheet and gully erosion occur in the area. However, a considerable part of 
the area is still under forest. There is a need for proper soil conservation and a policy to 
discourage the cutting of trees.  
 
Promotion BMPs for NMR issues:  
 
?
Protection of the river Nzoia water catchment through integrated watershed management 
(Cherangani hills ?GIS overlays);  
 
?
Promotion of best management practices (BMPs) for NRM to improve maximum net 
benefits to the farmers;  
 
?
Incremental benefits approach;  
 
?
Sustained use of soil fertility management inputs to reduce soil nutrient losses;  
 
?
Protection and rehabilitation of the Turkwell River catchment  
 
?
Promote biodiversity in critical areas such as Saiwa Swamp National Park;  
 
?
Upscale home level utilization of sweet potatoes and other indigenous crops/vegetables, 
establish baselines for the activities to be up scaled;  
 
?
Monitoring of trends in land resource management;  
 
?
Land resources inventory;  
 
?
Promotion of alternative livelihoods (e.g., oil palm cultivation) to reduce pressure on 
limited soil resources.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The borrower has the capacity and the institutional framework and experience to carry out 
assessments and address any environment concerns that arise from projects.  
Page  8
This proposed project was originally planned as being a part of the Kenya Agricultural 
Productivity project (KAPP) but was subsequently, it was de-linked. During the preparation for 
KAPP, the Borrower carried out the Environmental and Social Assessment, which was approved 
in principle by NEMA on the basis of a category B project. However, KAPP was classified as a 
category C and did not require impact assessment and disclosure measures. The implementing 
agency, KARI, also carried out an ESA for the Western Kenya Integrated Ecosystem 
Management Project (WKIEMP), a GEF project approved by the Board.  
 
The Environmental Management and Coordination Act, 1999, provides for the establishment of 
an appropriate legal and institutional framework for the management of the environment in 
Kenya. Part VI (S.58) of the act makes it mandatory for environmental impact assessments 
(EIAs) to be conducted before the commencement of projects involving amongst others 
agriculture and forestry related activities. The Act as well as the Environmental (Impact 
Assessment and Audit) Regulations 2003, and Kenya Gazette Supplement No. 56 of 13th June 
2003, requires that project proponent submit a project report to the National Environment 
Management Authority  and obtain an EIA License from NEMA before the implementation of a 
project.  
 
For those activities which require an EIA, as determined under the screening and review 
process, a copy of the EIA report is submitted to the National Environment Management 
Authority (NEMA) for approval.  NEMA will review and comment on the EIA before the project 
can be appraised.  This ensures that projects that may have potentially significant impacts and 
require more detailed study receive national level approval.  
 
The Government established NEMA as oversight and policy making body to address 
environmental issues. NEMA has the skills and competence to carry out independent review in a 
competent manner.  Kenya is also a signatory of a number of internationally accepted principles 
and practices dealing with (i) conservation and management of wetlands for conserving and 
establishing nature reserves in wetlands; (ii) adoption of a national strategies, plans and 
programmes for the conservation of biological diversity; (iii) conserving migratory species of 
wild animals; (iv) seeking  to regulate levels of greenhouse gases (GHGs) concentration in the 
atmosphere; (v) combating desertification and to mitigate the effects of drought in seriously 
affected countries, especially those in Africa; (vi) conservation of biological diversity and the 
sustainability of human use of natural resources around Lake Victoria basin which has been 
identified as Important Bird Areas (IBAs) of Kenya; and (vii) consumptive use of the waters of 
River Nile and Lake Victoria permitting lower riparian States an equitable share of the water.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Banumathi Setlur (ESDQC) 
Ms Roxanne Hakim (AFTS2) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
This is an environmental project that proposes to promote technologies for sustain
able land 
Page  9
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
management. No major negative environmental issues are anticipated for the project. Since the 
project however seeks to affect land use and change it, it has been rated as category B. It is 
therefore proposed that an EA will be carried out to monitor and eliminate adverse 
environmental impacts during project implementation.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Community involvement is key to the proposed project which in turn could lead to better use 
of natural habitats. The project will avoid significant conversion of any critical natural habitats. 
As a precuationary approach, the ESMF will include mechanism to avoid, manage and mitigate 
potentail impacts on critical natural habitats within the proposed project's area of influence.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
The ESMF for the project will include an IPM checklist to minimize the need for chemical 
pesticides.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
The project beneficiaries include farmers and communities within the operational areas who 
participate voluntarily in project activities. The project areas (Cherangani Hills and Tugen 
Hills)include minority groups where there might be a possibility of an impact on the lives of 
these groups because of project intervention (Cheranganys, Marakwets, Pokots, etc.). An 
indigenous peoples plan will be developed to ensure that indigenous people affected by the Bank 
project have a voice in project design and implementation and that adverse impacts on them are 
avoided, minimized or mitigated.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  08/31/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
31 August, 2005   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  10
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Berhane Manna 
 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Christine E. Cornelius 
 
Comments:   
