Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1095 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/26/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kenya 
Project ID: P066488 
Project Name: Kenya Municipal Program 
Task Team Leader: Matthew D. Glasser 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 15, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTU1 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Sub-national government administration (100%) 
Theme: Municipal governance and institution building (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
35.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
10.00
10.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The overall objective of the program is to support financial and institutional reform in order to 
improve service delivery in Kenya's urban centers.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed lending instrument is an Adaptable Program Loan.  An APL provides phased 
support for long-term development programs. It would involve a series of loans that build on the 
lessons learned from the previous loan(s) in the series. The anticipated phases of the APL can be 
outlined as follows:  
 
Phase 1: Nairobi only  
 
-
Institutional and Financial Restructuring  
 
-
Modest investment in high visibility, low cost, pro-poor infrastructure  
 
Phase 2: Broadening and deepening  
 
-
In Nairobi, if institutional and financial restructuring targets are met: medium-scale 
investments in critical infrastructure, e. g. slum upgrading, landfill, transport  
Page  2
-
In other urban centers: institutional and financial reform as needed, plus modest 
investment as in Nairobi Phase 1  
 
Phase 3: At scale  
 
-
In Nairobi, if institutional and financial sustainability is established: larger scale 
investment e.g. in transport and slum upgrading  
 
-
In other urban centers: medium to large-scale investment as in Nairobi Phase 2.  
 
Phase 1 can be described in some detail.  This initial phase focuses on Nairobi's institutional 
and financial recovery which is necessary to restore public and investor confidence, to deliver 
services, and to assure that future capital investment is not wasted.  There will also be a modest 
amount of pro-poor transport investment. Future phases will deepen the investment in Nairobi 
(contingent on success with the financial and institutional reform) and would roll the approach 
out to other urban centers.   The anticipated components of Phase 1 are as follows:  
 
Component 1: Financial and Institutional Restructuring of the City of Nairobi  
 
-
Subcomponent 1(a) Institutional restructuring and Governance  
 
This subcomponent would support measures designed to improve the City Council's ability to 
reliably and cost-effectively deliver services.  It would also have to address such issues as the 
organizational culture of the City Council, the staff and capacity development needs, the need for 
adequate data for planning and management, and the HIV/AIDS disease burden.  
 
This subcomponent might include such elements as decentralising administration and service 
delivery to the five proposed sub-councils (boroughs) and/or to the existing 55 wards.  It could 
also help support the development of an effective framework for public private partnerships, and 
would be designed to support coordination between the City Council's efforts and those of 
sectoral ministries and the Constituency Development Fund.  
 
In addition, the subcomponent would support the development and enforcement of internal 
governance measures, such as a framework regarding the roles and responsibilities of councillors 
in setting policy and overseeing implementation, the executive role of the town clerk and 
department heads in implementation and reporting.  
 
-
Subcomponent 1(b) Financial management and recovery  
 
This subcomponent would support measures to assure that planning and budgeting are linked, 
that budgets are realistic, that budget planning includes three year indicative figures for revenue 
and expenditure, that operation and maintenance of existing infrastructure is appropriately 
financed, that expenditure control measures protect against abuse, and that revenue collection is 
appropriately managed.  A program for managing the short- and long-term debt of the City 
Council would be established.  Systems of checks and balances, including but not limited to 
meaningful council oversight would be developed.  
 
Component 2: Modest, Pro-poor Infrastructure.  
Page  3
Recognizing that almost half of all home-work trips in Nairobi are made on foot and that these 
are predominantly by very poor people, the project will support urban mobility through relatively 
modest investments in non-motorized transport (i.e. paths for pedestrians, bicyclists and push-
carts) and in the upgrading of "spine roads" (i.e. collector streets) by resurfacing and storm 
drainage. Pedestrian paths will link residential areas where the urban poor live with locations 
where they walk to work. The "spine roads" will be selected based on the nature of links between 
low and middle income residential areas carrying matatu and similar mini bus traffic. While 
these initiatives will be relatively low cost and have modest maintenance requirements, they will 
enable the CCN to effectively demonstrate its pro-poor policies and facilitate the building of its 
internal institutional and financial capacity to design, implement and manage higher levels of 
infrastructure.  The IDA team reviewed the Nairobi City Engineer's proposed locations for "non 
motorised transport" (NMT) and associated improvements to safely and conveniently 
accommodate pedestrians, bicycles, and pushcarts.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Phase 1 of the proposed APL will focus on Nairobi.  Future phases are anticipated to include 
other urban centers in Kenya, which will be selected in preparation for those phases.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Although Nairobi City Council has been involved in prior World Bank projects, its capacity to 
appropriately implement safeguard policies should be strengthened.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
Mr Serigne Omar Fye (AFTS1) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  04/17/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The work on the EA and RAP is expected to be contracted in late 2005.  A first draft of each 
is anticipated in early 2006, with disclosure proper to appraisal.  The Sector Management 
Unit has agreed to accept transfer of safeguard responsibilities.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Matthew D. Glasser 
09/26/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
09/26/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jaime M. Biderman 
09/26/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
