Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1818 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/13/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Kosovo 
Project ID: P097635 
Project Name: Private Power Development Technical Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Varadarajan Atur 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 6, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: March 21, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: Power (35%);Mining and other extractive (35%);Central government 
administration (30%) 
Theme: Regional integration (P);Infrastructure services for private sector development 
(S);Export development and competitiveness (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
8.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
1.60
1.60 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the PPDTAP is to enable the PISG to attract, in a transparent manner, qualified 
world-class strategic investors into building new capacity for lignite thermal power generation 
conforming to high standards of environmental and social sustainability.  
 
The PPDTAP objective will be attained through: (a) developing and strengthening the enabling 
policy, legal and regulatory frameworks in the energy sector, including mitigating environmental 
impacts and managing expropriation and resettlement; (b) developing an institutional structure 
and capacity for dealing with FDI in the energy sector; (c) developing a framework for 
channeling the income towards priority programs that benefit the population; and (d) technical 
consultancies for seeking qualified private investors in the proposed IPP.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will have four main components:  
Page  2
Component 1 -  Policy, Legal & Regulatory Consultancy (US$ 3.0 million)  
 
This TA would primarily build on the IPA-Norton Rose diagnostics report on policy, legal and 
regulatory frameworks, and focus on preparing the key legislation, including any required 
amendments, that will facilitate the IPP transaction and establish the enabling environment for it, 
including requirements for environmental and social sustainability. In the first phase 
(implemented during the first 18 months of project implementation), the consultants will identify 
the gaps and define the actions for improving the investment environment. In the second phase 
(from about the 18th to the 36th month of project implementation), the consultants will work 
closely with the transaction advisors (under Component 4, below) and with relevant ministries to 
develop and help adopt the final legislative and regulatory framework.  
 
This component would also provide TA for the preparation of a Strategic Environmental and 
Social Assessment (SESA) specific to energy sector development. The SESA would identify 
environmental and social issues of projected developments in the power generation and related 
lignite mining sectors. For the scoping and consultation steps of the SESA the EU SEA Directive 
(2001/42/EC) will serve as a reference. The SESA can be regarded as the first stage overarching 
environmental and social assessment of sector developments prior to the EIA's and other 
analyses that will be prepared for the decision making on individual investments. The SESA will 
be instrumental to develop the framework for institutional strengthening and capacity building to 
assess, monitor and regulate the environmental impacts of mining and power generation, 
including preparing legislation, regulations and institutional changes that are necessary to fill any 
gaps. SESA would also develop a comprehensive resettlement framework that will serve as a 
practical guide for expropriation and involuntary resettlement activities in Kosovo, including 
drafting legislation and regulations needed to assure that future expropriation and resettlement 
programs meet international standards.  
 
Component 2 - Capacity Building (US$ 2.5 Million)  
 
This TA would support capacity building for the key ministries and agencies (including MEM 
and MESP), for inter-ministerial coordination, and for the implementing entity for the Project. 
The implementing entity would be responsible for the procurement of all consultants and 
advisors required for the project and also be responsible for all coordination, including 
supervising the implementation of the Project. Building on the ESTAP III community 
development program, this TA will also provide a mechanism for civil society input in the design 
of the proposed IPP. Further, the TA will include funding for designing the communications 
strategy and incremental costs.  
 
Component 3 - Technical Consultancies (US$ 2.0 million)  
 
This component would provide TA to cover the essential technical aspects of the proposed IPP.  
The different tasks would include: (a) a mine site assessment to define a long term mining plan 
for the existing and the proposed new power plants; (b) a power plant feasibility study to prepare 
conceptual designs, equipment configuration, cost estimates, construction plans, etc.; (c) a 
transmission system and market assessment study to examine potential purchasers of the output 
of the proposed IPP facility, identify necessary upgrades to the transmission system for effective 
utilization of the proposed IPP, and associated costs; (d) a power plant interconnection study to 
assess the adequacy and reliability of the transmission system in Kosovo to support the 
interconnection of one or more lignite-fired power plant units; and (e) a process of baseline 
environmental monitoring, the preparation of terms of reference for the environmental/social 
assessment and the resettlement action plan. All tasks are proposed to be completed within about 
the first 12 months of project implementation.  
Page  3
Component 4 - Transaction Advisors (US$ 2.6 Million)  
 
Building on the previous components, this TA would support the PISG in carrying out the 
transaction process through to the financial close of the proposed IPP. The transaction advisors 
would structure the procurement based on market soundings and would take into consideration, 
among other things, the proposed IPP revenue management recommendations of the FPSG. In 
the first phase (from the 8th to about the 18th month of project implementation), investors would  
be short-listed based on responses to a RFQ, and a detailed RFP would be prepared along with a 
bid evaluation methodology and a financial model; in the second phase (from about the 18th to 
the 36th month of project implementation), the preferred bidder would be selected through a 
bidding/evaluation process and, finally, the transaction advisors would assist through to financial 
close of the proposed IPP.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The project will provide technical assistance to Kosovo.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
While there have been recent efforts to develop an effective institutional structure for 
environmental regulation, including defining the most important actors, their roles and 
supporting legislation, the structure is still very weak.  Environmental legislation and standards 
are partially in place, but need further development to deal with the challenges of new initiatives. 
Current mining practice in the area does not incorporate planning for post-operation land 
reclamation such as the separation of top soil and other overburden material to facilitate 
reclamation as agricultural land. Similarly, the institutional capacity for managing land 
expropriation and resettlement is weak, and the project will develop the legal and institutional 
framework for managing land expropriation and resettlement and will support capacity-building.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Frank Van Woerden (ECSSD) 
Ms Paula F. Lytle (ECSSD) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The proposed Project will help strengthen the legal and institutional frameworks for 
regulating the environmental and social impact of mining and power projects, including 
resettlement, and also build capacity in the relevant ministries to implement, monitor and enforce 
the regulations. Environmental and Social Assessment ToRs and Resettlement Action Plan ToRs 
for the lignite mine and power plant would be developed by consultants before launching the 
tendering process for the IPP.  
 
Before appraisal, a Safeguards Framework will be developed that will include a concise 
narrative of the approach to environmental and social safeguard compliance to be developed 
under the PPDTAP grant.   
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/16/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
It is expected that consultancy for developing ToRs for the Environmental/Social Assessment 
and Resettlement Action Plan would begin work by May 2006 and provide these outputs by 
December 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Varadarajan Atur 
12/05/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/12/2005 
Comments:  Approved via EM of Dec 12, 2005 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Peter D. Thomson 
12/13/2005 
Comments:  Approved by Peter Thomson, Director of ECSIE, on Dec. 13, 2005 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
