Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/22/2005 
Report No.:  AC2041
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Kyrgyz Republic 
Project ID:  P099453 
Project Name:  Avian Influenza Control & Human Pandemic Preparedness & Response 
Project 
Task Team Leader:  Gotz A. Schreiber 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 30, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 9, 2006 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Emergency Recovery 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Health (50%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P);Other communicable diseases (P);Rural 
policies and institutions (S);Other environment and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
4.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.26 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
1.00 
 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
1.14
2.40 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [X] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall development objective is to minimize the threat posed to humans by highly 
pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) infection and other zoonoses and to prepare for, 
control, and respond to influenza pandemics and other infectious disease emergencies in 
humans.  To achieve this, three areas will be considered for support:  (i) prevention, (ii) 
preparedness and planning and (iii) response and containment.  
 
The proposed project is not included in the FY02-04 CAS (not applicable) as this is an 
Emergency Recovery Loan (ERL) being processed under OP 8.50.   
 
3. Project Description 
COMPONENT 1: Animal Health  
 
This component will support national prevention and control strategies proposed by the 
Kyrgyz Republic to cover its needs in the short, medium or long term, based on detailed 
Page  2
assessments of the avian influenza epidemiological status, of the capacity of national 
Veterinary Services to cope with highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) epidemic and 
the vulnerability of the poultry industry to new emerging infectious diseases.  This 
component would support four areas of activities described below:  
 
-
Enhancing HPAI prevention and preparedness capability;  
 
-
Strengthening of Veterinary Services, disease surveillance, diagnostic capacity and 
applied research for HPAI disease-free and infected countries;  
 
-
Strengthening HPAI control programs and outbreak containment plans, for countries in 
pandemic situation and newly infected countries; and  
 
-
Improving bio-security in poultry production and trade, with the longer term vision of 
restructuring the poultry industry.  
 
COMPONENT 2: Human Health  
 
Short-and long-term actions need to be taken and an appropriate balance struck between 
the two.  While immediate steps can be taken to address the crisis, there is also a longer-
term agenda given systemic shortcomings with respect to core public health functions. 
Work on both the short and long-term fronts, therefore, needs to proceed in parallel, and 
efforts need to be made to ensure that short-term responses are consistent with and 
contribute to proposed longer-term interventions.  Setting priorities in both cases is 
essential.  Building an effective national public health response will require an enabling 
environment and the necessary resources to bring proven interventions quickly up to 
nation-wide scale.Thus, under this component, the project will help to operationalize 
some elements that are contemplated as part of the global strategic plan, expanding and 
intensifying the responses rapidly, taking into account the epidemiological conditions, 
institutional capacity, and needs and priorities of the Kyrgyz Republic.  As it is unlikely 
that the global spread of a pandemic influenza virus could be prevented once it emerges, 
the emphasis would be on reducing its impact.  Several tools would help achieve this aim: 
(i) year-round surveillance; (ii) effective and accurate methods of diagnosis; (iii) social 
distance interventions; (iv) vaccines (once they become available); (v) anti-viral drugs; 
and (vi) strengthened medical services.  The interventions supported under the Project 
will be ba
sed on the Kyrgyz Republic’s epidemiological and programmatic needs, and 
well-assessed options for meeting them.  The interventions will be grouped in three broad 
sub-components:  
 
-
enhancing public health program planning and coordination;  
 
-
strengthening of the national public health surveillance system; and  
 
-
strengthening health system response capacity.  
 
COMPONENT 3: Public Awareness and Information  
 
This component is designed to promote awareness and improved coordination of the 
execution of the contingency plans and the national avian influenza strategy.It is designed 
to safeguard human health, in particular for extension staff, animal health workers, 
poultry producers and their families, by improving public awareness and information.  
Under this component, support would be provided for the development of strategies to 
promote public awareness and improved coordination of the execution of the national AI 
Page  3
responses strategies and plans.  Support will be provided for information and 
communication activities to increase the attention and commitment of government, 
private sector, and civil society organizations, and to raise awareness, knowledge and 
understanding among the general population about the risk and potential impact of the 
pandemic.  Activities will include:  
 
-
developing basic communication materials  
 
-
developing and testing messages and materials to be used in the event of a pandemic or 
emerging infectious disease outbreak  
 
-
developing training courses in communications methodology for extension and 
veterinary staff as well as health workers at the oblast and raion levels; and  
 
-
developing and implementing activities to improve the effective coordination and 
collaboration among stakeholders  
 
COMPONENT 4: Implementation Support, and Monitoring and Evaluation  
 
The component would support costs associated with project management and 
coordination, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).  In terms of project management 
and coordination the project would support the provision of technical assistance for 
procurement, financial management and technical assistance/training and coordination.  
In terms of M&E, the project would support training in participatory monitoring and 
evaluation at all administrative levels, monitoring and impact evaluation assessments.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be implemented nation-wide.  Specific activities related to the animal 
health component to support development of technologies for: (i) disposal of culled 
poultry and (ii) mitigating the negative impacts of mandated culling of poultry on small 
scale backyard poultry producers, will be introduced as needed in specific 
regions/districts of the country where outbreaks happen.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Rita Klees (ECSSD) 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody (ECSSD) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The two safeguard issues which pertain to the Project are those of environmental 
assessment for technologies to be deployed for disposal of culled poultry and of 
mitigating the negative impacts of mandated culling of poultry on small scale backyard 
poultry producers.  
 
Activities under the proposed project are not expected to generate any adverse 
environmental effect as a large part of the project is geared to support prevention 
activities.  The project would overall have positive environmental and social impacts.  
The Project’s environmental and social issues relate to two main activities:  
 
Building capacity for collection and testing of Avian Influenza virus.  The Project’s 
investments in facilities, equipment, and training for laboratories will improve the 
effectiveness and safety over existing avian influenza handling and testing procedures by 
meeting international standards established by OIE.  Any medical waste generated in 
health care facilities will be managed using existing guidelines in the Kyrgyz Republic, 
which have been found satisfactory under previous projects.  The Project would also 
support updating these guidelines, training of health care workers to manage medical 
waste following these guidelines, and, if necessary, purchase of equipment for the proper 
handling and disposal of medical waste in participating facilities.  These provisions 
would be included in the Project Operational Manual to be prepared prior to 
effectiveness.  
 
Overall, the Project will assist the government to develop a strategy for managing future 
emerging and re-emerging zoonotic and infectious diseases outbreaks.As such, the 
project would improve environmental and social safeguards in two areas: (i) 
mainstreaming environmental safeguards into protocols and procedures for the culling 
and disposal of animals during an outbreak, in particular by adopting OIE standards in 
these areas, and improving bio-medical waste management systems in health facilities 
Page  5
and laboratories; and (ii) development of policies on compensation for poultry farmers 
affected by future outbreaks.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Since the Project supports investments for the safe disposal of carcasses and laboratory 
wastes, an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for carcass and medical waste 
disposal facilities will be necessary.  This EMP will also cover the clean up of animal 
wastes of culled poultry by the local public veterinary services supported under the 
Project.  The scope of this EMP will be specified during Project implementation.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Though no social safeguard policy is triggered by the Project, the Project is designed to 
mitigate the negative impacts of mandated culling of poultry on small-scale backyard 
poultry producers.  A compensation fund will be set up under the Project (with an initial 
reserve of US$ 1 million) to pay producers roughly 75% of the market value of their 
culled poultry.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Since the Project is assessed as a B-category project, an Environmental Management Plan 
would be prepared during Project implementation for the carcass disposal facilities.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders with regard to safeguard issues are:  
 
-
the Ministry of Health,  
 
-
Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Processing Industry,  
 
-
the Department of Sanitary Epidemiological Surveillance (including rayon SES 
stations).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/30/2006 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/30/2006 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/15/2006 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
Page  6
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Due to the emergency nature of this action, and in conformance with paragraph 12 of OP 
4.12, the completion and disclosure of the Environmental Assessment will be delayed 
from appraisal to be a condition of disbursement, for Component 1 - Animal Health, and 
Component II - Human Health.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Gotz A. Schreiber 
12/21/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Rita Klees 
12/21/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Norval Stanley Peabody 
12/21/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
12/21/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
12/21/2005 
Comments:   
