                             Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC199
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/16/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: KYRGYZ REPUBLIC                                      Project ID: P074881
Project: Payments and Banking System Modernization            Task Team Leader: Rochelle Hilton
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 23, 2003                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 16, 2004                                 IDA Amount ($m): 9.00
Managing Unit: ECSPF                                          Sector: Payment systems, securities clearance and
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance Loan (TAL)           settlement (80%); Banking (10%); General finance
Status: Lending                                               sector (10%)
                                                              Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector
                                                              development (P); State enterprise/bank restructuring
                                                              and privatization (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The main objective of the proposed project is to develop a modern integrated national payments system that
is accepted and used by the commercial banks and their clients. This would provide basic infrastructure
that is essential for the development of a modern banking system that will increase the efficiency of
payment services and facilitate the growth of financial intermediation. The new payments system
infrastructure will enable commercial banks to process a larger volume of transactions in a more reliable,
secure and affordable manner.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The proposed project would include capacity building programs for the NBKR to the implement the
country's national payments infrastructure modernization program, a complicated and costly endeavor for
the country, in line with the priority objection of improving the efficiency of payment services passing
through the banking system and serving the whole population. The proposed project would finance the
investment costs, mostly software and hardware and project support, incurred by the NBKR for
establishing the above-mentioned infrastructure, as well as technical advisory services, such as for the
development of technical specifications and bidding documents, evaluation of bids, management of the
contract execution of the components making up the payments system, monitoring and evaluation and the
associated studies needed for the implementation of the systems.

Support for the preparatory work has been provided by the IMF and the Bank, as well as from resources
from the PHRD Grant for this project. The framework for the program has been designed taking into
account similar reforms in other countries (especially Azerbaijan), as well as best international practices.
The project would also support the institutional and operational strengthening of the Savings and
Settlement Corporation (SSC) and for privatizing Kairat bank. The project comprises the following
components:

A.       An integrated payments infrastructure that meets the payments and settlement system standards
recommended by the BIS, and includes the following sub-components:

a)       Bulk-clearing system (BCS): technical assistance for advisory services and establishment of a
modern, fully automated bulk-clearing system. This will enable commercial banks to process all types

                                                        2
                                                                                                            ISDS


(credit and debit orders) of high volume/low-value transactions, including utility payments, salaries,
pensions and other fiscal and quasi-fiscal payments in a more secure, reliable and fast manner. This will,
in turn, enable banks to attract more clients and possibly increase their deposit base. The project would
also include advisory services to ensure that the necessary arrangements (legal, management and other) are
in place to enable the BCS to operate effectively and securely;

b)       Inter-bank card system, supported by a Card Processing Center ( CPC): technical assistance for
advisory services and establishment of a national card inter-bank agreement supported by a shared
processing center. This would coordinate and strengthen Kyrgyz commercial banks' initiatives in card
activities, thus enabling bank customers to use any card accepted in the scheme in any Automated Teller
Machine (ATM) or merchant's equipment (Points of Sale - POS). All banks participating the system will
share the operational and investment costs and the management of associated risks. A nationally operating
scheme will reduce the need for cash payments, and will provide access to basic banking services (cash
withdrawal, payment and short term advances) to a large share of the population;

c)       Real-time gross settlement system (RTGS): technical assistance for advisory services and
establishment of a RTGS to provide timely settlement of large-value or urgent inter-bank transactions. The
RTGS will enable banks to settle their large-value transactions in a more secure and timely fashion
eliminating paper based-recording, meanwhile providing the NBKR with an accurate risk management tool
to better monitor intra-day liquidity positions and exceptionally overnight collateralized credit. It will speed
up transactions and reduce their costs and establish a safe and reliable system that is essential for business
activity. Furthermore it will enable bank management to manage and optimize their liquidity positions on a
real-time basis; and

d)       Project management support services: including baseline surveys, studies and the establishment of
a monitoring and evaluation system, so that these activities can be carried out using a professional project
management approach. This assistance, which would include local and international experts, would be
provided to NBKR's Payments Systems Department. It would be closely coordinated with the work of the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and would support NBKR's efforts to complete a complex payments
system within a tight timeframe.

B.       General ledger of the NBKR: feasibility study, as well as advisory services and investment costs
to enhance and strengthen NBKR's General Ledger (GL) so that it is fully compatible and consistent with
the requirements of the improved payments system. The full automation and real-time interfacing between
all components of the payments systems and the NBKR will enable the NBKR to better automate, integrate
and adapt its accounting, treasury and financial information systems to accommodate the increased flows
and volumes.

C.       Banking sector reform: to help implement other areas of the Government's banking sector reform
program, through the following subcomponents:

a)       Strengthening of SSC: the proposed project would help strengthen SSC and improve its financial
services delivery functions and thus better fulfill the banking needs of its customers. To this end, the
project would support long term advisory services (management contract) as well as specialized assistance
to complete an IT needs assessment and to implement the greed recommendations, with a view to lowering
SSC's operating and transactions costs and improving its outreach to the rural population. Project support
is expected to include software and hardware for improving the banks information systems. Assistance
could also include advisory services for the development and implementation of a long-term strategy for
divestiture through privatization, merger or other feasible alternatives. In addition, to help improve SSC's

                                                        3
                                                                                                          ISDS


outreach and the access of rural populations to banking services, the proposed project will explore the
possibility for SSC to enter into a partnership agreement with the Kyrgyz Postal System (Kyrgyz
Potchstasy) to use selected post office windows for the delivery of its payments services. This may be
carried out on a pilot basis; and

(b)      Kairat Bank privatization: the proposed project would provide down-stream support for the
privatization of Kairat Bank, helping to ensure that best international practices are applied. In particular,
the proposed project will provide funding for advisory services for contract negotiations. In addition, it will
include a provision for the development and implementation of a contingency plan in the event that a
fit-and-proper strategic investor is not identified.

D.       Project management and administration: this component would include support f the
implementation and administration of the overall project through the provision of long- and short-term
advisory services, training and equipment for project implementation. In addition, a provision would be
included to cover operating costs incurred by the PIU and to cover the costs of the project audit. The PIU
for the proposed project will be in the Directorate on Investments and Technical Assistance Coordination
(DITAC) of the NBKR.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project is not regionally specific.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments: There are no civil works and no reconstruction associated with the project.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe

                                                        4
                                                                                                           ISDS


any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
not applicable

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
not applicable

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
not applicable

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
not applicable

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
There are no safeguard issues under the project. The NBKR would lead the payments system reform; the
MoF and State Property Commission would play a key role in bank privatization and restructuring.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                           Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                          Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                               Expected        Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank

                                                     5
                                                                                                    ISDS


Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Rochelle Hilton                                    12/15/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Gottfried Ablasser                                      7/1/2003
Comments
The ISDS is approved.

Sector Manager                        Tunc Tahsin Uyanik                                 01/16/2004
Comments
The ISDS is approved

