                         Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I ­ Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 10, 2005                                Report No.:AC909
A. Basic Project Data
A.1. Project Statistics
Country: Lao People's Democratic                 Project ID: P074027
Republic
Project: Health Services Improvement             TTL: Hope Phillips Volker
Project
Total project cost (by component):
Component 1: Improving the quality and utilization of basic health services: $5.86
million
Component 2: Strengthening institutional capacity for health services provision: $8.22
million
Component 3: Improving equity and sustainability of health care financing: $1.32
million
Appraisal Date: June 30, 2004                    Loan/Credit amount($m):
                                                 IDA Credit: $8.10m ; IDA Grant: $6.77m
Board Date: July 14, 2005
Other financing amounts by source:                  ($m.)
Managing Unit: EASHD                             Sector: Health (90%);Central government
                                                 administration (10%)
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment
Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency            Yes? [ ]          No? [X]
recovery?
Environmental Category: B                        Safeguard Classification: S2
A.2. Project Objectives
The project objective is to improve the health status of the population by (a) expanding
access to and improving the delivery of basic health services in 8 southern and central
provinces through an improved planning, budgeting and performance orientation of the
district health system; (b) building institutional capacity, both technical and managerial,
in the health workforce at all levels, in order to improve health outcomes; and (c)
improving the equity, efficiency and sustainability of health care financing. The principal
beneficiaries of the project will be the population (particularly women, children and
including ethnic minorities) of 60 districts in which the capacity to deliver a core package
of health services will be strengthened. Thirty poorest districts will also receive support
for strengthening basic health infrastructure. In addition, the poor in at least 5 of the 60
districts will benefit from a pilot program to cover the costs of providing health care for
the poor. The project will also support improvements to medical education.

A.3. Project Description
        The project has three components: (1) improving the quality and utilization of
health services in 8 provinces; (2) strengthening institutional capacity for health services
provision; and (3) improving equity and sustainability of health financing.

Component 1.       This component will support the development of operational health
districts in each of the 60 districts in the 8 central and southern provinces, with extra
support to 30 districts identified as poor/poorest in the NGPES. A key feature of the
component is to build the capacity of districts for developing and executing
comprehensive health plans for their area. The criteria for allocation of resources to the
districts includes poverty, population and performance criteria. Performance criteria will
include (i) fixed targets for submitting monthly financial and HMIS reports in a timely
manner; and (ii) variable targets linking the proposed use of the district allocation to the
improvement in indicators of health service delivery (outputs). The link to performance
is likely to create incentives for stronger link and responsiveness to demand. Districts will
be supported with technical assistance for planning, budgeting and monitoring of district
health services and for implementing the new health management information system. A
core package of services is to be delivered at each level drawn from the MOH's
Minimum and Complementary package of services. The package is designed to increase
the demand for health services by supporting quality improvements and activities that
inform clients through outreach activities, the maintenance of village health networks and
community participation. HSIP funds will complement other funding available at the
district level for such services, filling funding gaps and shortfalls identified through a
district planning process. District grants will finance drugs and contraceptives; reagents
and medical consumables; logistics support; local training, supervision and technical
support; small equipment and furniture; and for operating costs, including spare parts and
maintenance.

Component 1 will also support the phased expansion of the model of Integrated
Community Health Centers (ICHCs) in selected health centers of the 30 priority districts.
The model was successfully developed with Belgian Technical Assistance under the first
IDA funded project (HSR&MC). The ICHC model supports the provision of a range of
health services discussed and agreed with the community, at agreed prices, and with fee
exemptions for the very poor. An ICHC operates with a minimum complement of trained
staff and is open 24 hours.. The HSIP provides training for ICHC staff, training in health
center management and training of trainers of village level staff.          It will finance
renovation of infrastructure and upgrading of utilities and provide funds for small
equipment, drugs and medical consumables.

Finally, Component 1 will support the improvement of basic health infrastructure in the
30 priority districts, including 3 provincial hospitals (Khammouane, Bolikhamsay,
Saravane), 5 district hospitals (Champassak, Thapanthong, Batieng, Sokhoumma,
Phouvong) and 4 health centers. Decisions on the site and scope of the civil works are
based on criteria including remoteness from existing facilities, ethnic minority
population, and area health needs.

The component addresses the lack of access to quality health services in the rural and
remote areas of Lao PDR, and the outputs are improved service delivery (see key
indicators above) and better health outcomes, particularly among the poor.                A
participatory monitoring and evaluation study among ethnic groups will be conducted,
including an assessment of the reasons for their poor utilization of health services.

Component 2. The component will build institutional capacity for health service delivery
in Lao PDR. The project will adopt a multi-year, competency-based training approach
that applies adult learning principles focused on developing and maintaining specific
monitorable skills. The credit will finance the training of provincial/district health
personnel, a PHC worker training targeted to ethnic minorities and support to the Faculty
of Medical Sciences (FMS) for medical education.

The focus of HSIP is on capacity building to improve service delivery, principally at the
district and village levels. Short-term training is supported through the district grants for
strengthening management capacity and improving the quality of health services
delivery. A short menu of core courses of proven efficacy will be funded , including the
training of trainers to deliver those courses. The training program will also support
longer term specialized training lasting 3-9 months (laboratory, X-ray and medical
specialties) offered at central and large provincial hospitals.

The project would support the PHC worker training that recruits students from
communities comprising remote and minority populations, provide them with 3 years of
training and then employ the trainees in the health centers in their communities upon
graduation. Nursing schools in Champassak, Savannakhet and Khammouane provinces
will deliver the training for which the development of the curriculum and training
materials is currently underway with ADB support. A minimum of 180 students (60
from each school) will be supported under the project, of which at least 50% will be
candidates from ethnic minorities.

Support will be provided to the Faculty of Medicine for the implementation of a Family
Medicine Intern Program, to enhance practical clinical skills of medical graduates
through internships in a provincial/district hospital. The project will also support the
upgradation of faculty skills through selective fellowships for post graduate studies in the
basic sciences, and short term training in pedagogical skills; the purchase of pedagogical
equipment and supplies, and for rehabilitative civil works at the Faculty of Medical
Sciences. Investment will also be provided for upgrading training venues and equipping
them, at the Mahasot and Friendship Teaching hospitals.

Component 2 would also finance Project Management services including those of the
Procurement and Financial management units .

Component 3. The ultimate objective of HSIP Component 3 is to strengthen the equity,
efficiency and sustainability of the Lao health system, thereby preparing it to use more
effectively the increased levels of government funding that are expected in the future as
the result of continuing economic growth and the completion of the Nam Theun II
hydroelectric project. Component 3 is also designed to complement and strengthen the
project's other components. Component 3 includes the following three sub-components:

        ·   Sub-component 3.1: Health management information system (HMIS)
        ·   Sub-component 3.2: Health care for the poor

        ·   Sub-component 3.3: Health financing policy development

HSIP will support implementation of the new MOH HMIS in all 60 project districts.
Implementation of the HMIS is expected to strengthen the project's district-level
planning sub-component and provide a basis for effective monitoring of project activities
at the village, sub-district, district and province levels. Its primary benefits are expected
to be in the form of increased efficiency in the use of district-level resources. In addition,
the HMIS will provide much of the information needed to monitor the HSIP.

HSIP will provide competitively awarded grants to NGOs and similar organizations to
finance health care for the poor in up to 5 project districts with one or more integrated
community health centers (ICHC). These grants can be used either to reimburse providers
directly for health services provided to the poor (equity funds) or to purchase health
insurance services for the poor on a pilot basis in existing community-based health
insurance (CBHI) schemes. This sub-component is designed to increase the utilization of
HSIP Core Package Services by the poor, leading to lower unit costs and to more
equitable health outcomes in the 10 pilot ICHC districts. This targeted demand-side
support will complement the substantial HSIP supply-side support provided through
district grants for operating costs and training.

HSIP support for the further development of health financing policy in Lao PDR will
focus on revising current Government policies concerning user fees (Decree 52 on cost
recovery).. These policies are an important constraint on the ability of the public health
system to provide an adequate supply of good-quality services. In addition, HSIP support
for health financing policy development will assist MOH to prepare the health system to
make effective use of future Nam Theun II revenues to improve access to health services
for the poor. Support is provided for four policy studies on important health-financing
issues, (for example - revision of Decree 52 on cost recovery, development of alternative
scenarios for resource allocation for health among provinces and districts, etc.,), for
workshops disseminating the studies' findings and for participation by MOH and project
staff in international conferences, workshops, and short-term training courses, and for
two study tours to neighboring countries.

A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis:

The project provinces are: Xaysomboun, Borikhamxay, Khammouane, Savannakhet,
Saravanh, Champasak, Xekong, and Attapeu.



B. Check Environmental Category A [ ], B [X], C [ ], FI [ ]

Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered

                                                           Yes                  No

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                               [X]                         [ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           [ ]                       [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               [ ]                       [X]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN
                                                                        [ ]                       [X]
11.03-)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   [ ]                       [X]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                           [X]                         [ ]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    [ ]                       [X]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             [ ]                       [X]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                             [ ]                       [X]
Projects on International Waterways
                                                                        [ ]                       [X]
(OP/BP/GP 7.50)



Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

Environmental Assessment

The Project is classified as a Category B activity where targeted environmental
assessment (EA) is considered appropriate to address specific environmental issues.
Potential environmental and human health impacts of the HSIP examined in completing
the EA corresponded to: (i) planned renovation of and new construction at national,
provincial and district health care facilities (HCF); and (ii) health care waste (HCW)
management practices at HCF. Environmental issues relevant to the foregoing aspects
were identified and recommendations made as to appropriate mitigation measures and
monitoring programs with a view to guiding project design and incorporating appropriate
management actions during project implementation. Mitigation measures corresponding
to the abovementioned aspects of the HSIP are detailed in an EMP.

Indigenous Peoples ­ Social Assessment


Project preparation included a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) to address the social
issues associated with the project, and in particular to assist in HSIP formulation by
considering potential impact of proposed activities, how to improve the design of specific
interventions and activities, and whether there are activities which should not be included
because they are unlikely to work or would have undesirable social impacts; ensure there
is an appropriate system for monitoring the impact of the HSIP and mechanisms for the
collection of baseline data; carry out consultations and a participatory process to ensure
views of relevant stakeholders (especially poor and ethnic groups) are taken into account;
and review relevant parts of HSIP documentation to ensure they are appropriate and
reflect the findings from social development inputs and stakeholder consultation. In most

*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas

cases, the upland ethnic groups in the project areas are culturally, socially, and
economically distinct from the lowland groups, and they are vulnerable to becoming
disadvantaged in the development process. The findings of the SIA are essentially that
while the project has no particular negative impacts, positive impacts will depend upon
the degree to which an increased effort to include ethnic group participation in the health
care system can be successful. To accomplish this, additional focus and financing will
have to be directed at programs aimed at the ethnic minorities in the form of further
participatory research on the utilization of health services by ethnic minorities,
availabiliry of appropriate IEC materials (in the local language) and drug kits, and
suitable training for health workers including the recruitment and training of Primary
Health Care workers from ethnic minorities, who will return, after being trained, to
provide services in the communities to which they belong.

Involuntary Resettlement

The project includes the continued development of primary health care facilities by
financing rehabilitation and new construction. Supported infrastructure projects will be
small in scale and are expected to cause little or no significant adverse impacts. The
government has confirmed in writing to the World Bank that all civil works, including
external networks and facilities related to these buildings, will take place on existing,
unoccupied land owned by MOH or relevant government authorities. The project will
also not support focal sites for the relocation of remote villages.



D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area.

N/A



D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)

N/A

D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

Environmental Assessment


For purposes of the project for which environmental impacts are expected to be limited
and readily mitigated, attention is given in the EMP to specifying best management
practices that will be put in place to ensure that environmental and human health
concerns corresponding to planned HCF civil works and operations are fully addressed
on an ongoing basis during project implementation. Mitigation measures contained in the
EMP emphasize: (i) incorporation of environmentally safe technologies in civil works
planning and design; (ii) adoption of best practices during renovation and construction to
avoid or minimize adverse impacts to natural ecosystems and neighboring communities;

(iii) adherence to strict occupational health and safety safeguards to protect construction
workers and the general public; (iv) application of best international practices
corresponding to the removal and disposal of asbestos containing materials during
building demolition and renovation; (v) meeting or exceeding international guidelines for
drinking water supplied to HCF; and (vi) adoption of best accepted practices
corresponding to handling, treatment and disposal of solid and infectious wastes typically
generated by HCF. Taken together the aforementioned measures address all
environmental issues identified in undertaking the EA, and are expected to be
successfully applied during HSIP implementation. An amount exceeding US$1.5 million
has been set aside in the project to meet the recommendation of the Environment
Management Plan.

Monitoring of HCF operations will be undertaken under the HSIP to ensure full
compliance with stipulated safeguards and other applicable regulatory requirements, and
to demonstrate good environmental performance on an ongoing basis. Responsibility for
fulfilling reporting requirements and timely submission of reports to the national
regulatory agency will rest with individual HCF, with the HSIP Project Management Unit
(PMU) acting in an oversight capacity. Funding has been allocated under the project to
carry out the necessary civil works, procure necessary equipment and consumable
supplies, and to deliver appropriate training in support of monitoring activities and these
are reflected in the PIP. Consultants were hired during the preparation phase with grant
funding to assist in the development of the EMP and will be hired as needed during
project implementation to ensure successful implementation of the EMP. Satisfactory
implementation of all recommended safeguards for the HSIP will be subject to external
evaluation by the Bank both at project mid-term review and final evaluation.

Indigenous Peoples ­ Social Assessment


An Ethnic Group Development Plan (EGDP) has been prepared to provide a strategy and
a programmatic approach to enhance the inclusion of different ethnic groups in the HSIP.
In terms of specific inputs to be financed under the project, the EGDP recommends the
inclusion of recruitment and training of Primary Health Care Workers from ethnic
minorities who would return to their communities to serve. It is also proposed to develop
IEC materials in the languages of ethnic minorities for distribution to village health
volunteers and to distribute drug kits in remote villages with large ethnic minority
populations. The EGDP also includes a Monitoring Plan and the Beneficiaries'
Consultation and Participation Plan. This is participatory research study which will
facilitate the "informed participation" of ethnic groups; and help to monitor and evaluate,
on a pilot basis, the project's impact on ethnic minorities. An amount of US$460,000 has
been earmarked in the project to implement these recommendations. For purposes of
project impact evaluation, key indicators will be disaggregated by ethnic group from the
Lao Reproductive Health Survey. The Manual of District Operations reflects the issues
discussed in the EGDP and describes the actions proposed to be implemented. The EGDP
also aims to ensure compliance with policies of the Lao People's Democratic Republic
concerning ethnic groups, as well as the World Bank's Operational Directive 4.20 on
Indigenous Peoples. The EGDP describes the legal, cultural, and socioeconomic context
surrounding ethnic groups in Lao PDR, particularly pertaining to the receipt of health

service benefits, and describes measures, institutional arrangements, and budgetary needs
that address the particular needs and circumstances of ethnic groups. Implementation of
the EGDP will be monitored together with the other HSIP activities and evaluated both at
mid-term and at final evaluation.

D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Environmental Assessment


Extensive consultation was sought with the Lao PDR Ministry of Health (MOH), and
participating HCF at the national, provincial and district in completing the EA to ensure
that potential project impacts are fully understood and appropriate conclusions and
recommendations have been reached. The Science, Technology & Environment Agency
(STEA), the national agency responsible for EA oversight, was also consulted with
respect to existing environmental regulations pertaining to HCF, and corresponding
monitoring and reporting responsibilities. Feedback was provided by the MOH and
STEA in finalizing recommendations contained in the EMP to prevent, minimize or
mitigate any adverse impacts and to improve environmental performance. The final EA
document has been submitted to the STEA for their approval. The Borrower has also
publicly disclosed the same report immediately following Bank approval.

Indigenous Peoples ­ Social Assessment

The SIA was carried out by direct consultation with rural populations, district and provincial health
personnel in target districts, which took the form of field studies undertaken by the social development
consultant and a team of social researchers who traveled to each province, and by consulting relevant
available existing documentation. The SIA Report and EGDP was publicly disclosed in Vientiane, Lao
PDR on June 21, 2004. The EDGP will also be disclosed in the local language to participating provinces
by September 30, 2004.



. Disclosure Requirements             Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                             06/10/04      or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                         06/21/04       or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                          06/17/04       or Not Applicable
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the
Executive Directors                                     .../.../...    or Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                             .../.../...    or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                         .../.../     or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                          .../.../...    or Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                             06/15/04       or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                         06/21/04       or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                          06/22/04       or Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                    .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                 .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                    .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                .../.../...   or Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                 .../.../...   or Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why.



Section III ­ Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                       Yes      No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve
                                                                             X
the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                             X
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                                             Yes      No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation
                                                                                   N.A.
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include                    N.A.
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                 Yes      No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                         N.A.
Is a separate PMP required?
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:                             Yes      No
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                             N.A.
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                              Yes      No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in
                                                                             X
consultation with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and
                                                                             X
approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been
                                                                                   N.A.
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                 Yes  No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process
                                                                            N.A.
been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and
approve the plan / policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4.36 ­ Forests:                                                  Yes  No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and
                                                                            N.A.
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                           Yes  No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                        N.A.
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                         Yes  No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                      N.A.
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement, then has this been cleared with the Legal Department,
and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
    Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                  Yes  No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
                                                                            N.A.
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the
OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                          Yes  No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World
                                                                        X
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to        X
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                Yes  No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of the            X
safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?            X
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project
                                                                        X
implementation?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                      X
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal  X
documents?
Signed and submitted by:                      Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:             Jayshree Balachander
Project Safeguards Specialist
                              Bekir Onursal
1:
Project Safeguards Specialist
                              Svend Jensby
2:
Project Safeguards Specialist
3:
Approved by:                                  Name                      Date
Regional Safeguards
                              Glenn Morgan
Coordinator:
Comments:
Sector Manager:               Fadia Saadah
Comments:

