Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC328 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 2, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Lao People's Democratic Republic 
Project ID: P075780 
Project Name: Lao Provincial and Rural 
Infrastructure 
Task Team Leader: Maria Margarita Nunez 
Estimated Appraisal Date:             September 7, 
2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 22 
Estimated Board Date: December 7, 2004 
 
Managing Unit: EASTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
(SIL) 
Sector: Roads and highways (75%);Water supply 
(25%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Decentralization (S);Civic engagement, 
participation and community driven development 
(S);Small and medium enterprise support (S);Rural 
markets (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  
Anil Somani, Svend Jensby 
Other financing amounts by source: 
Government of Lao PDR 
($m.) 
2 
 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The development objective of PRIP is to assist the Government of Lao PDR achieve its goal of 
sustainable economic growth and social development.  It will do so by improving access to basic 
infrastructure services, to income generating activities, and to institutional capacity at the central 
provincial and district levels in both the Government and private sector. 
 
The Social Assessment (SA) will facilitate consultations with potential beneficiaries and other 
stakeholders, particularly ethnic minorities, regarding potential project impacts and appropriate design 
features.  Social safeguards documents will be disclosed prior to appraisal and input from various 
stakeholders will be sought. 
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The Government proposed four provinces as being particularly isolated and/or with a low economic 
development level.  These provinces were Houaphan and Xayabouri in the North and Sekong and Attapeu 
in the South.  Based on an initial screening utilizing a multi-criteria assessment
 
that included:  level of 
poverty; accessibility to transport and water and sanitation services; and the existing interventions 
supported by donor and non-governmental/civil society agencies that complement those of the PRIP.   
 
The Bank confirmed that Houaphan, Xekong, Oudomxay and Phongsaly provinces were suitable for 
support under PRIP.  In Houaphan and Xekong provinces, PRIP will finance infrastructure improvement 
and institutional strengthening and capacity building at the provincial, district and village levels.  It will 
also support the development of micro-enterprises for roads maintenance and small towns’ water supply.  
In addition, for Oudomxay and Phongsaly provinces, PRIP would provide sustainable water supply and 
Page  2
 
 
sanitation and promote hygiene awareness in the rural areas and selected small towns.  The task team 
visited these provinces and a preliminary list of candidate roads, and small towns and districts for WSS, 
were identified. The project design is based closely on the current Provincial Infrastructure Project (PIP). 
 
Component 1.  Upgrading and rehabilitation of roads.  (US$16.5 million)
  This component will improve 
overall transport connectivity by: (a) providing all weather road access to provincial and district capitals;  
and (b) rehabilitating rural roads, footpaths and footbridges, local waterways landing facilities and 
approach roads.  The candidate roads are Hanglon Junction – Sopbao - Xiengko – Et - Dan in Houaphan 
Province and Phon - Kalum in Sekong Province.  
 
Component 2.  Small Towns and RWSS
.  
(US$5.5 million)
  This component will: (a) facilitate small towns 
WSS through private sector participation; and (b) provide sustainable water supply and sanitation and 
promote hygiene awareness, through community participation and the formation of user groups to manage 
and maintain the improved facilities in the rural areas of about seven districts.  The candidate urban 
centers are Xamtai, Viengthong, Huameuang, Sopbao and Xiengkho, in Houaphan; and Thateng and 
Dakcheung in Sekong.  These districts are all within the Government’s top 47 priority poor districts as 
identified in the NPEP.  
 
Component 3.  Capacity Building of the public and private sectors.   (US$1.5 million)
  
 
This component 
will support the ongoing decentralization efforts in Ministry of Communication, Transport, Post and 
Construction (MCTPC) and capacity building at the provincial and district levels.  It will aim to:  (a) 
improve the planning and operational ability of the managerial, technical and administrative structures of 
the provincial level, as well as selected agencies at the national level; and (b) develop local level 
enterprises for community road maintenance, and small town and RWSS. 
 
Component 4.  Public awareness and outreach.   (US$0.5 million)
  This component will support a 
community awareness program aimed at increased awareness of the transport agencies and beneficiaries 
of road safety, HIV/AIDS, participation in the selection of roads and WSS, and public information 
dissemination. 
 
 
D.  Project location 
 
Houaphan, Xekong, Oudomxay and Phongsaly provinces have been selected for support under PRIP.  In 
Houaphan and Xekong provinces, PRIP will finance infrastructure improvement and institutional 
strengthening and capacity building at the provincial, district and village levels.  It will also support the 
development of micro-enterprises for roads maintenance and small towns’ water supply.  In addition, for 
Oudomxay and Phongsaly provinces, PRIP would provide sustainable water supply and sanitation and 
promote hygiene awareness in small towns and rural areas.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
Delays in authorization and implementation of project activities, including, feasibility and final design 
reports, adherence to procurement procedures, materialization of commitments, contract signature and 
timely preparation of financial management reports are examples of institutional capacity issues which 
may pose constraints.  This could lead to slow progress and bottlenecks.  To overcome the provincial and 
district authorities’ capacity limitations, the provinces will be fully and actively involved in all stages of 
the project, from preparation to implementation; and technical assistance, designed after an assessment of 
the current capacity, will be addressed by the project. 
 
Page  3
 
 
The capacity, and resources, to undertake safeguard related work will require strengthening in MCTPC, 
as well as in Science, Technology and Environment Agency (STEA), particularly concerning the social 
safeguard issues for involuntary resettlement and ethnic minorities.  Social and Environment Division 
(SED) was established in October 2001 and has 9 staff – 5 for roads projects and 4 for the waterways unit.  
Technical staff are all engineers with only one having received formal training in Environmental 
Assessment. There is some uncertainty about the role and responsibilities of SED regarding safeguard 
aspects of the various donor supported projects, as well as national or private funded projects.  
Coordination with the Project Monitoring Division and communication with Provincial and District staff 
also requires strengthening.  For effective implementation of safeguard provisions for PRIP, the Social 
Assessment (SA) and other project preparation activities will assess in more detail the institutional 
capacity and constraints of SED, Provincial and District agencies and staff responsible for safeguard 
implementation and propose measures to strengthen their capacity.   
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ TBD] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[X] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
Safeguard Policies Classification:
    
[ ] S
1
   [X] S
2
  [ ] S
3
   [ ] S
F
   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues and prepare to 
mitigate them? 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
Preparation will include a review of the implementation of the Environmental Guidelines and the 
Resettlement Policy Framework for Road Maintenance Project (RMP) and Provincial Infrastructure 
Project (PIP).  This review will include an assessment of the type and level of environmental and social 
impacts of RMP and PIP activities.  The guidelines and framework for RMP and PIP will be used to 
develop guidelines for PRIP and the EA and SA work will propose measures, as needed, to strengthen the 
capacity of MCTPC (SED) and Provincial staff to implement the safeguard provisions and improve 
environmental and social outcome.  This exercise could be undertaken by the consultants to be contracted 
for the EA and SA for PRIP or by SED/MCTPC itself with the assistance of the World Bank. 
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
The proposed project will  require at least an Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) and an 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for submission to MCTPC and STEA, who after consultation 
and review of the IEE/EMP reports may clear the reports or require a more detailed EIA/EMP. 
Accordingly, public consultation is required during the screening of project environment, the preparation 
of IEE, EIA including its project planning and operation.  
 
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
The project team confirmed that the project will not affect ecologically sensitive areas,  environmental 
impacts would be minor and the roads would be improved within the existing alignment.  The meeting 
noted that some impact has been identified because of the on-going logging activities that are evident 
from the log storage patios along one of the roads visited by the team and that there is potential for 
involuntary resettlement because of limited land acquisition for road widening. The meeting asked the 
project team to look very closely at the safeguard issues with respect to environment, involuntary 
resettlement and ethnic minorities - in addition to the "standard" social issues of vulnerability (indigenous 
people and gender) the project team was asked to remains alert during project preparation in relation to 
concerns for relocation and village consolidation. 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
TBD 
Page  5
 
 
 
wb213157 
N:\LAO PDR\PRIP\Environment\Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet - v2.doc 
December 2, 2003 5:00 PM
 
