Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1828 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/21/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Caribbean 
Project ID: P090731 
Project Name: CARIB-GEF-Implementation of Pilot Adaptation Investments in 
Dominica, St. Lucia and St. Vincent & the Grenadines. 
Task Team Leader: Walter Vergara 
GEF Focal Area: Climate change 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 10, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 17, 2006 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Flood protection (25%);General water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(25%);Irrigation and drainage (25%);General industry and trade sector (25%) 
Theme: Climate change (P);Biodiversity (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
1.95 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
0.00
2.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project development objective is to support efforts by these three island states to 
implement specific pilot adaptation measures addressing the impacts of climate change on 
biodiversity and land degradation along coastal areas
,
thus achieving a high level of 
integration between these different conventions at a practical field level.
 
The project’s 
ultimate goal is to make efficient and integrated use of the capacity built in past operations, and 
limited human and financial resources to advance with practical steps on the actual 
implementation of adaptation measures.  The project provides an opportunity to seek synergies in 
support of various multilateral environment agreements and is promoting and facilitating more 
effective coordination 
 
Page  2
The project complements the goals of the MACC project and applies the lessons and information 
gathered through the CPACC project by piloting the implementation of adaptation measures in 
three countries that have already taken mainstreaming decisions and seek to execute specific 
measures to address the impacts of climate change on biodiversity and land degradation.  
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
1
Identification of pilot adaptation programs
 to reduce the expected negative impacts of 
climate change on coastal biodiversity and land degradation. Under this component, the 
following activities would be undertaken:  (i) ranking of impacts of climate change on 
biodiversity and land degradation; (ii) identification and cost effectiveness analysis of proposed 
adaptation investments under projected climate change scenarios; and (iii) monitoring and 
evaluation of the project activities, with the specific objective of maximizing its learning value.   
 
2
Implementation of pilot adaptation investments
.
The project will support the 
implementation, on a pilot basis, of selected adaptation investments, such as: i) reduction of 
vulnerability of water resources through application of supply and demand measures, together 
with specific investments in infrastructure for water conservation; ii) specific investment 
measures for conserving and restoring coastal ecosystems impacted by climate change; iii) 
reduction of pressures on biodiversity arising from habitat conversion induced by climate change 
impacts, through design and adoption of more effective land and buffer zoning, and countering 
of habitat fragmentation through establishment of marine and coastal protection corridors; iv) 
specific investment options that would reduce the impacts of climate change on coastal and 
marine resources, therefore addressing impacts on coastal and fishing communities; and v) 
facilitating the establishment of a coordinated legal, institutional and operational framework 
(including policies and management options) to enhance the resilience of national biodiversity 
and natural systems by reducing their vulnerability to climate change.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The exact location of each adaptation activity in the three island countries will be defined during 
the formulation of the activities.  
 
E.  Borrowe
r’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The GEF project will be executed by the Caribbean Climate Change Center (CCCC) on behalf of 
the participating countries. The CCCC was established by CARICOM to serve as a focal point 
for climate change initiatives in the region. The CCCC will coordinate with the Focal points in 
each participating country. 
 
With regard to safeguard policies, there are no major adverse environmental impacts expected as 
a
result of this project.  
The measures to be adopted will be a combination of modified policies, new regulations as well 
as specific investment, such as: infrastructure for water storage, design of buffer zones, 
establishment of marine and coastal protection corridors. The establishment of these measures 
will improve the capacity of the coastal zones in these countries to face the anticipated impacts 
from climate change, preventing or reducing the net effect of these impacts.  
Page  3
An EIA for each measure will be commissioned as required. These would be completed prior to 
implementation of any specific measure. The EIA will include a social assessment to determine 
if OP 4.12 would be triggered due to: 
(i) specific investments in infrastructure for water conservation; ii) specific investment measures 
for conserving and restoring coastal ecosystems iii) reduction of pressures on biodiversity 
through design and adoption of more effective land and buffer zoning; and iv) the establishment 
of marine and coastal protection corridors.  The project includes extensive consultations with the 
local communities and other stakeholders. Social mitigation measures will be identified during 
these consultations and would be made part of the implementation of specific adaptation 
measures. 
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
Environmental Safeguards Specialist: Walter Vergara 
 
Social Safeguards Specialist: Alonso Zarzar 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
TBD 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
TBD 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  4
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:   
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:   
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Walter Vergara 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Jean Roger Mercier 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Abel Mejia 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
