Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/27/2005 
Report No.:  AC1455
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Madagascar 
Project ID:  P083351 
Project Name:  Integrated Growth Poles 
Task Team Leader:  Ivan Rossignol 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 10, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 12, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTPS 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (30%);General industry and trade sector 
(30%);General transportation sector (20%);General water, sanitation and flood protection 
sector (10%);Power (10%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
129.80 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overall purpose of the proposed project is to help provide the adequate business 
environment to stimulate and lead economic growth in three selected regional poles.  
 
The specific objectives are to assist the GOM to:  
 
(i) construct and rehabilitate critical infrastructure essential for sustained economic 
activity in the tourism, manufacturing, agribusiness and mining sectors; (ii) put in place 
appropriate incentive measures to achieve rapid growth; (iii) develop the instruments to 
ensure equitable, sustainable growth; and (iv) strengthen the capacity of local authorities 
to formulate, prepare, implement, and manage medium- and long-term integrated of 
future regional development projects.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project is comprised of 5 components:  
 
Component A:  Strengthening the business environment  
Page  2
(US$55 million equivalent of which IDA will contribute US$21 million equivalent).  
Based on demand, the project will aim to provide proactive support to the Micro, Small 
and Medium Scale enterprises (MSME) sector and to strengthen the business 
environment in the three geographic poles to allow Malagasy firms play a greater role in 
the economy.  The component will also provide support for capacity building in tourism 
and will monitor specific policy changes.  The main activities under this component to be 
developed and implemented in cooperation with the IFC and Multilateral Investment 
Guarantee Agency (MIGA) include: (i) improving MSMEs' access to finance including 
through an IFC-managed risk sharing arrangement to provide guarantees to commercial 
banks; (ii) MSME capacity building to develop value chains (including in view of a 
possible development of the Antisrabe agribusiness zone); (iii) tourism capacity building; 
(iv) supporting the JIRAMA operation restructuring; and (v) improving the business 
environment including monitoring of policy and regulatory changes to be taken by the  
GOM, strengthening of the investment promotion agency and creation of registries.  
 
Component B: Supporting export led growth in Antananarivo-Antsirabe  
 
(US$7 million equivalent of which IDA will contribute US$6 million equivalent).  The 
project will help develop off-site investments allowing the creation of an ICT business 
park in Antananarivo (Antanetibe site) and provide technical assistance for an industrial 
and agribusiness zones in Antananarivo and Antsirabe. The main activities of this 
component include: (i) provision of technical assistance to relevant ministries and EPZ 
authorities to enhance the sector?s competitiveness, including to develop a new 
regulatory framework, to develop of one or more industrial parks (EPZ) in Antananarivo 
and Antsirabe, to develop skills development program(s) and on the issue of trade 
negotiations; (ii) supporting the development of an ICT Business park in Antanetibe.  
Finally, the project will provide support to the municipalities of Antananarivo and 
Antsirab? through: technical assistance, training, rehabilitation of existing facilities.  
 
Component C: Supporting tourism led growth in Nosy Be  
 
(US$55 million equivalent of which IDA will contributeUS$32 million equivalent).  
The project will create an infrastructure platform and regulatory environment to expand 
the tourism industry significantly. The infrastructure will be designed to accommodate a 
demand of 2,000 international-level hotel rooms by 2010.  Core activities under this 
component include:  (i) adoption by the municipality of a tourism development master 
plan and urban development plan for Nosy Be to regulate and manage development in 
existing protected areas; (ii) technical assistance to develop and implement business 
incentives measures to attract investments; (iii) upgrading of the road network to provide 
access to the isolated eastern part of the island and improve travel conditions between the 
airport, the main city (Hellville) and tourism sites; (iv) upgrading of the Hellville and 
Ankify ports (the latter under another ongoing IDA project); (v) upgrading the public 
utilities system by supporting power generation and distribution, upgrading the water and 
sewerage system, upgrading urban solid and liquid waste management, and 
telecommunications; and (vi) upgrading the urban infrastructure of Hellville and 
providing its hospital with a surgery block. Finally, the project will provide support to the 
Page  3
municipality of Hellville and the local tourism authorities through: technical assistance, 
training, rehabilitation of existing facilities and creation of ecotourism facilities.  
 
Component D: Mining and Tourism led growth in Taolagnaro  
 
(US$166 million equivalent of which IDA will contribute US$55 million equivalent).  
The project will create the infrastructure platform and regulatory environments to open 
up the landlocked region of Taolagnaro to facilitate the growth of tourism, agribusiness 
and to catalyze private sector growth in ilmenite mining. The infrastructure will be 
designed to accommodate a demand of 850 international-level hotel rooms by 2010.  The 
principal activities under this component include: (i) the adoption by the municipality of 
a
tourism development master plan and urban development plan for Toalagnaro, (ii) the 
development (under a public private partnership) of a new public port on the Ehoala 
peninsula to support the ilmenite mining operations and to facilitate market access for 
local production and exports, (iii) a partial rehabilitation of the existing port of 
Taolagnaro to provide continuity for traffic during construction of the new port; (iv) 
upgrading the access road network, and the main rural roads, which could also become a 
support to tourism activities;  (v) upgrading the key public utilities services (power, 
water, sanitation, urban infrastructure and services and solid waste management) and 
telecommunications to support the growth of tourism and other economic activities in the 
region, and (vi) upgrading of selected urban infrastructures including the Tsiranana 
hospital.  The project will provide support to the municipality of Taolagnaro, the local 
tourism authorities through technical assistance, training, rehabilitation of existing 
facilities, construction of basic sanitary facilities.  
 
Component E: Program and project implementation, evaluation and monitoring  
 
(US$21 million equivalent of which IDA will contribute US$15 million equivalent).  At 
the central and regional levels, the project will provide support for: (i) project 
implementation, project coordination, procurement and financial management and (ii) 
supporting the preparation and implementation of the provisions of the Environmental 
Management Plan, as well as the carrying out of all environmental and social activities 
under the project.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Two of the three growth poles are coastal.  At Tolagnaro, there are dune systems, 
beaches, brackish water lagoons, an existing port, and an area to be developed as a new 
port. A substantial expanse of ilmenite sands with scattered stands of forest and wetland 
vegetation is planned for mining by QMM in a project not being financed by the Bank 
but considered as an associated project and thus included in the environmental 
assessment.  Nosy Be is itself an island surrounded by smaller islands including Nosy 
Tanikely, where there are coral reef systems of relatively good quality.  Beaches, coastal 
waters, lowland and hill forests and scenic vistas are important tourism attractions, and 
there is a protected area adjacent to the port of Hellville that provides habitat to endemic 
lemurs.  Fishery resources are important in both coastal areas.  Lobster is of particular 
commercial value.  The Ansirabe/Antananarivo pole has fewer sensitive features, being 
Page  4
situated mainly on high plateau with expanses of hills and vallies. River systems are 
important for floodplain agriculture including rice and vegetables.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bienvenu Rajaonson (AFTS1) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTSD) 
Ms Charlotte S. Bingham (ENV) 
Mr Gordon Appleby (AFTS1) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no significant safeguards risks at the Antananarivo-Antsirabe Growth Pole.  
 
At Nosy Be, the significant risks are of adverse indirect impacts caused by tourist 
activities (e.g., sex tourism, and prostitution, increase in exposure to HIV/AIDS); damage 
to the natural and social environments resulting from poorly-controlled land development 
in response to real or anticipated tourism demand; and growth that exceeds the capacity 
of municipal infrastructure.  
 
At Fort-Dauphin, the situation is more complicated because of the cumulative impacts 
of the proposed ilmenite mine and its associated infrastructure, the infrastructure to be 
supported by IG2P, and the indirect impacts of both developments.  One direct impact of 
concern is the conversion of a portion of the beach and nearshore water at Eahoala for 
construction of a new port. The natural habitat at Eahoala is not critical, and an offset will 
be provided in the form of protected status for the rest of the beach. Of more concern is 
the possible disturbance of dune formations in and around the port, its associated 
industrial development zone, and the access road that must traverse the dunes. It is 
imperative that the dune protection and stabilization measures in the EMP be judiciously 
carried out.   
 
Page  5
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
A
specific impact of the associated mining project is the conversion of the occasionally-
brackish lagoon system near the mine site to a permanent freshwater system.  Essentially 
irreversible, the conversion may affect subsistence fishery. QMM is continuing to study 
the potential effects and plans to promote a freshwater fishery and to engage the local 
community in its management.  More generally, there is a risk that success in achieving 
growth at the Tolagnaro and Nosy Be poles in particular may result in unplanned or 
unregulated development and in population growth and tourist arrivals that exceed the 
capacities of municipal physical and social infrastructure, especially water and 
wastewater systems, solid waste management, health.  Preparation and implementation of 
regional development plans and capacity building for planning and plan implementation   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In the case of the sub-projects related to development of an industrial zone in the 
Antananarivo'Antisrabe pole, an environmental planning approach was adopted in order 
to determine the areas to be developed so as to avoid environmental sensitive zones and 
to minimize involuntary resettlement.  In the same way, the project took into account the 
requirements in terms of basic service provisions for water supply, energy, and solid 
waste and wastewater management and disposal. Concerning the Nosy Be ring road, the 
selected layout, for the most part, takes into account the existing Right of Way (ROW), 
but the originally-planned width of the proposed roadway and ROW have been reduced 
so as to minimize the impacts due to involuntary resettlement.  A change in alignment 
was made to avoid a sacred tree.  At the Fort Dauphin growth pole, detailed studies were 
carried out for site of the new port and the road connecting the mine and the port, and the 
options with greater impact were rejected. Thereafter, optimization studies, led by QMM, 
resulted in a layout for the port that would minimize the initial size of the breakwater in 
order to limit environmental impacts. The project has proposed a compensation program 
for unavoidable marine habitat loss in the form of a coastal protection system located at 
Fausse Baie des Gallions.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Eleven separate safeguards instruments have been prepared:  three policy  frameworks 
(ESMF, RPF and Cultural Properties Framework); three ESIAs (Taolagnaro, 
Antananarivo-Antsirabe, and Nosy Be),  three RAPs (two for Taolagnaro, one for Nosy 
Be), plus and EMP and a Resettlement Process Framework for the Nosy Tanikely Marine 
Protected Area.  A ?gap analysis? was performed on the extensive ESIA and EMP 
prepared by QMM for the ilmenite mine, road and port.  Each ESIA includes a 
management plan to deal with the direct social and environmental impacts.  Managing 
cumulative social and environmental impacts, direct and indirect, requires more than 
anything else sound regional planning and functioning systems of land development 
administration and control, coupled with timely provision of necessary environmental 
management infrastructure, to support sustainable rather than self-destructive growth at 
the growth poles. The design of a regional planning process is presented in the ESMF, 
Page  6
and the EMP for each growth pole includes measures to strengthen it where it is already 
on-going (Taolagnaro) and establish it where it is not well developed.  
 
Borrower capacity to implement safeguards measures including regional planning 
varies, probably  strongest in Taolagnaro, weak overall.  A local steering committee is 
being set up in each growth pole, supported by AGETIPA and the PIC implementation 
unit in the VPM.  The EMPs all include recommended capacity-building actions that will 
be funded as part of the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
In the context of the project environmental and social impacts assessment, the Vice Prime 
Ministry, concerned communes, in particular those of Fort Dauphin, Nosy Be and 
Antsirabe, as well as the Consultant conducted public consultations and formal and 
informal meetings relating to the IG2P, in general, and the individual growth poles in 
particular.  The National Steering Committee of the project held regional workshops to 
launch the safeguards studies in the three growth poles, namely: Nosy Be, 
Antananarivo/Antsirabe and Tolagnaro. Communication and public consultation 
workshops were organized subsequently to discuss stakeholders concerns about the 
project's main environmental and social impacts.  
 
In addition, this process was an opportunity to expose stakeholders to the notion of 
regional planning and strategic environmental assessment and to explain in great detail 
World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
All the safeguards studies were publicly disclosed in final draft form on March 8, 2005, 
and are accessible for public review and comment at each of the three growth poles, in 
line with the Malagasy regulation on environmental assessment (the MECIE decree).  
 
GOM conducted public consultations in each growth pole during the statutory review 
and comment period that began at the time of disclosure.  
 
In the case of the Tana/Antsirabe growth poles, public consultations were mainly used 
to assist in selecting the sites of industrial parks in order to minimize adverse 
environmental and social impacts and to better meet the needs and expectations of local 
populations   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/02/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/08/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/08/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
03/09/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
03/04/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/08/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/08/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Page  7
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
03/08/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
03/08/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
No 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Page  8
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ivan Rossignol 
06/22/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/22/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Gordon Appleby 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Charlotte S. Bingham 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
06/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Demba Ba 
06/22/2005 
Comments:   
