Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC890 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 15, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Madagascar 
Project ID: P074086 
Project Name: Watershed Management 
Project 
Task Team Leader: IJsbrand H. de Jong 
GEF Focal Area: M-Multi-focal area 
Global Supplemental ID: P088887 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 2, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 5, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTS1 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage 
(50%);Agro-industry (30%);Crops (20%) 
Theme: Other rural development (P);Other 
trade and integration (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Nina Chee (environment) and Mohamed 
Arbi Ben-Achour (social) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 158 
IDA: 120 
Other financing amounts by source:  
GOM 
Farmers 
AFD 
($m) 
10 
10 
10 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
8 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The proposed project is based on the principle that poverty, land degradation, unreliable access 
to water and extensification are intimately linked. The project will therefore support investments 
that intensify and diversify agricultural production, which is more likely to be achieved under 
conditions of reliable access to water. Past experience has demonstrated that merely rehabilita-
ting irrigation infrastructure is insufficient. As a clean break from the past, investments will be 
considered in a geographically and thematically coherent fashion.  
 
The objective of the proposed project is to contribute to inclusive rural growth through the 
promotion of intensification and diversification in three regions with high potential for 
agricultural development, while promoting sustainable use of infrastructure and soil and water 
resources.  
 
C.  Project Description 
Page  2
The project will consist of four components:  
 
ƒ
Soil and Water Management (US$60m, or 38%) 
Water management remains the most important constraint to intensification and diversification. 
The project will therefore invest in improving reliable access to water through rehabilitation of 
existing and development of new irrigation infrastructure. In addition, the project will support 
strengthening of water users’ associations (WUA), and the transfer of irrigation management so 
as to achieve sustainable recovery of O&M costs. The project will provide assistance that will be 
conditioned by the performance of WUAs in the gradual adoption of their new responsibilities. 
The project will also support the establishment of FERHA. 
 
In contrast with past support programs, investments will be 
geographically integrated
 and target 
upland zones where land degradation, erosion and sedimentation have an immediate impact on 
irrigated areas, and where investments make economic sense. Recognizing that rainfed 
agriculture is an important part of the rural economy, investments will also target rainfed 
agriculture in upland areas (tanety
)
to increase productivity and promote diversification through 
large-scale dissemination and upscaling of agro-ecological techniques, and to arrest a vicious 
cycle of fertility mining, declining productivity levels, expansion of agriculture into marginal 
areas, and soil and water degradation.  
 
ƒ
Agricultural and Environmental Support Services (US$51, or 32%) 
As a further divergence from past approaches, intensification and diversification will be targeted 
in a 
thematically integrated
 fashion. Issues that will be addressed include the delivery of new 
technologies, marketing of in particular non-rice crops, and the delivery of agricultural inputs, 
rural finance, tenure security, and road access. The establishment of a voucher scheme to 
improve access to inputs, technologies and extension services will be considered during 
preparation. The voucher scheme would be established in direct support to rural finance 
organizations, possibly in combination with a guarantee scheme and delivery of storage facilities 
that would enable capturing higher seasonal prices. Delivery of new technologies will be 
undertaken by private operators and NGOs. Off-season production of non-rice crops will in 
particular be promoted as these crops usually represent a higher value, the potential for adoption 
appears to be significant, input use is more common and main season rice production will benefit 
from spill-over effects, and stronger linkages usually exist with private sector operators for the 
provision of fertilizer, seeds and technical advise.  
 
ƒ
Institutional Strengthening and Policy Reforms (US$35,or 22%)  
Capacity strengthening will be a central element in the project. Beneficiaries will include 
government staff, private sector operators, NGOs and other agricultural service providers, 
farmers, producers organizations, and WUAs.  
 
The project will address policy reforms in the field of (i)
 Irrigation Infrastructure Maintenance
 
through the implementation of FERHA, and through the establishment of an independent agency 
responsible management and maintenance of this infrastructure; (ii) 
Land titling
 through the 
development and implementation of simplified titling procedures and lower transaction costs; 
Page  3
(iii) 
National Water Policy
 through the development of a comprehensive and more inclusive 
policy, strategy and institutional framework that would include participation of all water users.  
 
ƒ
Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$12m, or 8%) 
This component supports project management and the central and watershed level. It will also 
provide support to the monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes. 
 
The team discussed two alternative approaches, viz. a 
nationwide sectoral coverage
 versus a 
watershed-concentrated holistic approach
.
The clear lesson from past experience is that the 
approach has to be geographically and thematically integrated. In addition, emerging lessons 
suggest that spreading investments too thinly jeopardizes their impact on rural growth. The team 
has therefore opted for a holistic approach implemented in a few high potential watersheds. The 
team also recommends seeking cross-fertilization with existing projects as far as possible, in 
particular the PSDR, PST, IG2P and PE3. 
 
The project will be a fully blended operation of IDA credit and GEF grant under OP15 
Sustainable Land Management. The GEF component will benefit from the enabling environment 
created through IDA engagement and mobilize incremental funding to improving the 
productivity and economic growth in the upper watershed areas. GEF funding will also be 
targeted towards capacity strengthening for better management of natural resources and 
coordination of environmental activities at the watershed level.  
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will work in a number of regions that have the highest potential for agricultural 
development (“agricultural growth poles”). Five such locations are currently under 
consideration: Lac Alaotra (central-east), Marovoay (north-west), High Plateaux (central), 
Andapa (north-east) and Ambilobé (north-west). A final choice will be made during preparation. 
 
Following privatization of irrigation management agencies in the nineties, Madagascar’s 
irrigation sector is poorly performing in terms of productivity and sustainability. Sustainable 
growth through intensification is more likely to happen in places where access to water is more 
reliable. The project locations have therefore been selected based on their potential for growth 
and poverty reduction through intensification. They include some of the major irrigation areas of 
Madagascar (the second most important irrigation country in SSA). 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
Borrower institutional capacity for Safeguard policies is weak. Capacity building is foreseen 
under the project. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
Page  4
[x] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[x] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[x] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
OP/BP 4.01 (environmental assessment) is triggered in view of the impacts of irrigation 
development on the environment.  
OP/BP 4.04 (natural habitats) is triggered in view of the potential impact of irrigation 
development on the natural habitats and the people that live there. 
OP/BP 4.09 (pest management) is triggered, as the project will actively promote increased use of 
inputs. 
OP/BP 4.12 (involuntary resettlement) is triggered as some infrastructure works might take 
place, which will entail the acquisition of some individual, communal or/and public lands.
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
April 1, 2005. 
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
Not applicable 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
Some infrastructure works such as access roads and the construction of reservoir and pumping 
station might take place, which will entail the acquisition of individual, communal or/and public 
lands.  However, at this stage of project preparation, no firm information is available as to where 
these possible works will take place.  Hence, a Resettlement Policy Framework is proposed and 
will be prepared in February 2005, and will be disclosed before appraisal mission planned in 
June, 2005. During project implementation, when the location of the infrastructural works 
become known, individual or a consolidated RAP will be prepared as appropriate and as needed.  
 
Additional safeguard reporting instruments that will be used include an environmental 
assessment and a pest management plan. An Environmental Assessment and a Pest Management 
Plan will be reviewed and cleared prior to appraisal. Further instruments will be developed as 
appropriate.  
 
Borrower’s feasibility studies expected to be launched by July 2004, and completed by January 
2005. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
IJsbrand H. de Jong 
July 15, 2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
July 15, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Richard Scobey 
July 15, 2004 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
