Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/19/2005 
Report No.:  AC1633
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Malawi 
Project ID:  P084148 
Project Name:  Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development Project 
Task Team Leader:  Tijan M. Sallah 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 14, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: October 31, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTS1 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and drainage (50%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 
(25%);Agricultural extension and research (25%) 
Theme:  Other environment and natural resources management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The overarching development objective of the proposed project is to raise agricultural 
productivity and net incomes of 52,700 poor rural households in 11 target districts of 
Malawi in a sustainable manner by providing an integrated package of  support covering 
irrigation, agricultural/ irrigation advisory services, marketing and post-harvest assets and 
services, and capacity building. The specific objective of the project would be to increase 
agricultural productivity by 50% and smallholder net incomes by 30% through: (i) 
developing and rehabilitating irrigation infrastructure to raise cropping intensity by 30% 
by especially involving the private sector and beneficiaries in scheme development and 
maintenance;(ii) providing demand-driven technical packages to raise smallholder 
productivity and diversify crop mix; (iii) improving rural infrastructure and marketing 
assets and services; (iv) helping mobilize farmers and build capacity of farmer 
organizations; and of implementing institutions.  
 
Key performance indicators showing the achievement of project objectives would be 
measured by:  (i) about 2,600 hectares effectively served by improved efficiency and 
reliability of delivery of irrigation water in rehabilitated and new schemes, benefiting 
10,600 farm households; (ii) 400 water harvesting civil structures constructed and 
Page  2
operational, comprising 100 livestock water storage structures, 100 group backyard 
structures, 100 soil storage and new measures, and 100 catchment/land conservation 
structures, resulting in soil conservation and fertility regeneration measures in micro-
catchments, benefiting 5,100 farm households (iii) about 23,600 households benefiting 
from employment, inputs and rural asset creation through input for assets; (iv) about 
13,000 farm households benefiting from the FBO fund in the form of post-harvest assets, 
marketing and extension services; (v) built capacity of farmers, implementing staff, 
service providers and  institutions (benefiting 400 farm households); and (vi) overall, 
improved  cropping intensity by 30%, agricultural productivity by 50%, and farm 
incomes by 30% in addition to bringing above the poverty line at least fifty percent of the 
assisted households within 4 years of implementing the project.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed instrument is a Sector Investment Credit (SIL).  It is proposed to finance a 
time slice of the MOA?s agricultural investment program, focusing on an integrated 
package of interlocking support, covering irrigation, and demand-driven extension and 
marketing.  The overall project strategy is to support growth-oriented agricultural 
development by working with the capable poor. In line with the Malawi Poverty 
Reduction Strategy(MPRS), the principal target group under the project will be the 
economically active rural poor (those of working age and in good health but lacking 
productive assets) and, to a lesser extent, the transient poor (those at risk of becoming 
poor due to periodic or transitory shocks).  While this project is aimed at promoting 
economic growth through development in irrigation and other activities by the capable 
poor, the ongoing MASAF 3 is focused on providing social protection and livelihoods 
enhancement.  Hence, it is important that a district?s or community?s participation in this 
project does not exclude them from other sources of safety net type assistance.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The proposed project will support  smallholder farmers in 11  (out of a total of  27) 
districts in Malawi (namely Blantyre, Chikwawa, Nsanje, Phalombe, Zomba in the South; 
Dedza, Lilongwe, Salima in the Central; and Chitipa, Nkhata Bay, and Rumphi in the 
North, and have four main components: (1) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Development; 
(2) Farmer Services and Livelihoods Fund (FSLF); (3) Institution Development;  and (4) 
Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation. The criteria for the selection of 
districts were: (i) irrigation potential/water availability; (ii) the poverty of the area; (iii) 
community willingness and readiness to participate in the project; (iv) the presence of 
another Donor; and (v) technical readiness of the area (as determined by how advanced 
are the technical assessments, such as site investigations, designs, etc.).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi (AFTS3) 
Mr Amadou Konare (AFTS1) 
 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
From an environmental and social safeguard point of view, the proposed project is a 
Category B project.  The environmental and social impacts of the project, for the most 
part, are expected to be minimal, site specific and manageable to an accepted level. Some 
of the potential impacts may include:  
 
?
Loss of forest resources, particularly where new development of small-scale 
gravity schemes will be considered;  
 
?
Increase in soil erosion culminating in the loss of fragile ecosystem;  
 
?
Soil and water contamination due to exposure of agro-chemicals;  
 
?
Siltation of water course, which is more likely to cause flooding if not properly 
undertaken;  
 
?
Changes in migration patterns of animals;  
 
From a social safeguard standpoint, the project potential impacts include:  
 
?
Loss of grazing land for the local people surrounding irrigation schemes;  
 
?
Conflicts over land use and ownership; and  
 
?
Disruption of footpaths, roads and patterns of local people.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No such long term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
N/A   
 
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The report, in light of the weak institutional capacity to effectively address safeguard 
aspects, discusses the current legal, regulatory and institutional framework within which 
the project is to be implemented, along with its shortcomings and measures designed to 
facilitate implementation of proposed remediation and mitigations.  Institutional 
arrangements for putting in place social and environmental mitigation measures have 
been clearly discussed that are designed to ensure that environmental considerations are 
taken into account throughout screening, selection, planning, construction and operation 
processes of the various project activities and that social and environmental benefits are 
ensured and sustained through adequate impacts and mitigation monitoring, as they relate 
to identified project beneficiaries and affected people.  Environmental and social 
considerations and impact mitigation planning will be an integral part of the 
implementation of project activities.  
 
As indicated earlier, the proposed project is not expected to have significant negative 
environmental and social impacts.  The Borrower prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), an Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment 
(ESIA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the project.  They include the 
following: (i) systematization of environmental and social impact assessment for all 
identified sub-projects; (ii) procedures for conducting sub-project specific EIAs, be they 
Limited Environmental Impact Assessment (LEIA) or Full Environmental Impact 
Assessment (FEIA) as applicable; (iii) an Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMP) for all identified sub-projects (iv) Capacity strengthening and awareness raising 
campaigns targeted at relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and 
monitoring of project safeguard measures; (v) establishment and implementation of an 
intersect consultation framework for the environmental control and monitoring; (vi) 
reinforcement of coordination meetings of harmonization and consultation at all levels 
among stakeholders; and (vii) delineation of attributions, roles and responsibilities of all 
relevant stakeholders.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The environmental and social impacts assessment study, from the outset, was carried out, 
following broad consultation framework, involving all relevant stakeholder groups and 
other interested parties, including: Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Lands and 
Department of Environmental Affairs, other government agencies, the private sector, 
NGO and local institutions and smallholder rural communities in each of the district in 
project intervention zone.  
 
The study, which was carried out in full compliance with the national and Bank 
environmental and social safeguard policies and guidelines, has been reviewed and 
approved by ASPEN. The safeguard documents have been disclosed in-country and at 
Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal. In-country disclosure process involved: (i) sending 
copies of the ESIA/ESMF reports summaries the various district assemblies, District 
Agricultural Development offices, Irrigation schemes and Traditional Authorities in the 
districts and particular areas affected by the project; and (ii) Press release summarizing 
Page  5
project goals and objectives, the objectives, methodology utilized and findings of the 
safeguard studies carried out and modalities for accessing study reports and summaries 
in-country. Copies of the safeguard reports could be obtained from Ministry of Lands and 
Department of Environmental Affairs. Copies of summaries will be available for access 
and collection by the public at no cost.  
 
The recommendations of the safeguard documents will be reflected in the Project 
Implementation Manual (PIM) and environmental mitigation costs and institutional 
capacity strengthening with respect to safeguard aspects will be reflected in the project 
DCA.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/23/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/01/2001 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/01/2005 
 
Pest Management Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/06/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/23/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
 
Page  6
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes 
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes 
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards 
team?  Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the 
project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
Yes 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
Yes 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Tijan M. Sallah 
01/13/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Amadou Konare 
01/13/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
 
01/13/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Ms Yvette Laure Djachechi 
01/13/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
01/13/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Richard G. Scobey 
01/13/2005 
Comments:   
