Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC494 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  March 17, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Malawi 
Project ID: P057761 
Project Name: RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE 
SERVICES 
Task Team Leader: Paivi Koljonen 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTEG 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: General energy sector (26%); General 
water, sanitation and flood protection sector 
(25%); General transportation sector (25%); 
Sub-national government administration 
(13%); General information and 
communications sector (11%). 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private 
sector development (P); Access to urban 
services for the poor (P); Rural services and 
infrastructure (P); Decentralization (S); Public 
expenditure, financial management; and 
Procurement (S). 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Edeltraut Gilgan-Hunt and Yvette Laure 
Djachechi 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 40 
Other financing amounts by source: Government & bilateral donors 
25 ($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The development objectives of the project are to: (a) stimulate broad-based economic growth and public 
service delivery in selected districts; and (b)  improve access to and reliability of infrastructure services to 
exploit the productive potential of farm and non-farm rural enterprises.  The project seeks the following 
outcomes: 
 
\01\02
An increasing number of residents, farms, non-farm enterprises and public institutions in the 
project’s target areas will have improved access to stable and adequate power supplies, have 
clean drinking water, and adequate road transport to markets; 
\01\02
The output from the agricultural sector in the target areas will have been increased; 
\01\02
An adequate regulatory framework for rural electrification, telecommunications, and water supply 
conducive to private participation in the future development of these sectors will have been put in 
place; 
\01\02
District authorities in the target areas will have increased capacity to identify, appraise, and 
implement road and water projects within their jurisdictions. 
 
 
 
 
Page  2
 
2
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The envisaged investments will not in general cover large investments such as major roads or bulk 
infrastructure  supply. Nor will they cover public works programs or community level interventions in 
infrastructure for which MASAF is currently providing adequate coverage. Instead they focus on 
expanding access and improving the quality and productive impact of publicly owned infrastructure 
assets.  The project will adopt 
a 
relatively loosely integrated approach between the infrastructure sectors.  
The focus on integration will be strongest at the planning stage, while implementation will be 
independent.    
 
The interventions will focus on districts to be selected with a view to their potential to realize economic 
growth.  In the target areas, the project will finance investments in one or more of the infrastructure 
subsectors dependent upon the existing stock of assets and the forecast requirements.  In general, the 
activities may cover some or all of the activities stated below: 
 
Electrification:
  The project will finance rural electrification; strengthening of the transmission lines to 
the project areas; intensification of customer connections to the grid; and expanded use of solar PV 
systems for public institutions (GEF co-financing).  The government’s Rural Electrification Masterplan 
will be a key document to define the scope.  The government expects to concession out the distribution 
operations of ESCOM with an obligation for the concessionaire to undertake rural electrification.  The 
project would support this by providing performance based subsidies based on actual roll out of the 
network.   
 
Rural telecommunications
.    The project will finance rural pay phones, telecenters, and possibly internet 
connectivity.  As part of a broader sector reform, the government is in the process of establishing a 
telecommunications fund that would serve as the mechanism for subsidizing rural telecommunications 
access.  Revenues for the fund would come from a small levy on the turnover of all service providers 
operating in the sector.  It is envisaged that competitive bidding for these subsidies would be used to 
ensure value for money for the government.  
 
Water
.  In the service areas of the regional water boards, the project will finance the extension of water 
distribution mains into project areas and if required, increased water production.  Outside the service 
areas of the regional water boards the project will finance the establishment of community water boards, 
local private operators, and construction of small water supply schemes to serve the project area.  
 
Roads
.  The project will finance priority secondary and tertiary road construction and periodic 
maintenance needs at the district level.  Investment decisions would be based on an annual road sector 
program to be submitted on a regular, timely basis by local authorities to be consolidated into the national 
plan by the NRA.  The Government would be expected to make available adequate Road Fund allocations 
to cover routine maintenance through performance based contracts, which would be let to the private 
sector as far as possible.  
 
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
.  The main focus will be on assistance to the district 
authorities as the key implementing partners in the project.  Activities will also identify institutional 
strengthening and capacity building requirements of : (i) individual infrastructure sector ministries and 
their local officers; (ii) other ministries to the extent that infrastructure planning and service delivery 
affects their operations; (iii) regulatory bodies; (iv) ESCOM, the Regional Water Boards, and private 
service providers or contractors; and (v) small and medium enterprises to enhance productive uses of 
infrastructure services. 
 
Page  3
 
3
Implementation Arrangements 
The Ministry of Economic Development and Planning will have the central responsibility for 
coordination.  A Task Force under the chairmanship of this ministry with representation of all the key 
sectors is already in existence.  The optimal distribution of responsibility and controls across ministries, 
or government level (central v. district), and other implementing agents (ESCOM, MTL, private providers 
of electricity/telecom services) will be arrived at during the preparation process.  Depending on the 
geographic boundaries and sectors, implementation of investments could be done by private providers 
(electricity distribution, telecom) or district authorities (water, local roads), regional authorities (water), or 
public utilities (electricity, main roads). 
 
Alternative project designs considered
:   
 
A number of alternative project designs were considered during the formulation of the project concept.  
One possible alternative would have been to focus on fewer sectors, which might have made 
implementation more straightforward.  However, in many districts in Malawi, improvements in the 
provision of more than one service will be required to reduce the constraints on economic growth.  The 
government is particularly keen to develop packages of infrastructure services that can be funded as 
needed based upon the needs of different districts.  A second alternative approach would have been to 
design a project that financed either large scale infrastructure or that at the village/community level.  The 
Bank and government have existing instruments for the latter (MASAF) and for some larger scale 
investments (e.g. the electricity interconnection with Mozambique).  The proposed level of intervention – 
developing infrastructure networks in rural and peri-urban areas in the selected districts – also ties in 
better with the government’s growth strategies as indicated in the PRSP and the Economic Growth 
Strategy.   
 
Lessons Learned 
 
a. 
Capacity constraints, especially within central and local government structures, adversely 
affect planning and implementation of complex, multi-sectoral interventions in 
infrastructure. 
 
b. 
Without a participatory approach in planning and prioritization, stakeholder needs may 
not be addressed, rather some centrally planned and determined objectives.   
 
c. 
Adequate funding for the maintenance of assets created or rehabilitated under the project 
must be provided for otherwise the benefits are not sustainable. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Locations will be determined based on a survey of growth potential in a number of districts. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
Average. 
 
Page  4
 
4
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
There will be minor environmental impacts of construction of rural roads, water pipes, and 
power distribution lines. 
[TBD ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ TBD] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
There will be no people resettlement but possibly compensation for trees etc. 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[TBD ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
To be decided.  It 
would be triggered if any of the project's water supplies would depend 
on a safe, functioning dam.
 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[TBD ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
To be decided.  It 
would be triggered if any of the increased water supplies came from an 
international river or one of its tributaries or any other shared water source.
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
 
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared: September 2004. 
 
B.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed:  
June 2002 and December 2004 respectively. 
 
 
 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
5
 
To facilitate the environmental and social assessment process for this project, a sectoral EA will be 
prepared, which could then be combined with the use of an Environmental and Social Management 
Framework adapted to each sector. 
 
Potentially, the Bank's safeguard policies on Safety of Dams, Pest Management, Natural Habitat, and 
Projects on International Waterways - in addition to Environmental Assessment - could be triggered. 
However, this will be determined once the sectors and related infrastructure investments and service 
improvements have been more clearly defined. 
 
The Sectoral EA and ESMF will be sent to ASPEN for review, comments, and approval for disclosure in-
country and at the Bank’s Infoshop prior to appraisal. 
 
IV. 
AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
ESMF 
Date of Receipts by the Bank – 01/30/2005 
Date of “in-country” disclosure - 02/28/2005  
Date submission to Infoshop – 02/28/2005 
 
EIA 
Date of Receipts by the Bank – 01/30/2005 
Date of “in-country” disclosure – 02/28/2005 
Date submission to Infoshop – 02/28/2005 
 
RPF 
Date of Receipts by the Bank – 01/30/2005 
Date of “in-country” disclosure – 02/28/2005
 
Date submission to Infoshop – 02/28/2005 
 
V.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Paivi Koljonen 
Date 
3/18/04 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
Date 
3/18/04 
Comments: 
Sector Manager: 
Yusupha Crookes 
Date 
3/18/04 
Comments 
 
