AC547
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (initial)
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/21/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: MALAWI                                  Project ID: P075247
Project: Community-Based Rural Land Development  Task Team Leader: Rogier J. E. Van Den Brink
Project
Authorized to Appraise Date: December 4, 2003    IBRD Amount (Sm):
Bank Approval: April 13, 2004                    IDA Amount ($m): 24.00
Managing Unit: AFTS I                            Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  (60%); Central government administration (20%);
Status: Lending                                  Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme: Land management (P); Rural markets (P);
Participation and civic engagement (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The project development objective is to increase the incomes of between 15,000 and 20,000 poor
rural families by implementing a decentralized, community-based and voluntary approach to land reform in
4 pilot districts. The approach to land reform piloted under the project includes (i) voluntary acquisition of
lands by communities, either land sold by willing estate owners, transferred to communities by
Government, or donated by private individuals; (ii) on-farm development, including the purchase of
necessary advisory services and basic inputs; and (iii) land administration (regularization, titling, and
registration of property rights in land). The latter activity will be executed as part of a decentralized land
administration system to be piloted in the four districts in which the project will operate.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The estimated total project cost of the Community-Based Rural Land Development Project
(CBRLDP) is US$28.75 million equivalent, of which the Bank (the International Development Association,
IDA) would finance approximately US$24.0 million. Government would finance about US$4 million in the
form of counterpart contributions (including Government-administered land made available to the project,
and taxes); and beneficiary communities would contribute the remaining US$0.8 million (3%), mostly
in-kind and labor.
Components:
1. Land Acquisition and Farm Development
2. Land Administration (transaction, titling, and registration)
3. Capacity building
4. Program Management, and monitoring and evaluation
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)



2
ISDS
Designed as a first phase of a longer term program, the project will pilot the land reform and
community empowerment approach in only one part of the country. The project areas targeted for acquiring
land (through purchasing, or from existing government estates, or donations) are farming areas with
under-utilized estates within four southern districts: Machinga, Mangochi, Mulanje and Thyolo. However,
the exact location of project activities is not known at this time, as the project will be implemented on a
demand-driven basis. Moreover, the project will specifically target under-utilized lands in well-established
areas and will exclude protected areas or other sites of ecological, cultural, or archeological significance.
B. Chieck Environmental Classificationi: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: This project has been classified as S2
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (fromti PDS)
(click on E for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)         * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                 0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                  0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                    0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                0 Yes * No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                 0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                        0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                            0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*      0 Yes * No
Section IT - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Sunimary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessarj' data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The project does not present any major safeguard issues, as the net social and environmental effect of
the project is expected to be positive. The project will significantly reduce rural poverty in the target areas and
is likely to discourage encroachment on private and public lands, and encourage sustainable land management.
II.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The project does not present any major environmental issues as it will be implemented in already
established farming areas suitable for intensive agriculture. Potential issues that justify conducting an
environmental analysis, and the preparation of a screening and review process to be incorporated into the
project implementation manual, and to be funded and implemented through the project, include: the possible
location of farms to be purchased near natural habits or critical eco-system areas, the environmental health of
the project beneficiaries and their families, and the sustainability of land use and agricultural management



3
ISDS
practices on all newly acquired farms.
Il.D.lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
None are envisioned.
ll.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
N/A
Il.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project does not present any major safeguard issues. The net social and environmental effect
of the project is expected to be positive, since it will significantly reduce rural poverty among the
beneficiaries and is likely to discourage encroachment on private and public lands. The only safegaurd
policies triggered are OP 4.01 and OP 4.09.
Compliance with Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) is ensured through the implementation of
an Environmental Management Plan which includes: (i) an Environmental and Social Screening and
Review Process (ESSRP); (ii) a Pest Management Plan (PMP); (iii) Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E);
and (iv) and institutional strengthening, all funded and implemented as part of the project. In addition,
through ESSRP, the project will specifically screen potential farms to be purchased by poor communities
for the existence or connection with potential natural habitat issues, and will promote sustainable land use
practices as part of the FDPs. Finally, the appraisal phase of the farm development plans will use a
safeguards screening checklist and will promote sustainable practices at the household and the agricultural
production level, by providing capacity building resources to the new communities, as needed.
Compliance with Pest Management (OP 4.09) is ensured as follows. Because one of the key aims
of the project is to help poor and vulnerable groups in Malawi own farm land and improve their livelihoods,
the Land Acquisition and Farm Development component is designed to assist these groups in acquiring
basic production technology that may involve the use of agro-chemicals, seeds, tools and implements, etc.
Therefore, the Pest Management Policy is triggered and a Pest Management Plan has been developed and
incorporated into the Environmental Management Plan of the project. The PMP, as designed, has a dual
objective:
(i) to enhance the capacity of the project beneficiaries to use pesticides in an economic and safe way
(ensuring that banned pesticides or agro-chemicals in WHO classes IA, IB and II will not be acquired
by farmers, and introduce them to Integrated Pest Management (IPM) on a pilot basis, for which the
technical capacity will be established in the project districts through training of trainers; and
(ii) to identify the key strategic and institutional issues at the national and local government levels, in
order to promote movement towards the development and implementation of a pest management policy.
Finally, it is important to note that while the project will support the purchase of farms available on
the market for the benefit of poor/landless farmers and other vulnerable groups, the project will involve no
involuntary land acquisition or any form of restriction of livelihoods, or involuntary restrictions of access to
legally designated parks and protected areas. This is ensured through the following project design features:
(i) farms purchased from the market will be unenfcumbered and free of any legal and financial claims or any



4
ISDS
other liens; (ii) farms with encroachers and farms subject to any form of unresolved labor disputes, will not
be eligible for purchase and payment by the project; (iii) the farm development part of the Land Acquisition
and Farm Development Grant will be used for individual benefits only, allowing farmers to setup shelter,
and basic amenities, and to enable them to start agriculture production; and (iv) the project will not fund
any community infrastructure. Instead, if they express the need, communities can prepare proposals to be
submitted to the Malawi Social Action Fund (MASAF), which uses a community-driven approach to
support a variety of community socio-economic and infrastructure sub-projects.
Il.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders consulted included poor rural communities, estate owners, local level
organizations (NGOs, District-level entities, and small farmer organizations). Consultations were
conducted during the preparation of the project and the Environment and Social Analysis (ESA), and
centered around the project concept and development objectives, the beneficiary eligibility criteria, and the
geographical location of the project. In addition, structured and more detailed consultations will be
undertaken as a fundamental project design feature in order to enable poor and vulnerable communities to
access project benefits, on a demand-driven and transparent basis.
Rural communities will be in the driver's seat throughout project implementation. They will
identify the lands, negotiate with the seller, and prepare and implement their farm development plans, which
focus on private household benefits, and not communal sub-projects. The latter under the purview of
Malawi Social Action Fund (MASAF).
In addition to consultations with local communities within the four Pilot Districts, technical officers
from government, non-governmental organizations and members of the private sector were also consulted
in each district, including the District Commissioners (DC's), Environmental District Officers (EDO),
Directors of Planning and Development (DPD), NGO representatives with an interest in environmental
issues, staff responsible for Lands and Land Husbandry Officers, staff from the departments of Fisheries
and Forestry and Agriculture, staff from the Meteorological Department and tea estates' representatives.
Opinion leaders' views were also sought during the process, including traditional leaders, local politicians
and religious leaders, and other key informants.
NGOs were involved in public consultations from the very beginning, both at national and district
level. The preparation of the ESA involved a number of NGOs (such as members of the National
Smallholder Farners Association of Malawi, NASFAM) from all four Pilot Districts, during all three
phases of consultations conducted.
NGOs will play a major role during the launch phase of the project, during which an extensive
communication campaign will be launched at the national and local levels, in order to identify eligible
communities and help them access project funding to present their applications, identify farms available on
the market, negotiate a price, and meet the requirements for land acquisition, as well as prepare detailed
farm plans for appraisal and implementation. NGOs will also be used by communities, District Assemblies
and the Ministry of Lands to monitor the implementation of the project.
Disclosure. The SEA (including consultations) was prepared from December 2002 to October 2003, and
reviewed by the Bank in November 2003. The Executive Summary was disclosed starting November 18,
2003 in two local languages (Chichewa and Yao) and in English in the country capital Lilongwe (the



5
ISDS
Ministry of Lands, and Parliament), in Blantyre (the Regional Commissioner for Lands), the four districts
(District Commissioners Offices in Thyolo, Mulanje,Machinga, and Mangochi), as well as in the Bank's
Infoshop. In addition, the translated scripts and the English version is being published in newspapers,
broadcast on radio, and made available to the Traditional Authorities, the Group Village Headmen in the
pilot districts, and to all Ward Councillors. The entire project documentation in English is also available in
country and in the Bank's files.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] Sl. - Significant, cumulative and/or irTeversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                12/15/2002     11/16/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            2/17/2003      11/18/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             3/18/2003      11/19/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan.                                       Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                12/15/2002     11/16/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            2/17/2003      11/18/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             3/18/2003      11/19/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.



