Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC987 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: September 13, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mali 
Project ID: P090075 
Project Name: Second Transport Sector 
Project 
Task Team Leader: Jean-Noel Guillossou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 7, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 9, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways 
(80%);General transportation sector 
(15%);Ports, waterways and shipping (5%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure 
(P);Access to urban services for the poor 
(P);Other environment and natural 
resources management (S);HIV/AIDS 
(S);Injuries and non-communicable 
diseases (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Yvette Djachechi, Sr. Social 
Development Specialist; Robert A. Robelus, Senior Environmental Assessment Specialist
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 63 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
 
The objective of the project is to improve access to rural communities and to facilitate rural and 
urban transport services by improving transport infrastructure in Mali. 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The project will include three components: 
 
(a) Improvement of road access and transport conditions to rural communities : The project 
will : (i) improve about 530 km of earth roads which will provide access to landlocked 
rural communities in Mali (Gao-Bourem-Kidal, Kita-Bafoulabe). The cost of the works is 
estimated at US$15.6 million. (i) improve interface roads in the cotton area through 
regraveling of the roads rehabilitated before 1998 and through treatment of hot spots. The 
Page  2
cost of the works is estimated at US$44.6 million. and (ii) improve river access to 
landlocked rural communities. No data are currently available on the needs and the costs. 
Works will consist in wharves and underwater jetties. A provision of US$1 million is 
made. 
(b) Improvement of mass transit in Bamako: The project will help create a bus-only lane and 
a
circular road for minibuses. This will include improvement of pedestrian paths to allow 
access of passengers of minibuses to the center of the city. The project will also acquire 
equipment to measure air pollution in Bamako The cost of the component is estimated at 
US$6 million. 
(c) Institutional strengthening and capacity building: The component will include technical 
advisory services for : (i) implementing a financial and institutional mechanism to sustain 
rural road maintenance; (ii) supervision of works, implementation of social and 
environmental management plans, improvement of road safety, project management and 
financial and technical audits; and (iii) definition and implementation of a long-term 
strategy for building capacity in the sector based on an assessment of skills requirements, 
existing capacity, obstacles to use and development of capacity. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Earth roads : Two earth roads will be constructed : (a) Gao-Bourem-Kidal : The road is located 
in the Extreme North of Mali. Currently it is only a track in the sand; and (b) Kita-Bafoulabe : 
The road is located in the West of Mali along the railroad from Bamako to the border of Senegal. 
 
Rural roads : The roads are located in two areas of Mali : The first one is the cotton area where 
cotton is collected by CMDT (
Compagnie Malienne des Textiles
)
and includes the regions of 
Sikasso, Segou and Bamako. The second one is located in the South and West of Mali between 
Bamako, Kita and the border of Guinea. The program will be financed partly by the 
Competitiveness and Agricultural development Project (scheduled for Board presentation in 
December 2004) and the Second Transport Sector Project (TSP2). The program will cover the 
entire network of interface roads (1,063 km) linking the secondary and tertiary roads and the 
cotton plants to the primary network and of secondary roads (2,710 km) which were rehabilitated 
before 1998. Roads financed by TSP2 will be defined after the roads included in the CADP are 
identified. This identification is expected in September-October 2004 before appraisal of CADP.  
 
River infrastructure : The location is not known yet. A study will be carried out during project 
preparation to identify the sites in consultation with river transport operators and the population 
beneficiaries. Improvements would consist in wharves and underwater jetties. 
 
Urban transport : The bus lane will be located on Boulevard du Peuple, which is a large artery in 
Bamako. One existing lane currently used by cars and other vehicles will be reserved to buses 
and minibuses. The circular road will be constituted by a series of sections of existing roads 
surrounding the center of Bamako. One section may need to be paved. The feasibility study will 
confirm if there is no other alternative.  
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
A
transport environmental unit was created in the Directorate in charge of environment 
(
Direction Nationale de l’Assainissement et du Contrôle des Pollutions et des Nuisances
 
–
DNACPN) in the Ministry of Environment and Sanitation in May 2004. The unit is responsible 
for ensuring compliance with environmental regulation and for monitoring implementation of 
environmental management plans.  The unit provides support to the National Road Department 
for all aspects related to environment. However, there is no formal agreement and collaboration 
has been informal until now. 
 
A
training on Bank safeguard policies was organized in July 2004 in Bamako and attended by 23 
staff from the Ministry of Equipment and Transport and various transport institutions, including 
the transport environmental unit of DNACPN. 
 
The National Road Directorate has the experience of including social and environmental 
considerations in the preparation of road projects. Civil works contracts in the Transport Sector 
Project completed in 2004 included reforestation of borrowing sites. Social and environmental 
impact studies were carried out for the preparation of the Transport Corridors Improvement 
Project (TCIP) approved in March 2004. A Resettlement Policy Framework was adopted during 
TCIP preparation. 
 
The capacity of the Directorate and other institutions (Road Agency) will be reviewed and 
recommendations will be provided during the environmental impact assessment study of road 
maintenance programs which will be carried out under the TCIP. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
Road works may impact on soil, water, air quality, flora and fauna. 
Rural roads improvement may impact on wild flora and fauna given the 
possibility that some roads lead to national parks or reserved areas. 
[X] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
Involuntary resettlement may result from acquisition of land during the 
construction of the Kita-Bafoulabe and Gao-Bourem-Kidal roads and 
development of the circular road for minibuses in Bamako. It may also result 
from the creation of borrowing sites for road materials used for the maintenance 
of rural roads. Works may also impact on economic activity and require move of 
vendors and road stalls. 
[] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
This policy may apply from the construction of new earth roads. 
Page  4
[X] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
This policy may apply from the maintenance or rehabilitation of rural roads and 
construction of new earth roads. 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[X] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
This policy may apply as a result of the construction of new earth roads. 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
This policy will not apply in view of the small size of the river infrastructure 
envisaged which will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows 
to the other riparians, nor will be adversely affected by the other riparians' 
possible water use. 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared : April-May 2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS : N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The studies envisaged are:  
1.  Environmental assessment (EA) and environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP) for construction of Kita-Bafoulabe and Gao-Bourem-Kidal earth roads : the 
study will determine whether land acquisition resulting in the loss of crops, built 
structures, incomes or shelters will occur in which case a resettlement action plan will 
also be prepared. 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
2.  EA and ESMP for rehabilitation and treatment of hot spots on rural roads : For roads 
which would be selected at a later stage during project implementation, a RAP will be 
prepared with the same standards as the RAP approved during project preparation; 
3.  EA and ESMP for construction of river infrastructure; 
4.  EA and ESMP for development of bus lane and circular road projects and 
resettlement action plan. 
 
Terms of reference and requests for proposals are expected to be available by end of September 
2004. Procurement of consultants should take place between September 2004 and March 2005. 
Studies will be carried out between March 2005 and June 2005.  They are expected to be ready 
for public consultation and disclosure prior to Appraisal phase.  
 
The EAs and ESMPs will pay attention to : further environmental management capacity 
building, impacts on forest areas and biodiversity because of increased access, river pollution 
control and safety with regard to hydrocarbons transported on pirogues; air pollution 
management/monitoring in Bamako, road safety, HIV/AIDS, eventual support to the unleaded 
fuel initiative, indicators to monitor environmental and environmental health parameters. 
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared under the Transport Corridor Improvement 
Project (TCIP, approved on March 18, 2004) will be reviewed to ensure adequacy with the 
proposed project requirements and the revised RPF will be used for the preparation of 
resettlement action plans. It will be redisclosed to ensure that stakeholders are fully 
knowledgeable of its existence as they are not completely the same than for the TCIP. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by 
:
Task Team Leader: 
Jean-Noel Guillossou 
September 30, 2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Thomas E. Walton, AFTS1 
 
September 30, 2004 
Comments 
 
Sector Manager: 
 
C. Sanjivi Rajasingham, AFTTR 
 
September 30, 2004 
Comments 
 
