                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC879
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05/27/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: MALI                                                Project ID: P052402
Project: Gourma Biodiversity Conservation Project            Task Team Leader: Jean-Michel G. Pavy
Authorized to Appraise Date: October 11, 2002                IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 29, 2004                                 IDA Amount ($m):
                                                             Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 5.50
Managing Unit: AFTS4                                         Sector: Forestry (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           Theme: Biodiversity (P); Land management (P)
Status: Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
Context and background

Biodiversity loss has taken on extreme proportions throughout West Africa. While some countries assisted
by the donor community are addressing this loss in the Guinean Forest and Sudanian Savanna, the arid
Sahel ecosystem across the West Africa landscape has not benefited from significant attention by decision
makers or donors.

Mali, a landlocked Sahelian Country with extreme poverty and vulnerability, has requested donor
assistance to implement its environmental and biodiversity strategies in several priority sites. Donors have
responded favorably for the most important protected areas: Baoulé, Niger Delta and Adrar. For Gourma,
the priority Sahelian site, Mali's request to the Bank was formulated jointly with Burkina Faso because of
the transnational dimension of the ecosystem they seek to preserve. Burkina Faso has already completed
preparation and launched implementation of its project, the GEF-financed Partnership for Natural
Ecosystem Management Project (french acronym PAGEN) on the Burkina side of the Gourma.

The Gourma spans 3 million hectares (ha) in Mali, between the Niger River bend and the Burkina Faso
border. It possesses diverse landscape features (lakes, dunes, lowland forests and inselbergs) and unique
biological features such as the continent's northernmost 350-strong elephant population. With the end of the
Tuareg rebellion and increased human activities, the necessity to act is urgent. The Gourma is experiencing
high degradation, including local extinction of animal and plant populations and overall desertification.

The current country policy and reforms present an opportunity to position in the Gourma a conservation
model that responds to the community's perception of constraints and opportunities. Moving away from
centralized management, the government has launched an ambitious decentralization and administrative
deconcentration reform. This reform, widely recognized as genuine, participatory and democratic, provides
the framework on which the proposed project can be designed and implemented. The project is registered
with other donor projects in a decentralization program whose development objective is to ensure that "the
rural populations have better access to public services, to socio-economic infrastructures and to productive
natural resources."

In the Gourma, which spans part of 3 regions (Mopti, Timbuktu and Gao), the UN Capital Development

                                                       2
                                                                                                       ISDS


Fund (UNCDF) and Agence Française de Développement (AFD) are already supporting the above
program. They are strengthening commune capacities as well as helping them prepare and partially
implement their Communal Development Plan. In addition, in the Gourma, several Bank operations are
improving delivery of basic services in agriculture/livestock, rural equipment, health and education and, in
the future, social infrastructures/natural resources management. The proposed GEF project would
strengthen these efforts by further improving the commune capacity and maintaining the biological
resources that are the basis of land productivity and thus long-term poverty alleviation.

Project Development Objectives

Within the framework of the program above, the GEF and FFEM (French GEF) provide incremental
financing with the 6-year combined Global and Development Objective that Biodiversity degradation
trends are stopped and, in some cases, reversed in key conservation areas and project sites in the
Gourma. The project targets the GEF Operational Program 1 (arid and semi-arid ecosystems).

The objectives are sought via 4 operational outputs:

l O1. Conservation Areas are created and their management by the OGAC (french acronym for
    Conservation Area Management Associations) is efficient.
l O2. Municipalities have improved their capacities to plan for and manage biological resources in their
    own development programs.
l O3. The Gourma communes have organized themselves to plan and better organize the management of
    their land and biological resources.
l O4. Public institutions are able to advise and help communes and communities in the management of
    their biological resources.

In essence, the project will help communes and communities better manage biodiversity according to a
model derived from that of the French natural regional parks. The 18 communes will jointly define their
territorial space, its resources as well as options for regulations, planning and organization. From this
process, and from a consolidation and homogenization of existing Communal development plans, the 18
communes will produce and adopt a scheme of territorial coherence. If they wish, this scheme and its
regulations will be formalized in a Gourma territorial agreement. This large scale vision of the 18
communes territory will help define better the two main modes of investments proposed by the projects:
local biodiversity initiatives and conservation area management.

l Where the preservation of natural ecosystem function must remain intact, strict protection will be
    proposed (approximately 1.6% of the land). Where ecosystem functions can be altered while remaining
    under production, a proactive management prescription will be proposed (approximately 2.4% of the
    land). Areas under the above prescriptions will be connected and called "conservation areas."
    Conservation areas will be managed by community associations--called in this document "Conservation
    Area Management Organizations" (french acronym OGAC, created by their main stakeholders).

l On the rest of the communal land, local initiatives favoring biodiversity by community members,
    community group or communes will also be supported. There, the project will rely on the ideas,
    leadership and commitments of the Gourma population. Support will be provided through information,
    training, financing and advice for biodiversity local initiatives. It is expected that, as the entire
    community is presented with information, experiences and opportunities, behavior change in favor of
    less damaging modes of resource extraction will be stimulated and, in the long term, will spread over
    large portions of the Gourma.

                                                        3
                                                                                                             ISDS




I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
  The project will be implemented through 4 components:

l         Component 1. Support to intercommunal management of conservation areas
l         Component 2. Support to community-based biodiversity initiatives
l         Component 3. Capacity building for communal and intercommunal biological resources
      management
l         Component 4. Capacity building for public support to decentralized biodiversity management

  Component 1. Support to intercommunal management of conservation areas

  Through this component, GEF/FFEM will finance: (1) local capacity building including (a)
  communication, (b) creation of OGACs and (c) training; (2) studies including ecological diagnostic and
  applied research; (3) conservation area creation and management including (a) negotiation, delineation
  and gazetting conservation areas and core zones and (b) preparation of conservation area management
  plans and (4) implementation of conservation area management plans including (a) construction and
  maintenance of small infrastructure (deepening existing pond, watchtower, dirt road repairs), (b)
  surveillance of conservation areas, (c) use of conservation areas and (d) local wildlife surveys.

  Component 2. Support to community-based biodiversity initiatives

  Through this component, GEF/FFEM will finance: (1) community awareness building; (2) community
  training; (3) complementary diagnostics on biological resources of communal land; (4) specific studies to
  explore options for (a) ecological restoration outside conservation areas and (b) tourism development and
  private sector involvement; and (5) biodiversity-related local initiatives. The following list of eligible local
  initiatives has been defined: (a) protection of threatened local biological resources, (b) improvement of
  natural pond, wetland, spring or watercourse management, (c) improvement of forest management, (d)
  improvement of pasture land management, (e) measures in favor of elephant conservation and
  cohabitation with populations, (f) bushfire control, (g) education on biodiversity, (h) support to
  conservation of cultural assets, (i) support to ecotourism development, and (j) support to sustainable use
  of secondary products. The project will not finance any socioeconomic local initiatives such as road,
  school, storage facility, dispensary, well, dam, tree plantation, agriculture, and livestock.

 Component 3. Capacity building for communal and intercommunal biological resources management

 Through this subcomponent, GEF/FFEM will finance: (1) support to the Intercommunal Orientation
 Committee (french acronym CIO), Communal councils (CC) and Centers of Communal Councils (CCC)
 (animation, workshops, legal advice, travel), (2) contracting out design, creation and capacity building of
 the Intercommunal Management Association (french acronym AIG), and (3) studies and workshops
 including (a) study of rangeland users and tenure, (b) regional and local workshops on conservation and
 range use, and (c) with the assistance from the French Federation of natural regional Parks, consolidation
 of Communal development plans for territorial coherence as well as design and adoption of a Territorial
 chart or equivalent.

  Component 4. Capacity building for public support to decentralized biodiversity management

  This component is divided into 3 subcomponents: (1.1) Project management, (1.2.) Support to Gourma

                                                        4
                                                                                                          ISDS


  operation, and (1.3) National supervision and stocktaking.

  Subcomponent 1.1. Project management

  Through this subcomponent, GEF/FFEM will finance: (1) incremental support to steering and
  advising by the Steering Committee, (2) support to the Project Management Unit (french
  acronym UGP) for procurement, financial management, planning and supervision and (3) audits.

  Subcomponent 1.2. Support to project operations in Gourma

  Through this subcomponent, GEF/FFEM will finance: (1) technical assistance to commune and
  communities; (2) support to the Douentza, Rharous and N'Tillit Nature Conservation Services (french
  acronym SCNs); (3) support to other public deconcentrated institutions or NGOs, (4) training, (5)
  designing and testing an incentive-based mechanism for financing conservation areas in Gourma; (6)
  monitoring Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Process Framework; (7)
  contracting the Institute for Rural Economy (french acronym IER) to (a) conduct external ecological
  monitoring; (b) monitor vegetative cover and land use, and (c) set up and manage a local Geographical
  Information System (GIS) to monitor habitat and land use and produce maps, and (8) transfrontier
  coordination with Burkina.

  Subcomponent 1.3. Support for national supervision and stocktaking

  Through this subcomponent, GEF/FFEM will finance: (1) incremental support to DNCN including (a)
  operational support, (b) training and awareness building, (c) documentation center and website; (2)
  studies and workshops including (a) national reforms of biodiversity management, (b) transfer of natural
  resources management to Communes, (c) wildlife inventories, and (d) feasibility study, establishment of,
  and fund-raising for a Malian foundation.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Project will focus on 18 communes of the Gourma spanning three regions: Douentza (Region of
Mopti), Rharous (Region of Timbuktu) and N'Tillit (Region of Gao). It is difficult to provide accurate
figures on the Gourma demography because of the population mobility. By cross-referencing several
documents, it is estimated that the population of the 18 communes is in the order of 200,000 inhabitants.
These are a sub-set of the total population of the districts in which the communes are located and which is
estimated to be 150,000 for the Cercle of Douentza; 95,000 in the Cercle of Gourma-Rharous and less than
50,000 in the Cercle of N'Tillit. The population is divided between Tuaregs, Peuls, Songhai and Dogon.
Each commune covers a very large territory and encompasses several villages or fractions. Except for the
Dogon and Songhai who are mostly farmers, the bulk of the population is engaged in extensive pastoralism.
Depending on the quality of the range in the Gourma and elsewhere, the area also receives seasonal herders
from Burkina Faso, Niger and from other regions of Mali.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: Because of a few expected negative environmental externalities but potentially significant social
externalities, it was decided that these issues would be addressed with the special focus of an Environmental
Analysis. However, because the project's outcome is expected to be positive socially and environmentally, a

                                                        5
                                                                                                          ISDS


full-fledged EA is deemed unnecessary. Consequently the project is classified as B ­Partial assessment.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

 The Project seeks to conserve and restore biodiversity, which is highly threatened by over hunting and
 overgrazing. Expected positive environmental benefits are: (i) increased area maintained as natural habitat
 with associated increase in wildlife populations, including elephants, and in vegetation cover, (ii)
 improved management of grazing areas with consequential decrease in soil erosion, stabilization of dunes,
 reappearance of perennial grass-species, etc. Little negative environmental impact is foreseen.

 OP4.01 is triggered for several reasons. It is possible that an improvement of the range's grazing quality
 convince communities to increase further the number of livestock or attract herders from other areas. Both
 of these consequences may reverse the positive trends that the project seeks to establish. In addition, there
 are minor risks of local erosion or local degradation of vegetation associated with the restoration of old
 ponds that may prove necessary. Finally, the project seeks to stabilize the erratic motion of elephants
 along their ancestral migration route to decrease the potential of human-elephant conflicts. It is possible
 that longer sojourn of elephants in some areas increases local degradation of vegetation particularly in
 lowland acacia forests.

 OP4.04 on natural habitat is relevant not in term of threat mitigation but in term of conformity with the
 program global objective which is to improve the long term standing of biodiversity within a natural
 ecosystem.

 Though not triggered, OP/BP/GP 7.60 on Projects in disputed areas is still relevant because the project
 works with mobile resources (elephant and livestock) that travel across the Mali/Burkina Faso border in
 an area that was once disputed (settlement was reached at the International Tribunal of La Haye in the
 late 80's).

                                                        6
                                                                                                             ISDS


OP4.12 is triggered even though involuntary resettlement or settlement is an option excluded by the
approach itself. The limit of conservation areas as well as the rules of their management will be negotiated
with all communities to ensure that no involuntary resettlement occurs. However, collective management of
communal resources, even if the communities define rules, it could end up restricting access to
conservation area resources for certain users. The project intends to be careful at balancing the will of the
powerful traditional elite with the goods of the common herders and farmers. Because there is a potential
risk within conservation areas, it was decided that OP4.12 would be triggered; a Process Framework would
be necessary. Biodiversity micro-projects outside protected areas do not require land acquisition or any
"involuntary taking of land". Therefore, no resettlement plan or policy framework was required but only a
process framework.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
A failure implies that communes and communities of the Gourma have not endorsed the need, nor acted
upon that need, for improvement in biological resources management. In the worst-case scenario, the
situation will continue to evolve as if the project did not exist. In our opinion, this scenario is unlikely.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Under a "do no GEF program alternative", strengthening of commune capacity and local development
implemented by other operations is likely to improve living conditions in the Gourma. Natural resources
management is planned under these projects; however, the proposed scale of intervention is not
commensurate with the magnitude of the overall problem. As a consequence, it is likely that current
degradation trends would continue. This would include degradation of natural habitat, rangeland and
further extinction of species. The human/elephant cohabitation is likely to worsen and would perhaps lead
to drastic actions to eliminate elephants.

Alternatives for GEF involvement were considered at Project identification. Usual alternatives run from
top-down planning and law enforcement to hand-off approach based on awareness building; experiences
show that neither led to lasting results. Mali does not currently have the capacity to implement the first
alternatives, nor would the population accept it and respect its rules. Conversely, awareness building would
have little chances to bear significant results given the extreme poverty of the population, its low level of
literacy and the long-standing perception that all spotted wildlife is to be harvested and all vegetation
grazed. These alternatives were considered and rejected in favor of a participatory incentive-based
approach based on negotiation, technical assistance, demonstration of results and commune empowerment
for conservation. Decentralization makes this approach legally feasible. Such approach is recent in West
Africa and requires adaptation to each case; in Mali the dynamic and democratic decentralization process
provides the basis for such innovation. In addition, Local Development operations (e.g. PNGT2 in Burkina
Faso) or participatory wildlife management (e.g. GEPRENAF) are showing encouraging results. Commune
council and community members consulted are favorable to the approach.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
An Environmental and Social Impact Analysis (EA) was carried out by two consultants. This work
produced a document in three volumes called the Environment & Social Management Plan (ESMP).
Volume 1 provides baseline information and carries out an analysis of potential impacts. Volume II,
relevant for OP4.01, proposes a Framework for screening and monitoring of micro-projects (outside
conservation areas) and small infrastructures (within conservation areas). Volume III, relevant for OP4.12,

                                                      7
                                                                                                           ISDS


proposes a Process Framework to reduce potential negative impact of access limitation to resources in
conservation areas. Consultants built their recommendations within the project logframe as part of normal
project implementation. External control of the EA implementation will be provided by the national agency
in charge of environment assessment; training and operating costs will be provided to that agency. The
project budget makes provision for consultant contracts for specific ESIA and for independent monitoring.
The project also set aside provisional funds to mitigate unexpected adverse environmental impact that may
materialize during implementation.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Communes and communities have already been extensively consulted and informed by the project
preparation team and by consultants (see also Local Population and Partners Consultation Mission, B.
Hassane, June 1999 and Project Partners Information Mission, BICD, December 1999). Commune mayors
and counsels participated in the project planning workshop (November 2000). The consultant in charge of
the EA traveled extensively throughout the project area to interview the local communities and Commune
Councils. In October 2002, the ESMP was disclosed to Government services in Bamako, Mopti, and
Timbuctu and Gao. The three-volume document was also distributed to, and discussed with, each of the 18
Communes. It was also disclosed at the World Bank Infoshop.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

                                                     8
                                                                                                    ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              6/30/2002       8/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/1/2002       10/4/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/24/2002       10/9/2002
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              6/30/2002       8/16/2002
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/1/2002       10/4/2002
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           9/24/2002       10/9/2002

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Jean-Michel G. Pavy                                05/20/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Omar S. Fye                                             05/21/2004
Sector Manager                        Mary A. Barton-Dock                                05/21/2004

