Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/31/2005 
Report No.:  AC1320
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Mauritius 
Project ID:  P078643 
Project Name:  GEF-Marine Highway and Coastal Contamination Prevention 
Task Team Leader:  Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 29, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Ports, waterways and shipping (60%);Information technology (20%);Central 
government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Law reform (S);Technology diffusion (S);Regional integration 
(S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
11.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00 
 
FOREIGN SOURCES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
10.00
15.00 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The project's development objective is to increase the safety and efficiency of navigation.  
 
This will be achieved by establishing a demonstration marine electronic highway to 
guide  
 
ships through selected busy sea lanes and by strengthening capacity for port state 
control.  
 
Global Environmental Objectives  
 
The project#s main global environmental objective is to reduce the risk of ship-based  
 
environmental contamination (such as oil spills from groundings and illegal discharges 
of  
 
ballast and bilge waters) and the unsustainable exploitation of marine resources (such as  
 
illegal fishing and fishing practices). This will be achieved by testing the economic,  
 
technical, and institutional feasibility of introducing precision navigation systems, such 
as an  
 
electronically supported marine highway to guide ships through sensitive areas and to  
Page  2
monitor the movements and activities of fishing and other vessels operating within 
countries#  
 
territorial waters. Strengthening capacity for port state control will also help.  
 
2
A
second objective, focusing on Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania, is to reduce risks 
of  
 
environmental damage to beaches, fishing grounds, and other domestic resources from 
spills  
 
of
oil and chemicals. This will be achieved by supporting efforts of Kenya, Tanzania, 
and  
 
Mozambique to become part of a regional oil spill response plan, by completing the  
 
identification and mapping of environmentally sensitive areas along coasts and sea 
lanes, and  
 
by widening the regional collaboration that has been built under the GEF-supported 
West  
 
Indian Ocean Islands Oil Spill Contingency Planning Project.  
 
The proposed project is in line with the country assistance strategies (CASs) of the  
 
participating countries. The Kenya CAS (2004) names the proposed project as important 
not  
 
only to protect coastal and marine resources, but also to promote regional integration. 
The  
 
Mozambique CAS (2003) emphasizes the importance of protecting coastal and marine  
 
resources to promote sustainable development of tourism, a major source of growth in 
the  
 
country. The Madagascar CAS (2003) places environmental protection at the center of 
its  
 
strategy, noting the strong linkages between environmental degradation and high levels 
of  
 
poverty. CASs for Mauritius (2002), Comoros (2000), and Tanzania (2000) all discuss  
 
environmental protection as a key element in their strategies. No recent CASs have been  
 
produced for Seychelles or for South Africa. Both countries, however, have taken strong  
 
action to protect their coastal and marine resources in recognition of the importance of 
the  
 
tourism and fishing industries to their economies.  
 
The project#s global objectives are also in line with the objectives of the Nairobi 
convention,  
 
which are to encourage regional initiatives and cooperation among the states for the  
 
protection, management, and development of marine and coastal resources of the 
eastern  
 
African region. They are also consistent with those of the CLC92, OPRC90, FUND92,  
 
MARPOL 73/78, SOLAS, COLREG and other conventions of the International 
Maritime  
 
Organization. Collectively, these conventions require signatories to take coordinated 
action  
 
to protect marine and coastal resources and ensure the safety of navigation.  
Page  3
The project will contribute to the goals of GEF operational program 10 in several ways, 
and  
 
its strategic priority 3 (undertake innovative demonstration projects for reducing  
 
contaminants). It is expected to demonstrate ways to overcome barriers to adoption of 
best  
 
practices that limit contamination of the international waters environment by developing 
a
marine electronic highway to aid the navigation of ships through particularly hazardous  
 
seaways. The project will also leverage significant private sector support to demonstrate 
the  
 
value of using modern technology to help ships avoid collisions in busy marine 
corridors.  
 
The modern technology will also permit countries to monitor and control fishing in their  
 
territorial waters.  
 
The proposed project also satisfies the criteria for the operational strategy for 
international  
 
waters#to assist groups of countries to better understand the environmental concerns of  
 
their international waters and work collaboratively to address them#through its support 
for  
 
analytical work and establishment of information systems, for ratifying conventions and  
 
translating their provisions into law, and for building institutional capacity to more  
 
comprehensively address transboundary water-related environmental concerns.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project will include Kenya, Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania, Madagascar,  
 
Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles, and as a partner La R?union (France), covering a  
 
combined coastline of 13,300 kilometers. Following the model developed for the Straits 
of  
 
Malacca and Singapore, the development of the western Indian Ocean marine highway 
will  
 
be
implemented in phases. The first phase (the project) will establish as a pilot an  
 
electronically supported marine highway for some of the region#s major shipping 
routes, will  
 
assess the feasibility of the concept, and, should the concept prove viable, will finance  
 
preparation of a follow-up project agreed upon by the countries. The second phase (or a  
 
follow-up project) will build on the experience of the first phase and establish a full 
marine  
 
electronic highway covering all major shipping routes of the western Indian Ocean 
region.  
 
Components include:  
 
Component A: Development of a regional marine highway. This component will 
support  
 
the establishment of a network of electronic navigational charts in conjunction with the  
 
differential global positioning system and other maritime technologies, which will form 
the  
Page  4
backbone of a marine electronic highway extending from South Africa to the 
Mozambican  
 
port of Nacala (west of Comoros) to Aldabra (Seychelles). Vessels using this route will  
 
come under the control of the marine highway electronically supported in South Africa,  
 
again at Inharrime, and again at Nacala, and then again at Aldabra until leaving the 
marine  
 
highway. As the area between these points is in deep water and is far from the coasts, 
the  
 
area will be surveyed and electronic charts will be provided to vessels. In addition, the 
route  
 
north from the Seychelles will be surveyed to provide mariners with up-to-date 
information  
 
on
how to navigate the route safely after they leave the marine highway.  
 
The component includes six subcomponents: (1) production of nautical charts and  
 
publications; (2) maintenance of these charts and publications; (3) survey and 
rehabilitation  
 
of
the main aids to navigation on the route of the marine highway; (4) establishment of 
an  
 
automatic information service and ship reporting scheme; (5) search and rescue 
activities;  
 
and finally (6) the evaluation of the demonstration phase and preparation of the second 
phase  
 
if the demonstration phase proves to be feasible and sufficiently beneficial to justify 
costs.  
 
It is expected that the large vessels transporting oil and chemicals will choose to sail 
under  
 
the control of the marine electronic highway, rather than outside its boundaries, because  
 
doing so will reduce their risks of groundings and collisions and increase their 
efficiency of  
 
navigation. It is less obvious that fishing vessels will be interested in coming under the  
 
control of the marine electronic highway. The evaluation of the demonstration project 
will  
 
include an in-depth study of the costs and benefits to large fishing vessels of using a 
marine  
 
electronic highway, and will specify a range of regulatory and other measures that 
would  
 
encourage such vessels to use it.  
 
Component B: Capacity building for prevention of coastal and marine contamination.  
 
This component contains three subcomponents. The first will assist Kenya, 
Mozambique,  
 
4
and Tanzania to develop or enhance national oil spill contingency plans; join the 
regional  
 
plan developed for the island states under the GEF-supported Western Indian Ocean Oil 
Spill  
Page  5
Contingency Planning project; and create and maintain coastal and marine sensitivity 
maps,  
 
needed to establish the marine highway and improve planning. The second will support 
the  
 
development of a methodology to identify and assign values to the key environmental  
 
resources in the region. The third will support the development of a regional database 
and a  
 
geographic information system on the marine environment, marine and coastal 
resources,  
 
ship movements, ship waste, and sea-based activities. The IMO, IPIECA, the European  
 
Commission (EC), and France have expressed interest in contributing to or cofinancing 
the  
 
preparation of the national oil spill contingency plans.  
 
Component C: Widening capacity for regional oil spill response. This component will  
 
assist Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania (1) to identify and overcome obstacles to 
ratifying  
 
IMO conventions intended to protect the marine and coastal environments and to 
improve  
 
the safety of navigation, (2) to identify the needs for and provide the necessary 
equipment  
 
and onsite training, (3) to support the preparation of a regional marine pollution 
contingency  
 
plan that covers all participating countries, and (4) to strengthen a regional center to  
 
coordinate national actions and to monitor regionwide environmental conditions and 
causes  
 
of
degradation and damage. GEF financing will in particular assist countries to ratify  
 
conventions and to enact the enabling legislation. The IMO, IPIECA, the EC, and 
France  
 
have expressed interest in contributing to or in cofinancing these activities.  
 
Component D: Regional institutional strengthening and project management. Port state  
 
control allows countries to require that ships entering their ports meet the requirements 
of the  
 
major conventions of the IMO on the safety of navigation and the prevention of 
pollution  
 
from ships regardless of whether or not the flag state is party to the conventions. A 
regional  
 
port state control arrangement provides an effective tool to ensure that ships using  
 
international navigation routes and calling on major ports in a region comply with the 
rules  
 
and standards set out in the applicable IMO conventions. This component will support 
the  
 
development and implementation of a regional agreement on port state control, covering  
 
issues such as procedures for surveillance, inspection, and detention of ships, and  
 
arrangements for exchanging information. It will also support capacity building, 
including  
Page  6
training of inspectors to international standards in port state control. The subcomponent 
will  
 
also support several regional workshops aimed at developing consensus among 
countries on  
 
priority actions, administrative arrangements, and coordination mechanisms to be used 
in  
 
promoting regional marine environmental management.  
 
Assistance will be needed at the regional, subregional, and national levels to manage the  
 
project and coordinate the various activities. This component will finance equipment, 
staff,  
 
and logistical support required by the regional body, a subregional entity, and national  
 
institutions to ensure that the project is implemented efficiently and to build sustainable  
 
capacity of the participating entities to manage the development of the marine highway 
and  
 
to coordinate activities after the project is completed. The component will also support  
 
regional training and seminars on maritime traffic management and pollution 
prevention, and  
 
on
measures to protect coastal and marine biological resources. It will also strengthen 
the  
 
technical capabilities and the institutional and coordinating arrangements among the  
 
concerned states to collectively prevent, manage, and respond to transboundary marine  
 
pollution. This component will support technical assistance and studies as needed during  
 
project implementation. Finally, this component will support the establishment of  
 
mechanisms for sustainable financing of the development of the marine highway and 
other  
 
infrastructure and capacity created through the project.  
 
GEF funds will complement technical assistance provided through the other partners in 
the  
 
program, and will finance only activities that contribute to global environmental benefits 
and  
 
that others cannot finance. Specifically, GEF funds will finance activities designed to  
 
prevent marine and coastal contamination activities and activities that support 
surveillance  
 
and enforcement of laws and regulation governing the shipping and fisheries industries. 
This  
 
includes development and installation of a pilot marine electronic highway and creation 
of  
 
capacity for port state control. The oil spill contingency planning activities are largely  
 
baseline activities, and the GEF will allocate limited funding for these, focusing on the  
 
activities designed to widen the regional plan and strengthen regional collaboration.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will cover the coastal and marine areas of Kenya, Mozambique, South Africa,  
 
Tanzania, Madagascar, Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles, with a combined coastline 
of  
Page  7
about 13,300 kilometers.  
 
The first phase of the marine electronic highway will cover a route including South 
Africa,  
 
Inharrime (north of Maputo), Nacala (west of Comoros), and Aldabra (Seychelles). 
Project  
 
supported activities, which involve surveying of the ocean floor and creating electronic  
 
navigational charts, will have no adverse environmental consequences.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
There are no potential safeguard issues associated with the project. The project will 
finance primarily  
 
technical assistance to develop a marine electronic highway, to widen regional capacity 
to respond to oil  
 
and chemical spills, and to strengthen capacity for port state control.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The project in the long run is expected to contribute to the reductions in the risks of 
catastrophic damage  
 
from oil and chemical spills.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable.   
 
Page  8
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders have been involved in preparing the project. These include the IMO, 
ministries of  
 
transport and environment, port authorities      groups representing the oil shipping 
industry (IPIECA,  
 
INTERTANKO, ITOPF), groups representing navigation (International Hydrographic 
Bureau,  
 
International Hydrographic Organization, and the International Association of 
Lighthouse Authorities),  
 
local oil and shipping firms, groups representing the fishing industry, and development 
partners. Both  
 
the UNDP and the UNEP have been consulted to ensure that complementarities among 
relevant projects  
 
are used to maximum effect. The team preparing the proposed GEF-supported 
Southwest Indian Ocean  
 
Fisheries Project has also been involved in discussions on possible ways the marine 
electronic highway  
 
can be used effectively to monitor and control large fishing vessels. Local communities 
in the countries  
 
developing capacity to respond to oil spills have been consulted during project 
preparation through  
 
meetings organized by community leaders.  
 
The proposed project was discussed at a high-level seminar in December 2004 
organized by SAMSA  
 
with participation of the various stakeholders to agree on the final project objectives, 
design, and  
 
implementation arrangements. Its recommendations have improved the project design.  
 
The involvement of stakeholders in preparing the project provides a solid foundation for 
stakeholder  
 
participation during project implementation. Workshops will be held periodically with 
relevant  
 
stakeholders for purposes of training, knowledge sharing, and institution building. 
Annual project  
 
planning workshops will also be held with the participation of all key stakeholders to 
prepare the  
 
following year#s work program, specifying the role and contribution of each of the 
stakeholders to the  
 
implementation of the project. Local communities will participate in designing 
information campaigns  
 
on
the risks of oil spills and measures that could be taken to prevent them. This was 
done very  
Page  9
effectively under the Western Indian Ocean Oil Spill Contingency Planning Project. A 
key output of the  
 
project is expected to be a strengthened regional institution which provides a permanent 
forum through  
 
which various stakeholders come together to discuss issues of common concern and 
coordinate their  
 
actions. Local oil and shipping companies and port authorities will be part of the 
national and regional  
 
contingency plans. A detailed stakeholder involvement plan will be prepared no later 
than project  
 
appraisal.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Page  10
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
07/25/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
07/25/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Anil S. Bhandari 
07/25/2005 
Comments:  Acting Sector Manager. 
