Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC881 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 5, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION
 
A.  Basic Project Data
 
Country: Mauritania 
Project ID: P088828 
Project Name: MR:Integrated Development 
Program for Irrigated Agriculture II 
Task Team Leader: Ismael Ouedraogo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 29, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: March 1, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTS4 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan, second phase 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (25%); 
Agricultural marketing and trade (20%); 
Agricultural extension and research (20%); 
Crops (20%); General public 
administration sector (15%) 
Theme: Export development and 
competitiveness (P); Infrastructure services 
for private sector development (P); Rural 
markets (P); Water resource management 
(P); Land management (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Robert Robelus, Salamata Bal  
Loan/Credit amount ($M.):  
IDA: 20 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN]
 
The development objective of the overall PDIAIM is to increase value added of irrigated 
agriculture, incomes and employment in the Senegal River valley through the improved use of 
irrigation schemes. The objective of the first phase of the PDIAIM-IDA was to lay the 
foundations for a sustainable development of irrigated agriculture in technical, financial, 
environmental and socioeconomic terms. Phase I was successful in initiating sound rice policy 
measures, providing incentives to improve rice quality throughout the sub-sector, and making 
great strides in agricultural diversification. Phase I, however, was slow in rehabilitating irrigated 
schemes, realizing only about 1,000 ha instead of 3,000 ha, as it was hampered by the limited 
capacities of both public agencies and private enterprises. Clearly, increased efforts in 
implementing irrigated schemes are needed during phase II and III. 
The development objective of Phase II is to increase the area of irrigated schemes in 
rehabilitation, extension or new creation, under a favorable incentive structure and strengthened 
capacities of agricultural institutions. More specifically, it is envisaged that at the end of phase II  
(i) about 3,000 ha of economically viable and environmentally sound rehabilitation and/or 
extension will be carried out, including the development of 500 ha of new irrigated schemes 
dedicated for diversification away from rice; (ii) liberalized rural policy measures will be 
Page  2
strengthened; and (iii) the organizational and managerial capacities of agricultural producers and 
exporters will be improved. 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
The components of phase II, perceptively the same as in phase I and as called in the original 
program, are as follows: 
Component A:  Development of an incentive framework and rural institutional capacity 
 
(USD: 2.308 M
). It aims at improving the capacity and accountability of rural institutions to 
consolidate and take advantage of policy measures and incentives  initiated during phase I. It will 
finance: (i) analysi
s
of
the sectors’ competitiveness and implementation of land tenure; and (ii) 
capacity building of rural agencies (public and private) and producer organizations engaged in 
irrigated agriculture. 
Component B:  Development of basic irrigated infrastructure (USD 13.308 M):
 This key 
and largest component of phase II will finance (i) the expansion of rehabilitation, extension and 
creation of small and medium size irrigated schemes initiated during phase I; (ii) the realization 
of priority primary structural investments based on studies carried out during phase I; and (iii) 
studies of investments to be implemented during phase III. 
Component C:  Support to Farm Management and Organization (USD 0.768 M):
 It aims at 
improving technical support demanded by crop and livestock producers and other participants in 
traditional and agricultural diversification. It will finance: (i) training programs to facilitate the 
transfer of the management of the large irrigated schemes to producer organizations; mastery of 
good agricultural practices; and emergence of dynamic women organizations; and (ii) the 
provision through contractual agreements of key services to the project and beneficiaries. 
Component D:  Support for Traditional Crop Sub-sector (USD 2.692 M):
 It  targets the rice 
sub-sector, particularly seed improvement, pest control, and support to rice production, 
processing and commercialization. It will finance: (i) capacity building efforts targeting the seed 
sub sector and phytosanitary control; and (ii) support to the credit agency (UNCACEM) through 
a
second credit line to support upstream and downstream production activities. 
Component E:  Diversification Promotion (USD 2.077 M):
 It aims at scaling-up the first 
phase’s achievements in this area by financing: (i) the promotion of micro-irrigation technologies 
and agricultural intensification; (ii) the development and dissemination of good agricultural 
practices in the production of fruit and vegetables; (iii) farmer groups’ skills development with 
respect to domestic and export markets; (iv) improved cold chain and storage infrastructure; and 
(v) continued pilot activities for the introduction of crop diversification. 
Component F: Environmental and Social Safeguard Measures (USD 1.500 M): 
It
 
aims at 
mitigating the project’s environmental and social negative impacts and strengthening the positive 
impacts, as identified in the safeguard documents. It will implement measures geared to: (i) 
reducing the impact of irrigation development on the environment and on human health; (ii) 
combating invading aquatic weeds; (iii) develop and implement an action plan to control bird 
invasions, which cause significant damage to rice crops; (iv) anti-desertification activities in the 
Senegal River Valley; and (v) environmental management capacity building within the 
implementing agencies. 
Component G:  Project Management and Monitoring & Evaluation (USD 2.500 M):
 It 
aims at ensuring the proper coordination of project activities, supervision of the public and 
Page  3
private operators, daily monitoring of activities and the evaluation of impacts. It will finance (i) 
activities related to project’s administration and coordination; (ii) improvement and 
computerization of the PDIAIM M&E system, including a rural GIS to be co-financed with the 
CBRD; and (iii) the development and implementation of an effective communication strategy. 
D.  Project location (if known)
 
The project targets the rehabilitation/extension of existing irrigation schemes and development 
of new ones for diversified crops totaling some 13,000 ha over 13 years, throughout the Senegal 
River Valley on the Mauritanian side, where phase I was initiated. As with phase I, the proposed 
phase II will exclude any protected areas. In addition, the present phase II of the PDIAIM will 
carry out a rapid archaeological survey in new sites open to irrigation and apply a chance-find-
procedure during construction. Where the project activities may encroach on cultural heritage 
areas, they  will be diverted to make sure that the culturally and socially sensitive areas are 
spared OPN 11.03 (draft OP 4.11). 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Based on the experience gathered in the implementation of the first phase of the PDIAIM, 
Mauritania’s institutional capacity within the MDRE (particular its environmental department) 
remains weak and needs further strengthening. This requires the training of PDIAIM monitoring 
and evaluation staff (for basic infrastructures, water and sanitation, health and) to meet minimum 
technical norms with respect to developing irrigated schemes, and also to maintain a basic 
system of reliable data for measuring and assessing the impact of irrigated agriculture policy. 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x ] 
Environmental Assessment
(OP
/BP
4.01) 
Environmental impact on human health and the natural resources  
[x ] 
Natural Habitats
(OP
/BP
4.04) 
Potential impact on riparian ecosystems  
[x ] 
Pest Management
(OP 4.09
)
Use of pesticides in agricultural production 
[x ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(OP
/BP
4.12) 
Potential loss of the use of productive asset. 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(OP
/BP
4.36) 
[x ] 
Safety of Dams
(OP
/BP
4.37) 
Water flow from the Foum Gleita’s dam may affect some irrigated schemes 
[x ] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
)
Archeological artifacts may exist in sites yet to be developed for irrigation 
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(OP
/BP
/GP
7.60)
*
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
[x ] 
Projects on International Waterways
(OP
/BP
/GP
7.50) 
Mauritania shares the Senegal River with Senegal and Mali. 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
The project is classified as category A. The main environmental issues raised by the 
implementation of the PDIAIM, and by irrigation development in the Senegal River Valley in 
general, include waterlogging, salinization, water borne diseases (epidemics of intestinal and 
urinary bilharzia and malaria), aquatic weed and bird infestations and desertification. Poor 
drainage is one of the main causes of waterlogging and salinization. These environmental 
problems have an adverse effect on the productivity of land (waterlogging, salinity, and 
alkalinity) and labor (waterborne illnesses such as intestinal infections, bilharzias and malaria) 
and, thus, on the population’s income and quality of life. Also, dams built in the Senegal River 
basin to regulate water regime and generate electricity have had negative impacts. The 
subsequent reduction in flooding has affected communities that depended on flood-recession 
crops and some aquifers that feed wells and the supply of potable water to local populations. In 
2003, the safety of the only dam in Mauritanian territory (Foum Gleita) whose water release 
may directly affect irrigated schemes (yet to be rehabilitated) has been assessed to be adequate. 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
An extensive EA for the whole PDIAIM program was conducted at the appraisal of Phase I and 
environmental mitigation measures were initiated under phase I. Because the environmental and social 
issues remain the same now as during phase I, Bank’s safeguard experts during the identification mission 
of the second phase recommended for this second phase the following studies focusing on new activities: 
Environmental Assessment, including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), a Pest Management 
Plan (PMP), and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).  
The EA/EMP will analyze the impacts of additional irrigated infrastructure works contemplated 
under phase II and develop a plan to avoid or minimize their eventual negative impacts on 
natural environment, social relationships, and human health. The EA/EMP, to be in compliance 
with Bank’s OP 4.01 and Op/BP 4.04, will identify lines of responsibility, a monitoring and 
evaluation system, and prepare a budget to implement the EMP. The PMP, to be closely linked 
to the EMP and to be prepared in compliance with Bank’s OP 4.09, will look at an integrated 
pest management plan and similarly identify line of responsibility, M&E system, and supporting 
budget. The RPF (in compliance with Bank’s OP/BP 4.12) is recommended to ensure that no 
involuntary relocation, although not anticipated, would ever occur without proper compensation 
for those denied access to resources.  
At the implementation stage, the M&E carried out by the communities themselves would 
include these safeguard issues, which the M&E would document.  All approved safeguard 
documents (EMP, PMP, RPF) will be disclosed in country’s appropriate media and to InfoShop, 
at World Bank headquarters prior to appraisal and 120 days before Board Date to comply with 
the Pelosi Amendment. 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage 
ISDS would be prepared. October 15, 2004. 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS: N/A 
Page  5
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed.  The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  The 
safeguards documents, Environmental Management Plan, Pest Management Plan and 
Resettlement Policy Framework, will be disclosed to the Infoshop and in the country by October 
15, 2004. 
IV.  APPROVALS 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ismael Ouedraogo 
August  6, 2004 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
August 6, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Mary Barton-Dock 
August 6, 2004 
Comments 
Ismael Ouedraogo 
P:\MAURITAN\AG\PDIAM2\PCD\ISDSheet - Concept Stage - 5August2004.doc 
August 5, 2004 7:22 PM
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
