Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC313 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 16, 2003 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Countries: Western Indian Ocean (Kenya, 
Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania, 
Madagascar, Comoros, Mauritius, and 
Seychelles).  
Project ID: P078643 
Project Name: GEF-Marine Electronic 
Highway and Coastal and Marine 
Contamination Prevention Project 
Task Team Leader: Abdelmoula M. Ghzala 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 2004 
Loan/Credit amount ($m):  
Estimated Board Date: January 2005 
 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
GEF grant 
Sector: Ports, waterways and shipping 
(60%);Information technology 
(20%);Central government administration 
(20%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and 
institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Law reform 
(S);Technology diffusion (S);Regional 
integration (S) 
Safeguard policies specialists in the task team:  
Other financing amounts by source: 
($m) 
BORROWERS/RECEPIENTS 1.1 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
10.2 
FOREIGN SOURCES (France, the European Union, NORAD IMO, the 
Indian Ocean Commission, industry groups (IPIECA, INTERTANKO, 
ITOPF), and others to be identified 
12.3 
 
B.  Project Objective 
 
The global environmental goal of the proposed Western Indian Ocean Marine Electronic 
Highway and Coastal and Marine Contamination Prevention Project is to help protect the 
region’s globally significant and extremely sensitive coastal and marine environments and rich 
biodiversity.  The project has two main objectives.  The first is to help prevent ship-based 
environmental contamination (such as oil spills from groundings and illegal discharges of ballast 
and bilge waters) and unsustainable exploitation of marine resources (such as illegal fishing and 
fishing practices).  This will be achieved by establishing in phases a marine electronic highway, 
intended to guide ships through sensitive areas and to monitor the movements and activities of 
fishing and other vessels within countries’ territorial waters.  The principal outcome in the long 
run will be a fully operating marine electronic highway.  The second major objective is to 
Page  2
 
 
strengthen the capacity of countries to respond to an oil spill emergency in the region.  This will 
be achieved by supporting efforts of Kenya, Tanzania, and Mozambique to become part of a 
regional oil spill response plan, by completing the identification and mapping of environmentally 
sensitive areas along coasts and sea lanes, and by strengthening the regional collaboration that 
has been built under the GEF-supported West Indian Ocean Islands Oil Spill Contingency 
Planning Project.  The principal outcome will be the continuous operation of a regional institute 
that coordinates national and regional efforts to prevent and respond to an oil spill emergency.  
 
C.  Project Description 
 
The project will include Kenya, Mozambique, South Africa, Tanzania, Madagascar, Comoros, 
Mauritius and Seychelles, and as a partner La Réunion (France), covering a combined coastline 
of 13,300 kilometers.  Following the model developed for the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, 
the western Indian Ocean marine electronic highway will be implemented in phases.  After the 
PDF Block B phase, the first phase of the project will establish as a pilot a marine electronic 
highway for limited area of the region’s major shipping routes.  The second phase of the project 
(or of a follow-up project) will build on the experience of the first phase and establish a full 
marine electronic highway covering major shipping routes of the western Indian Ocean region.   
 
GEF funds will complement technical assistance provided through the other partners in the 
program, and will finance only activities that contribute to global environmental benefits, and 
that others cannot finance.  Specifically, GEF funds will finance activities designed to prevent 
marine and coastal contamination activities and activities that support surveillance and 
enforcement of laws and regulation governing the shipping and fisheries industries.  This 
includes development and installation of a pilot marine electronic highway.  The oil spill 
contingency planning activities are largely baseline activities, and the GEF will allocate limited 
funding for these, focusing on the activities designed to widen the regional plan and strengthen 
regional collaboration.   
 
Component
s 
 
Component 1: Developing a regional marine electronic highway (US$11.5 million) 
 
A marine electronic highway takes advantage of advances in technology that improve the 
navigational decision-making of mariners.  It involves an integrated system of electronic nautical 
charts, continuous real-time positioning information, aids to navigation and shore-based 
automatic ship identification system, transponders, and provision of real-time meteorological, 
oceanographic, and navigational information.  Shipmasters use the information to guide their 
ships safely through busy shipping lanes.  Shore-based authorities use the information to 
precisely identify and track ships.  The marine electronic highway is thus a valuable tool for 
preventing and controlling marine pollution and ensuring the safety of navigation.  It is also a 
valuable tool for monitoring fishing activities and for enforcing regulations and international 
agreements intended to ensure sustainable management of fisheries and of other marine and 
coastal resources.  A marine electronic highway lowers costs of shipping by reducing the risk of 
accidents and by allowing ships to operate in storms and other adverse conditions that would idle 
them if they relied on conventional navigational systems.   
Page  3
 
 
 
 
 
Specific activities include:  
 
(a)  
Generating nautical charts and publications.   
(b)  
Maintaining charts and publications.   
(c) 
Installing aids to navigation 
(d) 
Installing automatic information systems, a ship reporting scheme, and a differential global 
positioning system service.  
 
(e) 
Strengthening search and rescue operations.
  
 
(f) 
Evaluating the demonstration phase and preparing the next phase.   
 
Component 2: Coastal and marine contamination prevention capacity building (US$4.8 
million) 
 
Subcomponents include: 
 
(a) 
Supporting seminars and workshops.
  
 
(b) 
Creating site-specific pollution prevention and contingency management plans for coastal 
and marine biodiversity hotpots with high risk profiles.   
(c)  
Developing a methodology to value ecosystem benefits.   
(d)  
Developing a regional database and geographic information system on marine and coastal 
resources.    
 
Component 3: Developing regional oil spill contingency capacity (US$ 4.2 million) 
 
(a) 
Assisting Kenya, Mozambique, and Tanzania to develop national oil spill contingency 
plans, to join the regional plan, and to create sensitivity maps.   
(b) 
Supporting countries’ efforts to ratify IMO conventions and translate them into national 
legislation.
  
 
 
Component 4: Regional coordination and project management (US$3.1) 
 
(a) 
Supporting adoption of port state control.   
(b) 
Conducting regional workshops.   
(c) 
Supporting project coordination and management.   
(d) 
Conducting regional training and seminars.
  
 
(e) 
Facilitating regional agreements and development of a regional contingency plan.
  
 
(f) 
Strengthening a regional center.   
(g) 
Developing mechanisms for sustainable financing and other activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will cover the coastal and marine areas of Kenya, Mozambique, South Africa, 
Tanzania, Madagascar, Comoros, Mauritius and Seychelles, with a combined coastline of about 
Page  4
 
 
13,300 kilometers.  The first phase of the marine electronic highway will cover the area between 
Inharrime (north of Maputo) and the Mozambican port of Nacala (west of Comoros).  Vessels 
using this route will come under the control of the marine electronic highway at Inharrime and 
then again at Nacala until leaving the marine electronic highway.  The area between these two 
points is in deepwater and is far from the coasts.  Project supported activities, which involve 
surveying of the ocean floor and creation of electronic navigational charts, will have no 
environmental consequences.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity 
 
Not applicable. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain follow-up and calendar/steps for the determination of the category:    
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
III.  ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION 
 
A.  What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues 
and prepare to mitigate them? 
 
Not applicable.   
 
B.  How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? 
 
Not applicable.   
 
IV.  AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW 
 
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding 
safeguards during project preparation] 
 
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: 
 
No quality enhancement review is envisaged. 
 
 
Signed and submitted by:  
  
12/16/03 
Abdelmoula Ghzala 
Task Team Leader
 
 
Date: 
 
 
Approved by: 
 
 
 
                                                                                                  
12/16/03 
Thomas Walton 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator
 
 
Date12
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12/16/03 
C. Sanjivi Rajasingham
 
Sector Manager
 
 
Date:  
 
Page  6
 
 
 
