                           Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                Report No: AC184
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/15/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: MAURITANIA                                          Project ID: P081368
Project: Community-Based Rural Development                   Task Team Leader: Ismael Ouedraogo
Authorized to Appraise Date: February 19, 2004               IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: April 22, 2004                                IDA Amount ($m): 45.00
Managing Unit: AFTS4                                         Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           (40%); Other social services (30%); Roads and
Status: Lending                                              highways (10%); Sanitation (10%); Agro-industry
                                                             (10%)
                                                             Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P); Land
                                                             management (P); Other rural development (P);
                                                             Infrastructure services for private sector development
                                                             (P); Decentralization (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objective of the Mauritania Community-Based Rural Development (CBRD) Project is to
improve the living conditions of project-supported village communities in terms of sustainable income
increase and access to basic social services. This would contribute to the Millennium Development Goals
(MDG) of eradicating poverty and hunger in rural areas, and ensuring environmental sustainability. The
project would achieve its objective through community-centered capacity building and investments in
economic, social and environmental activities.

The proposed project would be in line with the country's Poverty Reduction Strategic Framework, the
Rural Development Strategy and the CAS for which it would constitute an implementation tool. It would
also support Mauritania's decentralization policy by working at the level of the communes (with their
elected Communal Councils), supporting their capacity building and assisting them in the design and
implementation of sustainable Community Development Plans.

The project would be a follow-up to the Rainfed Natural Resource Management Project (RNRMP,
1998-2003). The RNRMP was conceived as the first phase of a long-term program aimed at controlling
and ultimately reducing the spiral of poverty caused by the confluence of population growth, environmental
degradation and reduced agricultural production.       Viewed as such a first phase, the RNRMP was
successfully completed.

The project would intervene in all regions of rural Mauritania. The main criteria for selection of communes
and villages would be the level of poverty. Particular attention would be given to village communities and
communes where work under the RNRM project needs to be pursued and/or consolidated, particularly if
initiated during the last years of the project but not completed by project closing date. The goal is to
scale-up results achieved by the RNRM by building a critical mass (clusters) on villages already covered
by this project.   The RNRM project reached 295 villages located in 66 communes, in nine regions of
Mauritania: Hodh El Charghi, Hodh El Gharbi, Assaba, Gorgol, Guidimakha, Tagant, Adrar, Tiris
Zemmour, Inchiri. These nine regions have a total of 178 communes, which comprise 138 rural and about
2300 villages. (Mauritania has a total of 13 regions, 216 communes, which comprise 163 rural communes

                                                      2
                                                                                                         ISDS


and 5561 villages.) The proposed project would target about 1,000 villages in 80 rural communes in 10
regions, but coverage would depend on resource availability to ensure a meaningful and critical mass of
investment to impact the living conditions of beneficiaries.

The project duration would be six years to give sufficient time for the project to bring the first communes
and villages to a reasonable level of autonomy and sustainable development.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
As indicated, the project would adopt the community-driven development approach (CDD). It would make
a systematic use of participatory appraisal techniques to enable village communities and municipalities to
define their long-term needs and objectives; identify their strengths and constraints; evaluate alternative
options; design a strategy and an action plan; procure financial and technical resources; and proceed with
implementation of the plan and the O&M of the investments created. Village communities would be
assisted in their endeavor by locally-based public services, NGOs and/or the private sector. The CDPs
would be submitted for approval and assessed through transparent criteria known in advance to all
stakeholders. The development plans would be implemented by the village communities themselves or
under their control. These communities would be able to exercise choice over source of technical
assistance, technology type, and investment design. Deconcentrated public services, NGOs and private
sector may provide input, guidance, and training. This is essential to empower communities, ensure
correspondence of investment to needs and build mutual trust.

To implement this approach, the project would include three components, consisting of (a) Capacity
Building and Community Empowerment, (b) Implementation of Sustainable CDPs (local investments) and
(c) Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.

(A)      Capacity Building and Community Empowerment ($6M)

Village communities and their representatives are lacking skills to effectively conceive, implement, manage
and monitor their development plans and administer their local institutions as promoted in the
decentralization context. The proposed project would provide support to communities to acquire those
skills. Government, non-government and private-sector institutions would be sought to assist the
communities. If some of these institutions do not have adequate skills, they would benefit from institutional
and capacity building through the project. Therefore this component would have two main sub-components:
(1) Community Capacity Building and Empowerment and (2) Capacity Building for Community Support
Institution/Agencies.

(A1) Community Capacity Building and Empowerment ($4M)

The project would support Communal Councils to build their capacity in participatory preparation of
integrated Communal Development Plans (CDPs), and in the administrative, fiscal and technical
management required to support the effective execution of these plans. This would help ensure that
Communal Council work effectively with their constituents and local indigenous institutions. The project
would also assist the central government, notably the local community agency--Direction des Collectivités
Locales (DCL)--to accelerate the process of decentralization. This component could fund studies and
support a communication program that helps enforce and publicize the legal and regulatory framework for
the decentralization and deconcentration of the central Ministries responsible for decentralization.

This sub-component would also support and expand Village Councils (ADC) initiated by the predecessor
project and still the main focus of the proposed project. Villages of the same commune are often isolated

                                                        3
                                                                                                       ISDS


and distant from each other with very little means of communication. While getting all villages to work
together in the framework of the commune is very important, the need to have these isolated villages
internally well organized is essential. Village Councils (Associations de developpement communautaire
--ADC) have played an important role in helping village communities get organized and carry out several
initiatives under the RNRM project. They are now officially recognized bodies. With the implementation
of the decentralization policy, they would constitute the building blocks for the communal structures and
have produced a large number of Communal Council members. Continued capacity building efforts are
needed and would be provided under this project. As with the predecessor project, ADCs would include
village women.

Support would also be provided to Professional and Socioeconomic Groups and Community-Based
Organizations.      Investments made at the village or commune level (social or private productive
investments) would be managed by interest groups or community-based organizations that would need to
acquire proper skills. Capacity building would be provided to these groups as a package tied to the
investments. This sub-component would aim at introducing decentralized and participatory planning
procedures by building capacity of community-based organizations, and maximizing the capacity of
existing local indigenous institutions to design, implement, and manage micro-projects. Community-Based
Organizations would include women groups.

Community Capacity Building would also target Local Populations through ADC, Professional and
Socioeconomic Groups and Community-Based Organizations. Illiteracy is one of the main causes of
poverty. Another cause is the lack of basic knowledge of rural men and women about basic environmental
issues such as natural resource degradation, desertification, health and sanitation. These issues would be
addressed under this project through literacy programs and public education and sensitization, within the
community development plans.

A central theme at all these levels would be the need to overcome "social traps" that poor people often fall
into. When articulating their demand, poor communities tend to focus on short-term gains for individuals or
the    inner groups, and ignore negative externalities in the long run and for the larger community,
particularly in natural resource management. Capacity building would emphasize long-term gains and
externalities that need to be internalized for the benefit of the larger communities.

This component would be implemented in selected communes in 10 regions of Mauritania and would cover
all villages or village groupings within these communes for about 15-20 percent of the total population,
provided resources are made available.

A2. Capacity Building for Project Support Institution/Agencies ($2M)

Some of the institutions and agencies (government services, private agencies, NGOs) that would provide
support to communities for capacity building and for the design and implementation of Community
Development Plans need, beforehand, to strengthen their own capacities, acquire more skills and recruit
new staff.    This sub-component targets specifically public agencies providing agricultural (crop and
livestock) services, including research and extension. Because of limited resources, the proposed operation
would need to develop a strong synergy with the other rural operation (PDIAIM) to provide adequate
agricultural services to agricultural producers. This sub-component would also place a particular emphasis
in building the capacity of private rural micro and small enterprises (MSE) that provide goods and services
to rural communities supported by the project. Rural MSE need to strengthen their capacity in areas of
technical expertise (e.g., how to better repair agricultural implements and processing equipment), as well as
financial and overall management of their businesses. Building the capacity of rural MSE would likely

                                                      4
                                                                                                          ISDS


require services from urban-based providers. Thus, through this component, the project would be
strengthening the provision of business development services (BDS) to rural MSE, linking the rural and
urban spaces. Employment prospects would be generated in the rural sector, but also in the urban sector.
The project would emulate one of PDIAIM's successful features, which is holding periodic fora of service
providers to identify potential MSE and providers of BDS. To avoid complicating further its
implementation, the proposed project would give priority to nonfinancial BDS, i.e., the strengthening of
technical and managerial capacities of MSE, and would not be drawn into micro-credit activities.

B. Implementation of sustainable Community Development Plans - CDPs ($21M)

The primary focus of this component rests on village communities. This component would manage the flow
of local investment funds for the implementation of projects identified in the village Community
Development Plans (CDPs), which would have been prepared with the assistance of support agencies
mentioned in component A. The duration of the plans would be defined during preparation but it is
expected to be three years. Also during preparation, based on results achieved under the predecessor
project, the indicative amount per village community would be determined. Funding for the investments
proposed under the CDP would be provided by the project in the form of matching grants. As initiated in
the predecessor project, the share of the grant would vary depending on the nature of the investment
(economic, social or environmental). This flexibility would be needed to provide adequate incentive for
investments with longer-term returns and accounting for externalities, compared to those with shorter-term
returns, but possibly, non-sustainable overall gains for the larger community. Funding of CDPs would also
come from other sources, such as sectoral (Bank-supported) projects and programs already being
implemented. In education, health and water-and-sanitation, specifically, mostly coordination would be
required between the concerned sectoral projects and the CBRD. Only in exceptional cases where these
sectoral projects do not cover the CBRD project areas or do not address some of the key issues of the
proposed operation, could resources be provided under the CBRD project in agreement and cooperation
with the concerned sectors. Regardless of the source of funds, no social facilities would be built unless
their operation and maintenance (teachers, nurses, etc.) had been planned for at the communal level.

Funding would also be provided, on a pilot basis, to municipalities whose communal development plans
integrate village communities' development plans. For example, the proposed operation would partner with
the "Projet d'appui aux communes de l'Assaba (PACA), being designed by the United Nations Capital
Development Fund (UNCDF) with France's financing. With its four components (institutional support;
capacity building; investment instruments; and analysis/dissemination of information), PACA is structured
much like the proposed operation. Both projects would be targeting the same populations in the Assaba
region.

The institutional arrangements that would govern the administration of the flow of funds (flowing to village
communities, rural municipalities, public agencies and non-governmental entities and organizations) of the
matching grants would be carefully designed during preparation to help strengthen Mauritania's on-going
decentralization process. Under the PACA, FENU intends to support communes by funneling funds directly
to the commune-managed "fonds de developpement regional". Where communal development plans are
envisioned, as indicated, the CBRD would partner with UNCDF to work out arrangements that support the
decentralization process.

A strong participatory approach is necessary for the success of these investments. As they did in the
preparation of the CDPs, community stakeholders and community representatives would play a central role
in their implementation. Public services (health, water and sanitation, education, handicraft, agriculture and
livestock, environment, etc.), as well as the private sector and the NGOs would also be involved, as the

                                                        5
                                                                                                          ISDS


CDPs       would integrate all actions that could possibly contribute to a successful and sustainable
development of the community.

The broad categories of investments to be considered under village community development plans would be
as follows:

     (i) public socioeconomic infrastructure;
     (ii) private income-generating infrastructure/activities; and
     (iii) natural resource management and environment investments.

C. Project Management and Monitoring & Evaluation ($3M)

This does not constitute a component per se, but rather the overall project management activities, including
project coordination, financial management, procurement and project monitoring and evaluation.

C1. Project Management ($2.2M)

The CBRD Unit under the MDRE would be responsible for the overall management of the project,
planning, budgeting, financial management, procurement, supervision and monitoring and evaluation. It
would be responsible for the preparation of all the project technical and financial reports. The CBRD Unit
would coordinate between the different agencies and institutions to be involved in the implementation of the
project. It would report to the MDRE minister and to the Project Steering Committee.

C2. Monitoring and Evaluation ($0.8M)

Community-based M&E. A system would be developed and implemented for facilitating community-wide
understanding of the development process and the relations between actions engaged and the results
(output and outcome) obtained in comparison with initially targeted objectives. A local Monitoring and
Evaluation Committee would be set up to monitor the indicators identified during the preparation of the
CDP. Based on the results obtained, the community would make the necessary adjustments to achieve
better results. The Monitoring and Evaluation Committee would be responsible for data collection and for
the primary data analysis. A subset of these data would be sent to the CBRD Unit to make regional and
national aggregates to assist decision makers. It would also provide feedback and sharing of information,
experiences and results at all levels. M&E would make use of geographical information system (GIS) and
share information with other agencies (e.g., MDRE's policy and monitoring unit--DPSE) and projects
(e.g., PDIAIM).

Components:

A. Capacity Building and Community Empowerment
B. Implementation of sustainable Community Development Plans (CDPs)
C. Project Management and Monitoring & Evaluation

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project target about 1,000 village communities in 80 communes located in 9 regions of Mauritania
already covered by the predecessor project (RNRMP): Hodh El Charghi, Hodh El Gharbi, Assaba, Gorgol,
Guidimakha, Tagant, Adrar, Tiris Zemmour, Inchiri. The exact locations of the communes and villages

                                                        6
                                                                                                          ISDS


are not known at present. Detail information on environment characteristics will be obtained during
preparation. However, the project would exclude any protected areas.

The proposed project would not impact on cultural property. Where there is a possibility that project
activities would encroach on these areas, project activities would be diverted to ensure that these culturally
and socially sensitive areas are avoided.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The project would finance (i) the design and implementation of Community Development and
Investment Plans; (ii) community empowerment and capacity building ; and (iii) capacity building of public
and private providers of goods and services supporting the communities. The project would contribute to
eradicate extreme poverty and hunger, and ensure environmental sustainability, both Millennium Development
Goals (MDG). The project would provide funding for investment in crop and livestock production to increase
communities' income. However, to reduce income poverty through increased crop and livestock production, the
revenue-generating activities must protect the natural resource base. It is well understood that it is the
degradation of the natural resource base--by reducing the income-generating productivity of these resources
supporting crop and livestock activities--which is in great part responsible for rural poverty in Mauritania. The
proposed operation would carry over the same strong focus in preserving the natural resource base that
actually was the hallmark of the predecessor Natural Resource Management operation. It is therefore expected
that the program will have a globally positive environmental impact. All investments would be assessed in
terms of their sustainability. Also, mechanisms will be put in place to assess the environmental sustainability
of project-supported investments. This is one key indicator of project outcomes.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                      Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
O.P. 4.01, The net social and environmental effect of this project is expected to be positive since it would
   significantly reduce poverty in the target areas. The implementation of the proposed project is therefore
   likely to discourage encroachment on fragile lands. However, it is possible that certain environmental

                                                       7
                                                                                                          ISDS


   safeguards may be triggered from micro-projects (e.g., micro-irrigation, road rehabilitation and school and
   health post construction) if they are not adequately screened prior to funding agreements with communities.
   Assessment of environmental sustainability would be built in the community development plan and
   embedded in the approval process of community investments supported by the project to ensure that any
   environmental impact will be mitigated. An environment management framework was prepared, approved
   and disclosed. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared. The ESMF
   defines the roles and responsibilities for ensuring that CDPs and micro-projects are prepared and
   implemented to achieve environmentally and socially sustainable development, and provides checklists and
   other implementation tools and resources to support these activities.

O.P. 4.04, Natural Habitats, may be triggered if minor road construction and agricultural expansion impinges
   on natural habitats. This is addressed in the ESMF Mitigation measures. Any potential negative impact
   that might occur will be handled by the project consistent with Bank policies.

OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement may be triggered because land acquired for public and other project
   activities may cause individuals or community groups to lose assets, or access to assets, or proceeds of
   economic activities. To mitigate these risks, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared,
   cleared and disclosed. This RPF provides the framework to thoroughly investigate all land acquisitions and
   handle all issues related to OP 4.12 and to determine the framework for compensation for loss of assets or
   access to assets were this to occur during project implementation.

OP 4.09, Pest Management, may be triggered for several reasons. For example, if the project allows for the
   creation of a water body that would increase the number of pests and therefore disease such as malaria or
   bilharzia, or if the project funds pesticides for improved agricultural production. Since it is possible that
   this project will fund micro-projects that aim at increasing agricultural productivity through the use of
   inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides and small-scale irrigation, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) was
   prepared, approved and disclosed. This plan includes (i) the establishment of linkages between this project
   and the Government agency responsible for pest management; (ii) the training of input suppliers and users
   in the use of pesticides and integrated pest management. The plan also encourages ecologically based pest
   control practices designed to minimize the reliance on synthetic agricultural inputs.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative impacts are foreseen.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Alternatives will be an important element in the development of both CDPs and micro-project proposals.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
As some projects may entail water retention schemes and provision of school and health units, the project
prepared a Resettlement Framework, along with an Environmental Management Framework, both of which
had been reviewed and approved by ASPEN.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
On the demand side, the village community is the key stakeholder and, at the same time, the main executing

                                                      8
                                                                                                           ISDS


agency for the design and implementation of its own Community Development Plan (CDP). Village
communities would prepare their CDPs with the assistance of community support services (public services,
NGOs and/or private organizations) selected in consultation with the communities. Most investment
projects would be small (micro-projects) and implemented by the communities, including procurement of
goods, services and works. For more complex investments, detailed planning, design, and execution may be
contracted out. The monitoring and evaluation of the CDP's outputs and outcomes would be carried out by
the community, which would use the findings to correct and improve their program. Other stakeholders
would be professional and socio-economic groups inside the villages and communes as well as individuals.
As beneficiaries, they would also be involved in the design and implementation of the CDP but more
specifically in particular components of the CDP that are most relevant to them. On the supply side, the
main stakeholders are the government services (at field and central levels), the NGOs and the private sector
(consulting firms, enterprises, etc.) who would be providing assistance and support to the communities in
different sectors. These services would be fully involved. Details about their specific roles would be worked
out during preparation.

Safeguard policies addressed by the Borrower, specially those that could affect people, would be disclosed
during implementation when designing and implementing the community development plans. At the design
stage, disclosure of safeguard issues would go with exposing the need to overcome "social traps" into
which poor communities often fall when they focus attention on short-term gains and overlook long-term
ills and externalities. At the implementation stage, the M&E of CDP carried out by the communities
themselves would include these safeguard issues, which the M&E would document.                  All approved
safeguard documents (ESMP, PMP, RPF) were disclosed in the country's appropriate media and to the
InfoShop, at World Bank headquarters.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

                                                    9
                                                                                                    ISDS




F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              9/30/2003       2/9/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/15/2003      2/26/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           10/15/2003      2/26/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive        Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              9/30/2003       2/17/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/15/2003      2/26/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           10/15/2003      2/24/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              9/30/2003       2/5/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          10/15/2003      3/1/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           10/15/2003      2/26/2004

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Ismael Ouedraogo                                   3/11/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Amadou Konare/Person/World Bank                    3/11/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                                        3/11/2004
Sector Manager/Director               Mary Barton-Dock                                   3/11/2004

