Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1222 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03/29/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mauritania 
Project ID: P089672 
Project Name: MAURITANIA:  TRANSPORT SECTOR PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Alexandre K. Dossou 
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 7, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 16, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (65%);Aviation (20%);Ports, waterways and shipping (15%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Improved transport sector management through a series of targeted investments and institutional  
 
reforms which would benefit transport users by lowering the cost and increasing the safety and  
 
reliability of rehabilitated infrastructure.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Given the EU initiative to support institutional reform in the Road Sector, the Bank would  
 
continue its role of supporting overall transport sector planning and management, while 
orienting  
 
its institutional support towards the aviation and maritime sub-sectors. A sector lending  
 
instrument is proposed to implement the following:  
 
A. Institutional Support  
 
Air Transport Management and Airport Administration  
 
The project would provide institutional support to the newly established ANAC, within the 
context of a broader air transport reform initiative supported through regional funding (West and  
 
Central Aviation Security and Safety Project). During preparation, the PPF would finance 
shortterm  
Page  2
TA to assist ANAC, focused primarily to review ANAC's status and confirm it has both the 
technical, managerial and financial resources to ensure that the aviation sector meets  
 
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) safety and security standards. In terms of 
airport management, the project will seek to strengthen the existing airport concession by  
 
ensuring that it: operates on a sound financial basis; has a simplified, yet strengthened, 
shareholding structure; and no longer acts as a Government instrument to provide financial  
 
subsidies to Air Mauritanie.  
 
Maritime Transport Management and Port Administration  
 
Under PPF funding, the project would provide TA for managing the Ports Management 
Workshop in March-April 2005, which will lay the groundwork to achieve a consensus on the 
strategic vision for rationalizing management of the nation's port facilities, and developing an 
Action Plan. The Workshop, with the findings of the Multi-Modal Study, will provide the basis  
 
for defining any additional institutional assistance provided under the project.  
 
Transport Sector Planning and Coordination  
 
The Bank would continue support to overall transport sector planning in the MET. Assistance 
will be directed, but not limited to, the newly formed Directorate of Planning, Cooperation and 
Research (DPRC). The type of assistance will be clarified based on the results of the Multi-
Modal Transport Sector Study and would focus on such areas as strategic planning and 
environmental management.   
 
Other Institutional Support  
 
The project may provide additional technical or material assistance in the road transport and/or 
other sub sectors, to be defined in conjunction with the sector strategy studies, or as defined 
during the project.  
 
B. Transport Infrastructure  
 
Rehabilitation/Periodic Maintenance of the Nouakchott Airport  
 
The project would provide financing for resurfacing of the runway, taxiway and apron surfaces 
of the Nouakchott Airport so as to enhance airport operational safety standards. The project will 
not include the rehabilitation of Nouadibhou Airport runway, however, due to limited funding 
availability. Fortunately, the Government has already allocated about US$ 2.5 million in its 2005 
budget to undertake this project. Long term sustainability of the proposed investment will be 
ensured through the envisioned reform of the airport concession.  
 
Rehabilitation/Periodic Maintenance of the Priority Paved Road Network.  
 
The project would fund periodic maintenance/rehabilitation of a key link in the paved road 
network. Within the context of priorities identified in the National Transport Plan, the section to 
be rehabilitated might be part of north-south and/or east-west corridors of regional importance. 
The Identification Mission analyzed the status of (i) Nouakchott-Tiguent-Rosso (204 km), part of 
the north-south corridor and which rehabilitation studies financed by the EU is planned for 2005,  
 
but without execution financing and; (ii) some deteriorated sections on the east-west axis, such 
as Aleg-Boutilimit (108km) for which rehabilitation studies financed by the EU are also planned 
for 2005, but without execution financing and Kiffa-Tintane (140 km) and Tintane-Aioun (70 
km). Given limited funds available in the Credit and for preparation, it is proposed that the PPF 
Page  3
fund a study of Kiffa-Tintane (140 km), which would include a logical division into lots. This 
will provide a basis to select an appropriate section, at the time of pre-evaluation, from among 
the sections studied by the PPF as well as those studied by the EU.  
 
Rehabilitation of Rural Roads  
 
The project would fund the rehabilitation of a selected package of rural roads in conjunction 
with the accessibility needs of the PDIAM, implemented as an application of a national strategy 
for rural roads to be prepared under the PDIAM.  
 
C. Project Management  
 
The project would provide assistance to the newly established DPRC, as the project 
Coordinating Agency. PPF funding would establish a Project Preparation Unit under this 
Directorate, who will manage the PPF activities and coordinate the EU and Bank-financed 
studies. The PPF will finance establishment of the Unit's procurement and financial management 
capabilities, which will be assessed during appraisal. Fiduciary and procurement responsibilities 
will be centralized in the Unit, while implementation responsibilities will rest with the 
implementing agencies, namely, Directorate of Public Works for the works in the Nouakchott 
Airport and on the road network; and ANAC and other agencies for their respective institutional 
activities.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The location of the paved road rehabilitation (options noted above)will be determined during 
preparation. The location of the rural road improvements will be located in areas where PDIAM 
is currently operating. All road improvements will be made on existing alignments and for 
Nouakchott Airport are envisaged within the airport's existing boundaries.   
 
E. 
 Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Within the Ministry of Facilities and Transport, the project will support the creation of an 
environmental management capacity within the Directorate of Planning, Cooperation and  
 
Research, who will work with the Directorate of Public Works in assuring compliance with 
Safeguards Policies.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The Environmental Assessment Policy is triggered because of potential impacts associated 
with the road and airport improvements.  
 
SAFEGAURD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY - Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, 
BP 4.01, GP 4.01) applies.  No resettlement issues are anticipated - the road investments will be 
made along well-established existing alignments, on which there has been no evident 
encroachment on the right of way; while, the airport improvements will all be within existing 
boundaries.  However, a Social Impact Assessment will be required to identify and mitigate 
social impacts inside the airport?s fenced and security area, as well as the areas immediately 
bordering the fences and security area. The rural roads improvements will be screened to exclude 
roads with major environ
mental issues, under a standard Environmental Management 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Framework. Standard screening, environmental planning and management will be defined in the 
feasibility and design studies during preparation, and incorporated into the implementation 
contracts.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  11/15/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
For the paved road and airport rehabilitation investments, a Category B Environmental 
Assessment will be carried out as part of the feasibility and design studies.  For the rural 
roads, an Environmental Management Framework will be prepared and disclosed prior to 
appraisal.  This will specify the process for project screening and preparation of appropriate 
road-specific environmental management plans (EMP).  All safegaurd studies will be 
disclosed in-country as well as at the World Bank info-shop before appraisal   
 
The project has been transferred to the sector unit for safeguard review and clearance.  The 
Task team and Sector Manager accept the safeguard responsibility for this project from now 
onward.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Alexandre K. Dossou 
03/24/2005 
Approved by: 
 
R
egional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
03/24/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr C. Sanjivi Rajasingham 
03/24/2005 
Comments:   
