Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC799 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 26, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Mauritania  
Project ID: P087828 
Project Name: Poverty Reduction Support 
Credit (1) 
Task Team Leaders: Kees Kostermans, 
Nicola Pontara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 16, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 16, 2004 
Managing Unit: AFTH2 
Lending Instrument: Poverty Reduction 
Support Credit 
General public administration sector 
(40%); Health (10%); Water (10%); 
Energy (10%); Sewerage (10%) 
Theme: Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement (P); Water 
Resource Management (P); Health System 
Performance (P); Nutrition and Food 
Security (P); Child Health (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Amadou Konare 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 25 
IDA: 25 
Other financing amounts by source: none 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The main objectives are to: (i) foster better service delivery to improve human development 
outcomes and enhance productivity; and (ii) strengthen the links between stated PRSP objectives 
and the MDGs on the one hand, and efficient resource allocation to attain those objectives 
(through the global MTEF and Budget) on the other. A further objective is also to stimulate 
greater market competition and a business environment more conducive to private sector 
activity, resulting in higher growth.  
 
The proposed PRSC and its matrix of policy measures would also help the Government and 
the donors to prioritize policy actions and their phases, focusing on measures with the greatest 
pay-offs in term of poverty reduction. In addition, the PRSCs would improve the predictability of 
funding as funds for supporting public service delivery would flow through the national budget 
(Treasury) and would be available at the beginning of the fiscal year to allow for proper planning 
and ensure availability of financial resources. Such predictability can be enhanced if other donors 
would also switch to budget support. 
 
 
 
Page  2
 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The reform agenda supported by PRSC-1 is elaborated around three of the four main pillars 
of the PRSP, namely: (i) the stimulation of broad-based growth driven by the private sector 
(PRSP Pillar 1); (ii) the strengthening of institutional capacity and governance (PRSP Pillar 4); 
and (iii) the development of human resources and expansion of access to basic infrastructure and 
services (PRSP Pillar 3). 
 
Component 1
. As mentioned in the PRSP, one of the key objectives of the Government is to 
accelerate the implementation of reforms geared at stimulating private sector-led growth and 
rendering Mauritania more attractive to foreign investors. This depends on several factors, 
including, 
inter alia
: (A) Lowering factor costs; (B) Stimulating growth in the mining sector by 
opening competition in iron ore production; and (C) Improving the overall business climate by 
removing remaining barriers to competition and factor mobility. Component 1 of the PRSC 
focuses on these important elements. 
 
Component 2
. The main priority of the PRSP in the area of economic governance is to ensure 
efficient and transparent allocation and use of public resources. Effective management of public 
resources is considered as an integrating part of the governance agenda, alongside the 
consolidation of the rule of law, decentralization, the modernization of public administration and 
strengthening of civil society capabilities. PRSC-1 essentially focuses on four key areas: (A) 
Improving the budget elaboration process with a view to allocating resources more efficiently; 
(B) Strengthening the capacity to execute and track public expenditure (notably all poverty-
reducing spending); (C) Strengthening the controls on the budget through the structures that 
exists and have the mandate to do so; and (D) PRSP Monitoring and Evaluation. 
 
Component 3
. The third pillar of the PRSP aims at “developing human resources and 
expanding access to essential infrastructure to enhance productivity and improve the living 
conditions of the poor”. The proposed PRSC addresses this priority by targeting key basic 
services: (A) health and nutrition; and (B) water and sanitation. Although education is also 
specifically mentioned in the PRSP, PRSC-1 does not cover this domain in that the Bank is 
already engaged in this sector through a number of investment projects. However, it is believed 
that improvements in health and water and sanitation sectors will also contribute to the 
achievement of the ambitious education sector goals (and vice-versa), given the 
multidimensional nature of human development.  
 
In these sub-sectors, the focus of PRSC-1 will be mainly on getting the policy frameworks in 
place, the implementation of which will then be supported by the follow-on PRSC-2 and 3. The 
PRSC places emphasis on the concerned institutions (State Secretariat for Women’ Well-being – 
SECF - and the ministries of Health, and Water and Energy) to coordinate their activities in some 
of the most disadvantaged regions with a view to striking a bigger impact
. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project has no specific location and project components will be implemented by the 
appropriate ministries nation-wide. 
Page  3
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Looming perspectives of oil and mining industry, development of unrestrained tourism in 
fragile ecosystems, over-exploitation of fossils aquifers and impact of rapid urbanization on land 
make the Mauritania Government fully aware that environmental issues can significantly impede 
sustainable development and prevent the country from achieving MDGs and NEPAD’s main 
objectives. IDA-financed projects such as the Integrated Development Program for Irrigated 
Agriculture (PEDIAIM), the Mining Sector Capacity Building Project (PRISM) and the Urban 
Development Program (PDU), or GEF-financed activities, all point out the difficulties in 
improving environmental management of their respective sector due to the lack of a national 
authority dealing with all environmental laws and regulations. 
 
At the moment, compliance with environmental assessment (EA) requirements remains weak 
in both the private and the public sector. Lack of awareness among public and private operators, 
and low technical capacity of the agencies responsible for enforcing EA requirements remain 
strong binding constraints to achieving effective enforcement of, and compliance with EA 
requirements.  
 
Based on this assessment, capacity building in EA is a key element to improving the 
management of natural resources and promoting greater observance of environmentally sound 
practices. The Capacity Building Operation, which is currently under preparation and runs 
parallel to the PRSC, supports the strategy presented in the National Environment Action Plan 
(PANE - underway), which advocates the creation of an independent body that will be able to 
address issues crosscutting several ministries like a National Environmental Agency, a High 
Commission for the Environment or another type of institutional structure whose design will be 
decided during the validation of the PANE.   
 
This operation also supports mainstreaming the environment into development in Mauritania, 
as recommended in the Sub-Saharan Africa Regional Environment Strategy endorsed by the 
Board in 2001.  It will provide funding to: (i) the establishment of an independent and central 
environmental body as recommended in the PANE; (ii) the preparation of a strong policy and 
legal framework; and (iii) capacity building programs for the new entity and selected ministries 
(incl. Environment and Rural Development, Interior and Telecommunications, Fishing and 
Maritime Economy, Mining and Industry, Infrastructure and Transport, Water and Energy).   
 
This would enable effective coordination of environmental planning and management in 
Mauritania, help integrate environmental concerns in the social and economic development 
process; and better define the roles of public and private sector. Funds could be available to 
finance civil works, equipment, training and technical assistance. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
PRSC-1 may have potential adverse impact from privatization of energy company (SOMELEC) 
Page  4
 
 
and the reform of the energy and water sectors and related regulatory frameworks. Reforms in the 
mining sectors could also have an environmental impact. Other environmental safeguard issues 
may arise from government investments in infrastructure in the health sector and the waste 
management of government health centers. The strategy for ensuring sufficient environmental 
safeguards for activity financed under PRSC-1 builds largely safeguards for ongoing World Bank 
projects and their environmental management plans (EMP). The enforcement of EMPs is ensured 
through supervision of sectoral Ministries (i.e. Rural Development and Environment, Energy and 
Water, Mining and Industry, Health and Social Action):  
 
a) 
Under the Energy, Water and Sanitation Sector Reform Technical Assistance Project, an 
environmental audit has been conducted to address any environmental problems related 
to the privatization of SONELEC.
1
 This audit focused on the environmental conditions at 
SONELEC’s facilities, remediation measures in view of potential environmental damage, 
the costs of such remediation measures, and the financial responsibilities of the new 
operators. In addition, a set of environmental regulations for the electricity and water 
sector has been developed and annexed to the Mauritania’s environmental law. These 
activities are monitored at the Ministry of Water and Energy. 
b) 
Under the First and Second Mining Sector Capacity Building Projects, EAs were 
conducted at the national level and specifically on the mining sector. As a result, 
environmental requirements and procedures have been introduced into the Mining Code; 
an environmental unit was formally established, trained and equipped within the Ministry 
of Mining and Industry; an Environmental Information and Management System was set 
up; and a study on the environmental and socio-economic impacts of the SNIM iron 
exploration in Zoueratt was completed. These activities are monitored at the Ministry of 
Mining and Industry.   
c) 
In the health sector, safeguards for health waste management are being applied under the 
Multisectoral HIV/AIDS and Endemic Disease Control Project (approved in 2003) and 
its waste management and pest management action plans. 
d) 
As mentioned above, under the Capacity Building Operation, institutional reforms are 
supported to improve the management of natural resources and promote greater 
observance of environmentally sound practices. 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
PRSC-1 would not finance activities requiring involuntary resettlement of population. 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
                                                
 
1
 SONELEC was split in July 2001 into two entities: Société Mauritanienne d'Electricité (SOMELEC) and Société 
Nationale de l'Eau (SNDE).    
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory):  
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
The safeguard policies for the operation would be laid out in an environmental annex to the 
program document that builds on the available environmental analysis and existing safeguard 
measures outlined above.  
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
September 16, 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
2
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Kees Kostermans 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Robert Blake 
Date 
Comments 
                                                
 
2
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
