Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC991 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 25, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: 
Mexico
 Project 
ID: 
P087038
 
Project Name: 
Environmental Services of the 
Forest
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ricardo Hernandez
 
GEF Focal Area: 
B-Biodiversity
 Global 
Supplemental 
ID: 
P089171
 
Estimated Appraisal Date: 
February 4, 2005
 Estimated 
Board 
Date: 
July 10, 2007
 
Managing Unit: LCSEN 
Lending Instrument: 
Specific Investment 
Loan
 
Sector: Environment, Forestry 
Theme: 
Biodiversity (P);Other environment 
and natural resources management (S)
 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: 
Gunars Platais
 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 52 
IBRD: 52 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
15 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The 
Project Development Objective
 is focus on developing and promoting environmental services 
markets, strengthening existing mechanisms while piloting new instruments to better manage and 
conserve environmental services.  While recognizing that positive externalities relating to reducing 
deforestation and improving livelihoods in rural areas are to be expected, these should be considered as  
additional positive impacts resulting from achieving the core PDO of developing environmental service 
markets and improving the quality of those services. 
 
The definition of particular environmental services would be defined during project preparation, given 
that such services are site-specific (i.e., depending upon geographic conditions, etc.) and therefore must 
be addressed on a case-by-case (or watershed-by-watershed) basis. 
The following indicators will measure progress towards achieving Project Development Objectives: 

The number of forestry hectares under long term contract (Areas under Protection, Priority Areas 
for Biodiversity Conservation and Aquifer Management)  through the program;  

Number of market transactions; 

Number of inhabitants of local communities or indigenous people trained with respect to 
environmental services benefits; and 

Improved access to the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) as a financial tool for sustainable 
development and environmental services. 
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project will be considered as a pilot initiative in Mexico, breaking new ground vis-a-vis 
environmental management in Mexico, developing new market mechanisms to promote sustainable forest 
management, and an opportunity for scaling up in the long-run. 
 
The World Bank will contribute to improve the design and implementation of the current innovative GoM 
program. The loan contributes to promote a long-term financial mechanism through local capacity 
building and development of market opportunities, and together with the grant will provide the necessary 
instruments to promote a multi stakeholder participatory process. It will also explore new approaches like 
integrated forest environmental services which addresses the convention뭩
1
recommendations to develop 
synergies among the different global environment objectives. 
 
The project activities will be organized under 2 components: 
Component I 
 Mexican Forestry Fund: Payment for Environmental Services. 
This component will (a) strengthen the existing watershed management  program within the Mexican 
Forestry Fund of CONAFOR to better define and focus its support to strategic mountain and forest 
ecosystems while developing surrogate local arrangements to guarantee long-term financial sustainability;  
(b) Design and promote similar market mechanisms to support conservation and sustainable use of 
biodiversity through  the Tourism Sector Fund which is supported 
inter alia
 by state and municipal taxes, 
migration taxes, airport taxes, and voluntary contributions of the tourism operators who benefit from the 
conservation of ecosystems, particularly around the most popular destinations, including the Pacific 
mountain dry forests and the Caribbean tropical forests; and (c) Design and implement pilot projects 
enhancing linkages between biodiversity, land degradation and carbon sequestration to maximize 
synergies that generate both local and global environmental benefits.
 
Component II 
Strengthening Capacity to participate in Environmental Services Markets 
This component will support (a) technical assistance targeted towards the development and promotion of 
markets for environmental services, including 
inter alia
 
development of institutions, social participation, 
regulatory framework, certification mechanisms and public awareness; (b) to increase the participatory 
process; and (c)  monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the Mexican Forestry Fund as well as project-
specific M&E and project coordination.  
 
The definition of particular services to be considered will be defined during preparation as the 
identification of externalities and market failures is location specific and therefore something to be 
addressed on a case by case basis (or watershed by watershed). 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
The project is considered as a pilot initiative in Mexico, the pilot sites will be determined during 
preparation. 
 
1
The secretariats of the UN Climate Change and the Biodiversity Conventions have been working together with the 
Forest Forum and the Water Forum to explore synergies among conventions, recognizing the integrated processes 
involved, including for an integrated approach to forest environmental services. 
Page  3
E.  Borrower뭩 Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]
 
CONAFOR has created a Unit to manage the Environmental Services program, which is presently 
managing project preparation resources.  Likewise, CONAFOR has experience implementing IBRD-
financed operations (PROCYMAF I, PROCYMAF II), and as such has developed managerial capacity to 
comply with the basic WB requirements, including the environmental and social safeguards and 
participation policy. 
 
Nacional Financiera (NAFIN) will be the financial agent for this project under the same standard 
agreements that operate for numerous IBRD and GEF-financed operations in Mexico.  
 
The project is likely to generate positive environmental impacts, in this sense the project is considered an 
innovative Category B project where not all outcomes are clear and therefore relevant Bank safeguards 
should be addressed during project preparation, including screening criteria and designing a strong M&E 
component to ensure compliance with those standards. A public consultation and a separate 
Environmental Assessment will be prepared and disclosed during project preparation.  With respect to 
social issues, a Social Assessment is programmed with the goal of clearly define the roles and 
responsibilities of various actors (e.g., government, private sector, communities), and an Indigenous 
Peoples Development Plan should be incorporated as
 
required.  This would be done in coordination with 
other Bank- and/or GEF-financed projects, including PROCYMAF and COINBIO.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Yes] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[Yes ] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[TBd ] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[No ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[Yes ] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[Yes ] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
No] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[No ] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
No] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[No ] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
This project will require an EA that should: (i) describe the types of areas in which the project will occur 
(emphasizing the location of Critical Natural Habitats and other natural habitats, as defined by OP 4.04); 
(ii) describe they types of activities and technical assistance that may be supported by the project; (iii) 
evaluate the potential impacts (direct, indirect, and cumulative) of the project activities, including 
identifying which safeguards policies are triggered; and (iv) develop an environmental management plan 
(EMP), including screening criteria, environmental management procedures (to ensure all triggered 
safeguard policies are adequately complied with), responsibilities, budget and timeline (linked to other 
project activities) to ensure that project activities do not unintentionally cause environmental harm. 
 
The EA should evaluate whether the project could trigger the Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09), either 
by financing the procurement of pesticides or pesticide application equipment, or through support to 
projects that may lead to increased pesticide use, or expand present pest management practices that are 
not sustainable, not based on an IPM approach, and/or pose significant health or environmental risks. 
 
Finally, a stand alone EA report should be disclosure to InfoShop and in-country prior to appraisal. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
4thQ FY 2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
2
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
May 2005 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ricardo Hernandez 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Juan David Quintero 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
John Redwood 
Date 
Comments 
2
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
