Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/24/2005 
Report No.:  AC1506
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Moldova 
Project ID:  P095049 
Project Name:  CADASTRE SPPLMNT 
Task Team Leader:  Maha J. Armaly 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: June 16, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSIE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (75%);Sub-national government 
administration (25%) 
Theme:  Land administration and management (P);Other financial and private sector 
development (P);Personal and property rights (P);Other urban development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
1.50 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.25
0.25 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed additional financing is to support the objectives of the First Cadastre 
Project.  The supplemental financing would strengthen the national unified real estate 
registration program for urban and rural land, and expand the existing system of 
ownership rights.   The additional financing would allow more real estate plots to be 
registered in the legal cadastre, thus giving new owners security of tenure and 
possibilities to obtain credit or undertake transactions involving their properties.   
 
3. Project Description 
The activities to be supported by the additional financing are an expansion of ongoing 
activities under the First Cadastre Project, and include:  (i) additional surveying; (ii) 
additional registration; and (iii) upgrade of the existing information system.  These 
components are the main elements of the First Cadastre Project and are the necessary 
steps to register properties and strengthen the cadastre system through improved 
technology.   
 
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project is located in rural areas of Moldova.  It is expected that the survey and 
registration would cover small plots of gardens used by households and small dachas. 
The additional financing will not fund any civil works and land acquisition issues will not 
be triggered.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
This is additional/supplemental financing (about $1.5 million) of the Moldova First 
Cadastre Project.  The financing would cover additional surveying, registration, and 
information technology upgrade.  The original project had an Environmental Rating of C, 
with no environmental or other safeguard issues.  This will apply to the additional 
financing.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the long term, the project is expected to have a positive effect on the environment by 
providing reliable and current land information, which can assist in the preparation and 
enforcement of environmental protection programs, and better manage natural resources.  
Private land ownership is expected to foster prudent use of land and natural resources.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
None   
 
Page  3
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Considerable public information to inform the public about their rights and 
responsibilities and benefits of real estate registration have been incorporated in the First 
Cadastre Project and have been continuing through out implementation.  In the farm 
areas, USAID has taken the lead in surveying and registration activities and has an 
extensive public information, including legal and technical assistance as well as training, 
directly to farmers to facilitate transactions in equitable ways   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Maha J. Armaly 
04/18/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Social Development Specialist 
 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/19/2005 
Comments:  For Category C Projects, additional environmental specialist not required 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Sumter Lee Travers 
04/22/2005 
Comments:   
