Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC459 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 1, 2003 
 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Moldova 
Project ID: P074139 
Project Name: ENVIRONMENTAL 
INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECT 
Task Team Leader: Seema Manghee 
GEF Focal Area: I-International Waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 30, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: November 20, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Sewerage (70%);General water, sanitation 
and flood protection sector (30%) 
Theme: Pollution management and environmental 
health (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Philip Moeller (Social); Alexander Danilenko 
(Environment) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
Other financing amounts by source:  
($1.5m) 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
5.0 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to reduce the discharge of nutrients from municipal and 
rural sources into the Nistru and the Black Sea.  The project would finance development of the nutrient-
reduction program, low-cost investment in reducing nutrient discharges from municipal sources, project 
management, monitoring and evaluation and replication activities.  The project would also assist Moldova 
in beginning to develop a Transnational Nistru River Basin Management System. 
 
The proposed project would recommend inexpensive investments in sanitation and wastewater 
rehabilitation schemes.  The objective is to proceed with investments that have low operating costs, 
limited energy consumption and relatively good nutrient-removal rates.  Low-cost investments are critical 
because power shortages and interruptions are common in the region and the financial status of the water 
utilities is extremely poor.  A phased strategic staffing plan and training program to address project 
implementation would also be prepared.  The aim is to replicate the project at other priority sites in 
Moldova, Ukraine, Russia and other countries of the region. 
 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The proposed project would be grounded on key reforms for the municipal wastewater sector, as 
identified by the Government and the World Bank and consist of: 
 
Component 1. 
Development of a Water Quality Management Plan for the Moldovan Part of the Nistru 
River Basin. 
 
This component would finance: 
 
Page  2
 
 
\01\02
Identification, loading and impact on water quality of the major sources of pollution, i.e., industrial 
discharges, municipal discharges, agricultural run-off, urban storm water, mine discharges, etc. 
\01\02
Evaluation of existing effluent discharge legislation and regulations for both municipalities and 
industries and recommendations for changes, if required; 
\01\02
Preparation of a phased plan with costs for the reduction of water pollution in the Basin, with 
emphasis on low-cost, appropriate technologies; 
\01\02
Identification, indexing and description of all major point discharges; 
\01\02
Plan for the establishment of a bi-National working group responsible for implementing the plan and 
regulating activities that impact on water quality, including an organization, staffing, draft bylaws and 
draft legal statute; 
\01\02
Development of specifications for a water quality data management system; and 
\01\02
Design of a public awareness program for the clean up of the Nistru River, including disseminating 
information on private polluters as a means of pressuring compliance with effluent discharge 
regulations. 
 
Component 2
. Implementation of the First Phase of the Water Quality Management Plan.  This 
component would finance:  
 
\01\02
Nistru River Basin Working Group, including staffing and the financing of operating costs for 12 
months; 
\01\02
Training of key staff members of the Working Group, including technical training for laboratory and 
water quality sampling staff; 
\01\02
Key water quality sampling stations and stream flow gauging stations;  
\01\02
Data management system; and 
\01\02
Water quality monitoring program, including the financing of operational costs for 12 months. 
 
Component 3.  
Low-cost Wastewater Treatment in Medium-size and Small Cities and Rural 
Communities.
  
This component would finance: 
 
\01\02
Several low-cost, sustainable wastewater treatment systems for urban and rural populations to pilot 
low-cost, sustainable technologies in priority interventions recommended by the water quality 
management plan;  
\01\02
Training of the operating staff; 
\01\02
Operation and maintenance for 12 months following completion of construction and dissemination of 
results among the municipalities currently contributing to the pollution of the Nistru River; and   
\01\02
Acquisition of technologies most likely to be piloted, which would be constructed in wetlands, land 
treatment or lagoons. 
 
Component 4. 
Project Management, Monitoring, Evaluation and Dissemination
.
  This component would 
finance:  
 
\01\02
Management and implementation of the project; 
\01\02
Guidance and training to utilities and local entities on project preparation; and 
Communication strategy to include capacity building, a media campaign and community and civil-society 
outreach. 
 
Risk Mitigation 
Strategy 
Moldova and Ukraine unable to reach cooperation 
on list of polluters and monitoring mechanisms. 
Bank has continued to reinforce with both parties 
that cooperation is essential to attain project results 
and is a criterion for receiving funds. 
Page  3
 
 
Risk Mitigation 
Strategy 
Limited financial resources and counterpart funds. 
 
Mix GEF grant with potential grants and 
counterpart funds. 
The nutrient reduction process will be too 
expensive to operate. 
The most cost-effective option would be selected 
for the nutrient removal process.  The campaign to 
increase willingness-to-pay for the improved 
wastewater treatment to cover increased costs 
would be conducted during the project preparation 
and project implementation stages, and also after 
project completion. 
Public's potential unwillingness to pay for services. 
Improved  tariff-setting  methodology  and  social 
protection measures for needy households would be 
developed during the pilot project and early 
implementation of the public awareness program to 
ensure public and stakeholder involvement in the 
project. 
Capacity to implement Bank-financed projects is 
limited. 
The proposed project would use the same PIU 
currently implementing the Pilot Water Supply and 
Sanitation Project who have been provided with 
significant training and support during the 
preparation of the Water project. 
The rehabilitation costs will be higher than 
expected. 
Rehabilitation cost risks are being discussed and 
analyzed during the project preparation stage. 
 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Specific areas are to be identified by March 2004 for the first-year investment program.  An 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared for the first-year investment program.  
Environmental/Social Management Process Frameworks (ESMPFs) will be prepared to describe the 
procedures and implementation arrangements for ensuring full consideration of environmental and social 
concerns of the rest of the investment program (years 2 and 3) in accordance with Bank 
environmental/social safeguards and Moldova and Ukraine regulations. 
 
The determination of the first-year investment program as well as subsequent investments should clarify 
such possible impact as involuntary resettlement, land acquisition, and natural habitats.  If such issues are 
triggered by the first set of investments, this would be addressed in the EMP and appropriate surveys and 
consultations carried out.  The ESMPFs would indicate how such issues would be addressed for the 
remaining investment package.  
 
 
Page  4
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The same PIU currently implementing the Pilot Water Supply and Sanitation Project would be used for 
implementation and has been provided with significant training and support during the preparation of the 
Water project. 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
 
[X] Environmental 
Assessment
 (OP
/BP
 4.01) 
 
Environmental classification
.  At the meeting, a PCN-stage environmental assessment  
category "B" was assigned to the project.  Investments for the first year of project 
implementation will be identified prior to appraisal.  Other investments will be identified 
during first year of project implementation.   
Environmental management plans (EMPs) must be prepared for the first-year investment 
program. 
Environmental/Social Management Process Frameworks (ESMPFs) must be prepared to 
describe the procedures and implementation arrangements for ensuring full consideration 
of environmental and social concerns of the rest of the investment program in accordance 
with Bank environmental/social safeguards and Moldova and Ukraine regulations. 
Both the EMP and ESMPF will form an integral part of the Project Implementation Plans 
or Operational Manuals. The EMP should have the minutes of public consultation done 
with the stakeholders and local NGOs.  All safeguards related documents (e.g., EMP, RAP 
or Policy Framework, Environmental/Social Management Process Frameworks) should be 
disclosed before project appraisal mission in country in local language and in Infoshop.   
[X] Natural 
Habitats 
(OP
/BP
 4.04) TBD 
 
TBD by Appraisal for first-year investments.  The ESMPF would cover policy for 
investments for subsequent years. 
Safeguards
.  The meeting agreed that apart from the Environmental Assessment and 
Projects on International Waters OPs, the projects may also trigger Involuntary 
Resettlement and/or Natural Habitats.  Therefore, the ISDS shall indicate TBD as for the 
applicability of OP4.04 and OP4.12. 
Natural habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
.  If constructed wetlands or lagoons for wastewater 
treatment are actually included in the project, then attention should be given to the 
identification of natural habitats (especially critical habitats) that might be encountered 
and measures must be identified to avoid/mitigate negative impacts. 
[ ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP
/BP
 4.12) TBD 
 
No physical relocation is expected but land acquisition and land use could be impacted.  
This would be determined by Appraisal for first-year investments.  The ESMPF would 
cover policy for investments for subsequent years.  The ESMPF would be a condition of 
appraisal and would be embedded in the project Operations Manual. 
Potential land acquisition (OP/BP 4.12).
 If the project makes use of wetlands or lagoons 
owned by municipalities, (but perhaps currently encumbered by legal or illegal users) land 
acquisition through eminent domain could be involved, triggering OP 4.12.  If project sites 
are to be determined during preparation, this issue should be addressed as part of a social 
assessment, and/or a Land Acquisition Assessment or a Resettlement Action Plan, which 
Page  5
 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
 
would then be a condition of appraisal.  For subsequent land acquisitions, a Policy 
Framework will be in place by appraisal.  The Policy Framework must include a screening 
mechanism for land acquisition.  In addition, the Policy Framework basically spells out 
the steps that must be taken to ensure compliance with the OP if there is land acquisition.  
This would include a description of standard procedures in Moldova/Ukraine when private 
land is expropriated for public use, and an assessment of the extent to which these 
procedures meet the requirements of the OP (particularly compensation at full 
replacement value--in all cases--and income restoration--if the loss is more than 10% of 
the holdings of the affected party).  If local procedures do not meet these criteria, the 
Policy Framework should outline what additional steps will be taken to ensure 
compliance.   
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (OP
/BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (OP
/BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP
/BP
/GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[X] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP
/BP
/GP
 
7.50) 
 
Exemption to be requested from LEGAL. 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that EA 
category (mandatory): 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would 
be prepared.  March 2004. 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS.  
March 2004. 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The 
specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  6
 
 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Seema Manghee 
2/12/2004 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald N. Hoffer 
2/19/2004 
As regional Safeguards Coordinator I clear this ISDS.
 
Sector Manager: 
Sumter Lee Travers 
2/20/2004 
Comments 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P:\MOLDOVA\INFRA\ENV-PROTECT-GEF\1LENP\Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet-Concept Stage.doc
                                                                                                                               
                                                           
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
