Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1102 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  November 5, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country:
 
Moldova 
Project ID:
 
P090037 
Project Name:
 
SUSTAINABLE PERSISTENT 
ORGANIC POLLUTANTS (POPs) 
STOCKPILES MANAGEMENT 
Task Team Leader:
 
Rita Klees 
GEF Focal Area:
 
Persistent Organic Pollutants 
(POPs) 
Global Supplemental ID:   
Estimated Appraisal Date:
 
October 4, 2005 
Estimated Board Date:
 
December 8, 2005 
Managing Unit:
 
ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  
Specific Investment Loan 
Sector:
 
Health (50%); Solid waste management 
(50%) 
Theme:
 
Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Environmental policies 
and institutions (S);Other environment and 
natural resources management (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
 
Rita Klees 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
8.7
Other financing amounts by source:   
($m) 
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
1.4 
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY 
4.5 
BILATERAL AGENCIES (UNIDENTIFIED) 
2.8 
B.  Project Objectives 
 
The 
main development objective
 of the project would be sustainable Persistent Organic 
Pollutants (POPs) stockpiles management and disposal for their future final destruction and for 
prevention of future POPs pollution.  The 
global project objective
 is to prevent POPs pollution of 
the environment and to protect public health by the environmentally safe disposal and 
management of POPs, and by creating national capacities for implementation of the Stockholm 
Convention on POPs requirements.   
 
POPs are chemical substances that persist in the environment, bioaccumulate through the food 
web, and pose a risk of causing adverse effects to human health and the environment.  The 
Stockholm Convention is the United Nations treaty negotiated to eliminate persistent organic 
pollutants (POPs) worldwide.  Under the Convention, countries commit to reduce and/or 
eliminate the production, use, and/or release of the 12 POPs of greatest concern to the global 
community (including 9 pesticides, polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and unintended by 
Page  2
products such as dioxins.  Moldova has signed and ratified the Stockholm Convention.  The 
POPs of relevance to Moldova in terms of the Stockholm Convention have been found to be 
obsolete pesticides and PCBs.  Moldova does not produce or use any of the POPs pesticides 
covered by the Stockholm convention and the use of any of them is not permitted.  Moldova does 
not produce PCBs but there are no restrictions on their import or use.   
 
In terms of obsolete pesticides, one residual effect of the past extensive use of pesticides in 
Moldova is an extremely high amount of stockpiled obsolete pesticides (defined as pesticides 
that are not in current use because they have been banned, have deteriorated, have expired, or are 
not wanted by the current owner).  Of the 1,700 tons stockpiled in warehouses, 780 tons contain 
POPs.  The composition of the remaining 920 tons in warehouses is unknown, as is that of 50% 
of the material in the landfill, but can be expected to include POPs. 
 
Regarding PCBs, these are a group of synthetic organic chemicals with varying harmful toxic 
effects to humans and the environment.  PCBs in Moldova are primarily used in the energy 
sector for use as dielectric fluids in power installations, especially transformers and capacitors.  
An initial inventory has identified more than 26,300 transformers, 17,000 capacitors, other 
electro-energetic equipment with the total amount of dielectric oils of 23,920 tons that might 
contain PCBs.  At least 230 tons of PCB contaminated oil in capacitors has already been 
identified.  The transformer oils are potentially contaminated, but a further detailed inventory 
will be conducted during project preparation to verify this.  All the equipment is about 30 years 
old and at the end of its life span.  Since PCBs can be readily released into the environment via 
equipment failures, leakages, and vandalism, the stockpiles of equipment pose a significant risk 
to health and the environment. 
 
C. 
Project Description  
 
Moldova signed the Stockholm Convention in 2001 and quickly thereafter requested, and 
received, financial assistance from the GEF, through the World Bank, in the form of a 
US$410,000 GEF POPs Enabling Activity (EA)) Grant.  The grant was implemented from 2002-
2004 by the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources (MENR) and financed preparation of a 
POPs inventory (intended to be a first cut only) and a National Implementation Plan (NIP) which 
quantify the magnitude of the problem and present a planning framework to identify priority 
actions, respectively.  Significant findings which guided development of  this project are: 
·
Moldova has an unusually high level of pesticide contamination because of the intensive 
use of pesticides in the past [1.8 metric tonnes/1000 km
2
(FAO 2,000)], which either 
remain in the environment, or are slowly being released into it largely due to improper 
storage.   
·
Moldova has an extremely high amount of stockpiled obsolete pesticides 
–
amongst the 
highest of any country in the world.  Of the 1,700 tons of stockpiled obsolete pesticides in 
warehouses/facilities (and over 4,000 tons in a landfill), 780 tons are known to contain 
POPs.  The composition of the remaining stockpiled 920 tons is unknown, as is that of 
50% of the material in the landfill, but all the material can be expected to include POPs. 
·
Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in Moldova are primarily used in the energy sector as 
dielectric fluids in power installations, especially transformers and capacitors.  There are 
currently no disposal requirements for equipment contaminated with PCBs and tons of 
Page  3
such material is stockpiled throughout the country.  The POPs inventory identified 
approximately 26,300 transformers, 17,000 capacitors, other electro-energetic equipment 
with a total amount of dielectric oils of 23,920 tons that might contain PCBs.  Much of 
this equipment is no longer in use, e.g. only 1,000 of the capacitors are used with the 
remainder primarily at one location (Vulcanesti) but unsafely stockpiled there.  Since 
PCBs can be readily released into the environment via equipment failures, leakages, and 
vandalism, stockpiles of this equipment pose a significant risk to health and the 
environment. 
·
The release of POPs by-products is insignificant due to a huge decline in the industrial 
and other activities that might generate these products, e.g. dioxins. 
 
The project is designed to address the immediate needs to improve the storage of POPs and to 
clean up existing contamination while putting in place the preconditions for ultimate disposal.  
By centralizing and ensuring the safety of storage, through improved storage methods and 
facilities, the project will reduce the threats posed by the over 300 obsolete pesticide stockpile 
locations, and 20 power stations with unused PCB containing equipment, scattered throughout 
the country.  The project supports feasibility studies and cost analysis of final disposal options 
while recognizing that the final disposal could be far in the future.  It also addresses the weak 
institutional capacity to manage POPs and the lack of public awareness of POPs issues.  The 
total project financing would be US$5.9 million, of which the GEF contribution is proposed to 
be US$4.5 million and the GoM contribution of US$1.4 million.  (It is expected that an 
additional US$2.8 million of donor financing will be forthcoming based on discussions during 
project identification with other donors).  The detailed project activities will be defined during 
project preparation and project costs estimates may change on the basis of results from project 
preparation activities.  Tentatively, the following components and activities are envisioned:   
 
Component I
.
Environmentally safe repackaging and storage of POPs stockpiles
 
(US$4.1 
M
-
GEF US$3.2 M; GoM US$0.9) Within this component the following activities would be 
supported: 
 
POP obsolete pesticides subcomponent  
This subcomponent would support:  (i) supplying UN 
approved packaging materials suitable for long term storage of POP obsolete pesticides; (ii) 
repackaging, transporting and storing of obsolete pesticides in designated well-designed, secure 
and controlled facilities) (no new construction 
–
rehabilitation of existing facilities will be 
financed based on project preparation results) (iii) monitoring for POPs pollution at the 
pesticides landfill, and mitigation measures as needed; and (iv) promoting integrated pest 
management and strengthened pesticides control.  
 
PCBs subcomponent  
This subcomponent would support:  (i) a detailed feasibility study on the 
existing 20 power substation sites where the PCB contaminated equipment is used, or stockpiled, 
describing the state of the environment, quantification of PCBs (as possible), site remediation 
measures, and disposal options for PCB contaminated equipment and oil; (ii) provision of 
lockable containers for leaking capacitor drums at selected substations, as needed; and (iii) safe 
storage of PCBs in a site to be provided by, and at, the Vulcanesti station.  The safety of the site 
and requirements for site rehabilitation will be determined during preparation. 
Page  4
Pilot project to demonstrate remediation of PCB contaminated storage sites:  
This sub-
component would support development and implementation of a remediation plan for a selected 
site of PCB contamination.   
 
Component II.  POPs Stockpiles Management
 
(US$1.0 M;  GEF US$0.7 M; GoM US$0.3 M).  
Within this component the following activities would be supported: 
 
Strengthening POPs Institutional capacity.  
The project would support:  (i) developing an 
integrated POPs management approach, including creation within the MENR of a Center on 
Chemical Safety; (ii) strengthening the capacities of MENR, and the Moldovan Department of 
Customs, and Ministries of Energy, Agriculture and Industry related to the import/export of 
POPs, monitoring, transportation, and identification; and (iii) designing innovative regulatory 
and financial mechanisms for sustainable POPs management.  
 
Inventory, monitoring and enforcement activities.  
This subcomponent would support:  (i) 
improving environmental monitoring by upgrading the analytical laboratory capacities for 
conducting POPs analyses and identification; (ii) strengthening of the enforcement capacity to 
ensure compliance with regulatory controls; and (iii) improving inter-agency information sharing 
and information management systems . 
 
Training and capacity building for POPs handling.  
This sub-component would support:  (i) 
training of staff in the use of personal protective equipment and appropriate environmental 
safeguards for handling of obsolete POPs stocks; (ii) training in standard inventory techniques, 
storage of inventory data in special database, and standard risk assessment and prioritizing 
techniques for storage sites; and (iii) purchase of basic inventory equipment (digital and photo 
cameras, computer, data base, GPS, etc.) and staff training in its use. 
 
Component III.  POPs public awareness and education
.
(US$0.55 M; GEF US$0.40 M; 
GoM US$0.15 M).  This component is based on the Communication Strategy prepared by the 
GEF POPs Enabling Activities Grant and would support training, public awareness and a 
participation program on POPs. 
 
Component IV.  Project management.  
(US$0.25 M; GEF US$0.2 M; GoM US$0.05M).  This 
component would provide incremental financing for implementation of the project, incremental 
operating cost of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), audit services, and monitoring and 
evaluation.  The PIU established within the MENR for implementation of the GEF POP EA 
Grant will take on responsibility for implementation of the project. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
Preparation of the NIP included a national inventory of POPs which is being used to design the 
project.  The inventory identified the location, quantity, and in some cases, the composition of 
obsolete pesticides throughout the country.  These were found in approximately 344 locations 
scattered throughout the country, including one land fill (located near Cismichioi) devoted 
Page  5
exclusively for obsolete pesticides, primarily in rural areas.  In 1997, the Government decreed 
that the storage of obsolete pesticides be centralized within each agricultural administrative 
district to one existing site but due to lack of resources this has not occurred.  The project will 
finance the transport to, and storage of material in these designated sites.  During project 
preparation they will be assessed to determine what, if any, improvements should be made to 
ensure the safe storage of obsolete pesticides.  It will also be determined during preparation, 
whether additional centralization, to fewer sites, would be advisable.  To date, monitoring of the 
land fill, which is in an isolated area and has been closed since 1987, has not found any 
contamination of soil or water in the vicinity.  The project will finance continued monitoring of 
the site and improvement to the landfill, as needed, to prevent pollution.   
 
The PCBs to be addressed in the project are primarily those in capacitors.  Most of the 
transformers are still in use.  Background analysis conducted for the NIP identified PCBs in 
capacitors as a priority problem.  Out of about 17,000 capacitors in the country, only 1,000 are in 
use.  The project will focus on the safe storage of PCBs in 16,000 unused capacitors.  About 90% 
of these are located in one large power substation in Vulcanesti.  A total amount of 230 tons of 
trichlorobyphenil and 670 tones of PCB contaminated equipment is stored there.  As part of 
preparation, a detailed feasibility study will be conducted on the existing 20 power substation 
sites where the PCB contaminated equipment is used, or stockpiled, describing the state of the 
environment, quantification of PCBs (as possible), site remediation measures, and disposal 
options for PCBs.  It is planned to store all the PCBs in one facility at Vulanesti which would 
entail new construction but this will be reviewed during project preparation.  The project will be 
coordinated with the WB Energy II project which is contributing US$300,000 to support the 
identification and safe storage of PCBs.   
 
All the sites for obsolete pesticides and PCBs, the composition and quantity of material is 
available on a map, produced by the POPs EA grant, which has been widely distributed and 
discussed, as part of NIP preparation, with communities throughout the country. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
The POPs EA Project included an assessment of the legal framework for POPs.  Over 25 legal 
and regulatory acts deal with the full life-cycle of managing toxic and hazardous substances and 
wastes, including POPs regulated by the Stockholm Convention.  The most important legislation 
is Environmental Protection (1993), and Sanitary-Epidemiological Well-being of Population 
Laws (1993); Ecological Expertise and Environmental Impact Assessment Law (1996); 
Production and Consumption Waste (1997), Regime of Hazardous Products and Substances 
(1997), and Protection of Atmospheric Air (1997) Laws.  These Laws are supported by the GoM 
implementation resolutions.  
 
Despite the large number of laws in this sector, a number of deficiencies were found.  The
 
existing legal and normative acts do not specifically mention the 12 POPs regulated by the 
Stockholm Convention nor do they clearly define public and private sector management 
responsibilities for these POPs life-cycles.  These will thus require amending and clarifying 
existing legal provisions as well as ensuring that certain stipulations of the Stockholm 
Page  6
Convention are transposed into the body of national legislation and norms.  The NIP presents this 
as a priority action and will engage in this activity, supported by the project. 
 
The existing PIU within the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources which implemented the 
GEF POPs Enabling Activity Grant will be used for project implementation.  The project will 
support building this PIU into a Moldova Center on Chemical Safety which will be responsible 
for overall chemical management.  The project will finance training and capacity building of this 
Center, including safeguards training.  The project will also finance upgrading of the analytical 
laboratory capacities for conducting POPs analyses and identification; strengthening of the 
enforcement capacity to ensure compliance with regulatory controls; and improving inter-agency 
information sharing and information management systems . 
 
Page  7
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
The main potential negative environmental impacts of the project relate to the 
public health and environmental risks associated with handling and transport of 
toxic materials as well as with storage of the materials; and impacts of  
rehabilitating and building new storage facilities.  Because GEF does not finance 
ultimate disposal of POPs, the project is designed to meet the pre-conditions for 
ultimate destruction, e.g. packaging of obsolete POPs in UN approved packaging 
is required to export the material for incineration elsewhere.  The project also 
provides for safe storage in the interim, and supports feasibility studies and cost 
analysis of final disposal options.  It is recognized that final disposal options may 
not be forthcoming in the foreseeable future, but by centralizing and ensuring the 
safety of storage,  through improved storage methods and facilities, the project will 
reduce the threats posed by the over 300 obsolete pesticide stockpile locations, and 
20 power stations with unused PCB containing equipment, scattered throughout 
the country.  The project will finance clean up of the storage sites closed under the 
project, and the existing facilities to which the materials will be transported. 
 
One environmental impact associated with sorting and storage of these chemicals 
is self-ignition.  This is an existing risk given the prevailing conditions of storage 
but the project will reduce such a risk by virtue of the integrity of the containers to 
be used for pesticides and PCBs.  The project also finances improved security 
devices and guarding of the materials to prevent vandalism. 
 
An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management 
Plan (EMP) will be developed for the:  (i) cleanup of each identified pesticides 
storage sites including rehabilitation of the storage facilities; (ii) clean up, storage, 
and facility construction for PCBs (Vulcanesti power substation); and (iii) 
remediation of a selected site 
–
yet to be determined.  Sites for obsolete pesticide 
storage were determined during the POPs EA grant activities based upon 
Moldovan standards and EIAs.  The EIA will review these decisions. 
 
The MENR and the Ministry of Health are responsible for supervision of the safe 
handling of obsolete pesticides during repackaging.  There are technical standards 
to follow.  The actual repackaging and transport is conducted by special units of 
the Ministry of Defense and the Department of Civil Protection, which have some 
training in handling of the materials and are equipped with special protective gear.   
The materials are transported in specialized military vehicles.  During project 
preparation the adequacy of these standards, equipment and procedures will be 
reviewed with project activities designed to address deficiencies as needed.  The 
project will finance training to train staff in the use of personal protective 
Page  8
equipment and appropriate environmental safeguards for handling of obsolete 
POPs stocks. 
 
[
TBD] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04)  
The EIA will examine the existing sites 
proposed for storage none of which is reported to impact upon natural habitats but 
this needs to be confirmed.
 
[
N] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
Moldvoa has never produced pesticides o
r
PCBs.  
All are imported.  None of the POPs pesticides is presently permitted for use in 
agriculture, forestry or households.  The project does not finance purchase or 
production of pesticides but rather is financing disposal of the existing stockpiles.  
The project will finance training in integrated pest management and strengthened 
pesticide control.  
The project is coordinating with the WB Moldova Rural Investment 
and Services Project (RISP) II IDA credit which supports integrated pest management and 
the strengthening of pesticides control
 
The project is working closely with the WB 
Rural Investment Project which is financing improved pest management practices.
 
[
N] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12)  
Storage facilities to be used are already 
existing.  No new construction that might entail land acquisition or resettlement is 
included in the project. 
 
[
N] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[TBD] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36).  
The EIA will examine the existing sites proposed for 
storage none of which is reported to impact upon forests but this needs to be 
confirmed.
 
[N ] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
N] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[N ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
N] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  9
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
April 2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.  September 
30, 2005 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Rita Klees 
Date 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ron Hoffer 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Benoit Blarel 
Date 
Comments 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal:  (i) at the 
InfoShop; and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially 
affected persons.
 
Page  10
