Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  08/19/2005 
Report No.:  AC1502
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P088992 
Project Name:  Private Sector Development Credit II 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaofeng Hua 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 19, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASFP 
Lending Instrument:  Financial 
Intermediary Loan 
Sector:  Micro- and SME finance (50%);General finance sector (30%);Banking 
(18%);Central government administration (2%) 
Theme:  Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(S);Other financial and private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.57 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.15
5.15 
Environmental Category: F - Financial Intermediary Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The Project is to continue to support the Mongolian government and commercial banks? 
efforts to develop the intermediate-term lending market for Mongolia?s private sector.  
This development objective will be achieved through (i) increased longer-term funding 
for viable capital investment projects, (ii) strengthened institutional capacity in identified 
high priority areas of Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs), and (iii) improved 
enforcement of prudential regulation and supervision by the BOM.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Project has three components. Component 1, Line of Credit, is to support the growth 
of Mongolia?s private sector by providing longer-term financing sources for their capital 
investment needs without distorting the local market. There will be no sector or market 
limits.  The main beneficiaries of the LOC are expected to be Mongolia?s SMEs, given 
the agreed limits on sub-loan size and single borrower exposure. Component 2 is to 
support PFI and BOM institutional capacity development through consultant services, 
system upgrading and staff training. Component 3, Project Implementation Support is to 
support the government?s efforts to better manage, monitor and evaluate project 
implementation.   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Mongolia (mainly the metropolitan area of the nation's capital). Mongolia is a scarcely 
populated country (population density is 1. 58). Main industries include traditional 
grazing and associated preliminary processing, mining and wool/mohair based textiles. 
After the country embarked on developing market economy in early 1990s, services 
sector started to grow and now accounts for 57% of GDP.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal (EASEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Project is rated FI for environmental assessment. No potential significant/irreversible 
impacts are foreseen based on the available information.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
In the longer-run, the Project would assist Mongolia's commercial banks and SMEs to 
improve their knowledge of safeguards policies and capacity of meeting the country's 
EIA requirements (see below for details).   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Mongolia adpoted a new package of environmental legislation which came into effect in 
1995-98. Under the country's EIA Procedures, a project proponent is responsible for 
Page  3
preparing a project description and other materials and submitting them to initiate an 
EIA. MNE and local government units are responsible for screening project proposals, 
reviewing EIA reports, deciding on project implementation, and issuing the appropriate 
environmental permits. Monitoring for compliance with the terms and conditions of EIA 
permits is the responsibility of local government agencies. To sum up, the Borrower has 
established a basic framework for EIA, and the system is operational. Main weaknesses 
identified by a detailed review of the EIA reports under the completed first PSDC project 
include lack of knowledge of EIA procedures on the part of the PFIs and sub-borrowers, 
and less than desired involvement of local environmental protection agencies for 
approval and monitoring. To address the issues, all the PFIs are to adopt an 
environemental manual and screening checklist before project launch. In addition, the 
government has adopted a negative list to ensure that the Project would not violate the 
general safeguards policies. Sub-loans shall not finance the acquisition of, or rights to use 
land, military equipment or activities, consumer loans, and refinancing of existing loans 
or takeover loans. For Sub-projects giving rise to the displacement of persons (whether 
physical or economical), a resettlement action plan, satisfactory to the Bank, is required, 
to improve or at least restore the livelihood and standards of living of the displaced 
persons.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the Mongolian government, the participating financial 
intermediaries and the potential sub-borrowers. Dialogues between the government and 
the Bank regarding improvement of the legal and regulatory framework for EIAs are 
carried out mainly by Bank staff covering safeguards issues of Mongolia. On the project 
level, it is the PFIs' responsibility to train credit officers on the environmental manual and 
checklist, who in turn are expected to provide to potential sub-borrowers. PFIs 
advertisement on the Project will include information on EIA requirements and the 
negative list.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
No 
Page  4
Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Xiaofeng Hua 
06/28/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Teck Ghee Lim 
06/30/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Bekir A. Onursal 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Khalid A. Mirza 
 
Comments:   
