                         Integrated Safeguard Data Sheet (Initial)
                 Mongolia: Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC 1)


Section I ­ Basic Information

Date ISDS prepared/updated:             March 10, 2004

A.      Basic Project Data

I.A.1. Project Statistics

Country: Mongolia                                        Project ID: P078386
Project: Poverty Reduction Support Credit 1              Task Team Leader: Vera Songwe
Authorized to Appraise Date: March 31 04                 IBRD Amount ($m): NA
Bank Approval: June 29 04                                IDA Amount ($m): N/A
Managing Unit: EASPR                                     Sector: Poverty Reduction Strategy.
Lending Instrument: Adjustment Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives:

1. This initiating memorandum outlines the first in a series of three single tranche Poverty
Reduction Support Credits (PRSC) for Mongolia. The PRSCs will support the implementation of
the Government of Mongolia's medium term poverty reduction and institutional reform agenda as
articulated in its Economic Growth Support and Poverty Reduction Strategy (EGSPRS), which
was discussed and endorsed by the Boards of the Bank and the Fund in September 2003. The
purpose of this Initiating Concept Memorandum (ICM) is to seek approval of the Bank
management to proceed with pre-appraisal of the first PRSC.

2. Since Mongolia initiated its transition to a market based system in 1990, it has realized
important progress in achieving macroeconomic stability and initiating fundamental structural
reforms. Mongolia's EGSPRS aims to deepen and accelerate the accelerate the reform process to
put the economy on a path toward rapid and sustainable growth, to create employment, to reduce
poverty, and to improve the economic well being of the population. The EGSPRS is based on
five pillars (see Graph 1): (i) ensuring macroeconomic stability and enhancing public sector
effectiveness; (ii) establishing a sound institutional and regulatory environment to complete
transition to a market economy and enable the private sector to become an engine of growth; (iii)
enhancing balanced and environmentally sustained development; (iv) sustainable human
development; and a cross-cutting pillar of promoting good governance and gender equality. The
EGSPRS also pays attention to monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the EGSPRS.

I.A.3 Project Description:
PRSC-1 is the first project to be designed and implemented under Mongolia's "Economic
Growth Support and Poverty Reduction Strategy" (EGSPRS). EGSPRS is based on 5
main pillars that cover sectoral reforms and cross cutting issues.
1. Ensuring macroeconomic stability and enhancing public sector effectiveness;

                                                                  ISDS: Mongolia ­ PRSC 1
                                                                                   Page 2 of 8

2. Establishing a sound institutional and regulatory environment to complete the
    transition to a market economy and enable the private sector to become an engine of
    growth;
3. Enhancing balanced and environmentally sustained development;
4. Supporting sustainable human development, and
5. Promoting good governance and gender equality.

The main focus of PRSC-1 (2003 - 2006) will be to support the first agenda of the five
pillars of EGSPRS, namely the reform of the government's public sector and institutions.
The reform agenda includes:
a) developing sound budget management practices needed to ensure fiscal discipline,
    align policies and funding to improve efficiency and equity of public spending;
b) reforming the civil service, and;
c) enhancing performance management and accountability for results.

PRSC-1 will be complemented by an Economic Capacity Building Technical Assistance
Program, which will support the public expenditure management and civil service reform
agenda, and a Governance TA program supported by ADB.

B. Check Environmental Classification: C

The TTL was asked to describe what sort of interventions in PRSC-1 would there be and
how they might impact the environment and what are the mitigation measures. It was
explained that given that PRSC-1 will focus on the development and strengthening of
sound budget management systems and civil service reforms to enhance the effectiveness
of the public sector relating to varied institutions and issues, with no discernible physical
interventions at the sectoral level, it is not expected to be any direct environmental impact
from PRSC-1. The subsequent PRSCs, however, will include regulatory reforms for the
private sector and improved service delivery in the social sectors. The Safeguards team
noted that such programs have the potential for environmental linkages and questioned
the project team as to how these might be addressed. The TTL explained that to address
the potential for such linkages especially from the privatization program in the energy
sector (which would merit environmental audits), mining, livestock and urban sector
strategy, and land titling, the project team is working closely with the environmental team
on the EA and SIA currently underway in Mongolia. [For further details on PRSCs'
program and timetable for implementation see the matrix on pp63-78 in the Annex of the
PAD.]

The Safeguards team asked the TTL to give an overview of the current status of the
energy and mining sectors in Mongolia and what PRSC-1 intends to address in these
sectors. The TTL explained that, up to this point, the energy and mining sectors have
been state owned industries. One of the goals of PRSC-1 is to reform public finance and
enhance institutional capacity in relation to these sectors in preparation for their
privatization in the subsequent PRSCs stages. The Safeguards team stressed that
particular attention also need to be placed on the strengthening of environmental
institutions, legislative and policy frameworks, as these will ensure that such industrial
sectors will be properly regulated once they are privatized.

                                                                 ISDS: Mongolia ­ PRSC 1
                                                                                 Page 3 of 8

[Please see p.41 & 43 for details on the Energy sector]

In regard to the health sector, the Safeguards team noted that such issues as the handling
and disposal of contaminated medical waste would need to be addressed under the
Bank's environment safeguards policy. The TTL confirmed that this matter is to be
addressed through the new solid waste management law.

The legacy of the USSR's centralized economic system, the subsequent dismantling of
that system, and the droughts of recent years has left the environment in a poor state of
mismanagement and stress. Such a situation can exacerbate social problems when there
is a weak government. The Safeguards team, therefore, questioned how these issues
would be addressed under PRSC-1. The TTL explained that the project team is fully
aware of this situation and that the overexploitation of the environment would be abated
as a result public finance reform and privatization of inefficient state owned enterprises
(SOEs). Since the misallocation of natural resources under the centralized economic
system was a direct result of distorted market signals, these signals should be corrected
through the PRSCs' programs and the move towards a capital market system.

Questions were raised regarding public disclosure of environmental information in
Mongolia and the environmental legislation and institutional structure. The TTL
informed the meeting that although Mongolia does disclose environmental information,
such as ambient air quality, the information is unreliable and leaves a great deal to be
desired. It was recommended that the project team look into the structure of the
environment ministry as well as other ministries that may also have departments and/or
sub-units with environmental mandates. The strengthening of environmental legislative
frameworks of these institutions will need to be included in the reform programs in
PRSC-1. For instance, in the mining sector where there has already been an influx of
foreign firms there needs to be strong environmental framework to ensure good
environmental practice are adopted in the sector.
The Safeguards team noted that upgrading and effective use of information technology
can also lead to increased efficiency and transparency of these government institutions.

OP 4.04 -- Natural Habitats
The project will not finance activities that would significantly convert or degrade any
protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or proposed critical natural
habitats as defined under the policy. No further action is required under this policy.

                               OP 4.09 -- Pest Management
The project will not procure any pesticides nor will an increased use of pesticides result
from the project. No further action is required under the policy.

OPN 11.03 (being converted to OP 4.11) -- Cultural Property
The project will not finance activities that will adversely affect sites having
archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural values. No further
action is required at this

                                                                   ISDS: Mongolia ­ PRSC 1
                                                                                   Page 4 of 8

Social Assessment
Questions were raised regarding the current social structures with regard to women,
indigenous peoples, and property rights and access issues.

The TTL informed the meeting that the EGSPRS poverty diagnosis and qualitative
poverty assessments are still ongoing. Gender issues have been a central part of the
discussion throughout the EGSPRS process and two workshops on gender and the
EGSPRS have been held in Mongolia to mainstream gender into the EGSPRS. A
separate section on gender and poverty prepared by a joint civil-society and government
committee on gender is included in the EGSPRS and recommendations from this section
are included in the PRSC agenda. A separate gender assessment is planned for FY03 and
will feed into PRSC-II. It is expected that PRSC-1 will address a range of gender issues
through various activities that includes strengthening the participation of women's groups
in the decision making and management process, improving gender-sensitive in planning
and budgeting system-both at the national and local levels, and enhancing the rights of
women property ownership, inheritance, and access to credit [See p.58 of PAD for further
details on gender issues].

It is well known that the transition from a centralized to a market economy can be a
painful process in terms of the negative social impacts that result from the
implementation of institutional and economic reforms. The Safeguards team, therefore,
questioned how such matters of unemployment and redistribution of resources, especially
associated with the privatization process, will be addressed under the project. Will there
be some form of social safety net to assist those who become unemployed for the period
of adjustment? How robust would a decentralized system be in delivering outcomes with
regard to equity? The TTL explained that since the project is expected to produce
positive results in terms of increased efficiency in the delivery of social services this
matter is not a major concern within the project. Furthermore, since the current situation
is inefficient and inequitable, the project will essentially lead to improvements. The
Safeguards team expressed concern at the paucity of data on poverty and suggested that a
poverty map would ensure that the equity issue is properly addressed and provide added
value to the fiscal reform. The TTL informed the meeting that the National Statistical
Office is producing the poverty map once the poverty data has been collected and
assessed.

OD 4.20 (being converted to OP 4.10) -- Indigenous Peoples (IP)
Regarding the indigenous peoples issue, the GoM as well as studies undertaken by other
Bank's projects (such as the Sustainable Livelihoods and the Ulaanbaatar Services
Improvement I&II projects) in Mongolia have determined that indigenous peoples are not
a factor in Mongolia. However, the Safeguards team pointed out that there are in fact a
number of non-Mongol ethnic groups in Mongolia such as some of Turkic origins in the
more remote and isolated western regions of the country. Although they may not be
recognized as significantly distinct from the majority of the population by the GoM they
would nonetheless need to be treated as ethnic minorities under Bank's policy. Since it is
one of the aim of PRSC-1 to implement institutional reform in the public sectors
including social services such as health care and education, ethnic minorities will need to

                                                                   ISDS: Mongolia ­ PRSC 1
                                                                                     Page 5 of 8

be taken into account when implementing reform in these sectors. The project team will
need to ensure that such groups will have equal access to the benefits from the project.

This project will not finance activities adversely affecting Indigenous Peoples as defined
in this policy. No further action is required under this policy.

OP 4.12 -- Involuntary Resettlement
The project will not finance land acquisition or involuntary resettlement as defined under
the policy. No action is required under this policy.

OP 4.36 -- Forestry
The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion or
degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the
policy. No action is required under this policy.

OP 4.37 -- Safety of Dams
The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any large dams as defined
under this policy. No action is required under this policy.

OP 7.50 -- International Waterways
There are no known project components involving international waterways as defined
under the policy. No action is required under this policy.

OP 7.60 -- Disputed Areas
The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined under the policy. No
action is required under this policy.

                               BP 17.50 -- Public Disclosure
As PRSC-1 will not trigger any environmental or social safeguards policies, there will be
no disclosure requirements. However, should phase 2 trigger such policies, full
disclosure will be required.

                               Reputational / Political Risks
The Safeguards team noted there are several non-Mongol ethnic groups in certain areas
of the country, and encouraged the task team to attend to them as the overall program
develops.

                             Design / Non-Safeguards Issues
The Safeguards team raised the issue of decentralization, and the fact that the long-term
success of the PRSC program will depend crucially on getting decentralization right. The
capacity and representativeness of the aimag and soum levels will need to be closely
monitored in order to ensure that the resources delivered from a reformed central
government are effectively applied at the local level.

The issue of innovative educational strategies, particularly with regard to meeting the
needs of the herder population, was also raised. In particular, there are a number of

                                                                           ISDS: Mongolia ­ PRSC 1
                                                                                          Page 6 of 8

approaches which have been developed which do not undermine young people's sense of
identity and ethnicity, provides positive attitudes and skills enabling children to
successfully pursue a pastoralist lifestyle, and enables herders to become active advocates
of their own interests. The use of mobile schools was also mentioned. It was recognized
that these issues would probably be more germane in PRSC 2 and 3, but they were
mentioned in hopes they might be useful in planning those operations.

C.      Safeguard Policies Triggered:

                                Policy                                           Applicability
Policy                                                                      Yes      No       To be
                                                                                             Decided
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                                 X
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                         X
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                            X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                        X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                X
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                                    X
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                              X



Section II.      Key Safeguard Issues and their Management

D.      Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is
        not available, describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

        N/A

II. D. 1a.       Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

        N/A

II. D. 1b.       Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one
safeguard policy or due to multiple project components.

        N/A

II. D. 1c.       Describe any potential long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area.

        N/A

II.D.2.          In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

                                                                        ISDS: Mongolia ­ PRSC 1
                                                                                           Page 7 of 8


         N/A

II.D.3            Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues.

         N/A

II.D.4.           Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially effected people.

         N/A

E.       Safeguard Classification. Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Wherever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and
institutional risks in management of one or more safeguard areas.

[ ] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact
and are technically and institutionally manageable.

[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues.

[ ] SF. - . Financial intermediary project, social development funds, community driven
developments or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic
approach to address safeguard issues.

F.       Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan          Expected              Actual
 Date of receipt by the Bank                               NA
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                           NA
 Date of submission to InfoShop                            NA
 Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the   NA
    Executive Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework                         Expected              Actual
 Date of receipt by the Bank                               NA
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                           NA
 Date of submission to InfoShop                            NA

Indigenous People Development Plan/Framework               Expected              Actual
 Date of receipt by the Bank                               NA
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                           NA
 Date of submission to InfoShop                            NA

Pest Management Plan                                       Expected              Actual
 Date of receipt by the Bank                               NA
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                           NA

                                                                           ISDS: Mongolia ­ PRSC 1
                                                                                            Page 8 of 8

 Date of submission to InfoShop                               NA

Dam Safety Management Plan                                    Expected              Actual
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                  NA
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                              NA
 Date of submission to InfoShop                               NA
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Conclusions / Recommendations for Clearance
This project is categorize "C" and is approved by the Safeguards team.

Correction needs to be made on p.57 of PAD to incorporate the new policy requirement.
The term OD 4.01 need to be changed to OP 4.01

