Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/21/2005 
Report No.:  AC1491
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Mongolia 
Project ID:  P088816 
Project Name:  MN-Index-Based Livestock Insurance Proj. 
Task Team Leader:  Nathan M. Belete 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 21, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%);Non-compulsory pensions, 
insurance and contractual savings (50%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Social analysis and monitoring (P);Other 
financial and private sector development (S);Regulation and competition policy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
7.75 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.26 
 
The Financial Sector Reform and Strengthening Initiative 
0.56 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
1.32
2.14 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the proposed project would be to ascertain the viability of 
index-based livestock insurance in Mongolia to reduce the impact of livestock mortality 
for herders.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project would support the piloting of index based livestock insurance in three 
provinces of Mongolia ? Bayankhongor, Uvs and Khenti. Two products would be 
introduced in the pilot provinces: the Base Insurance Product; and the Disaster Response 
Product. The viability of both products would be tested during the project.  
 
a) 
Base Insurance Product (BIP) is a commercial risk product, sold and serviced by 
insurance companies. Herders will pay a fully loaded premium rate for this product. This 
product would pay out when the sum mortality rates exceed specified ?trigger? 
percentages, (in the range of 7% to 10%, depending on species and location).  Based on 
historical analysis of 33 year time series of livestock mortality data, the maximum 
Page  2
payment for the BIP would be when mortality rates reach a specified ?exhaustion point? 
of 30% for Bayankhongor and Uvs and 25% for Khenti (these rates will be subject to 
review annually, if necessary). The trigger and exhaustion point percentages have been 
derived from the analysis of historical livestock mortality data. They have been set to 
balance the level of coverage and affordability by herders, and will be reviewed 
throughout the pilot implementation. These numbers will be subject to annual review and 
change, if necessary.  
 
b) 
Disaster Response Product (DRP) is a social safety net product financed and 
provided by Government, which would begin payments at mortality rates exceeding the 
BIP exhaustion point. Herders who purchase the BIP will be automatically registered for 
the DRP on the same species at no additional cost. Without the purchase of at least the 
minimum value of BIP, herders must pay a contribution to the administrative cost of the 
DRP. The payout structure for DRP will be the same as the BIP.  
 
A
successful demonstration of viability during this pilot phase would provide a basis for 
future expansion and therefore a key outcome of the project would include essential 
preparatory elements, such as the formulation of an appropriate regulatory framework, a 
strengthened livestock statistical system, and support to insurance companies to develop 
linkages with international reinsurance markets.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project would be pilot index based livestock insurance in the three aimags of 
Bayankhongor, Uvs and Khenti.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project is financial in nature, and involves sales and monitoring of a new index-based 
livestock insurance instrument in Mongolia.  It is therefore felt to have very limited 
impact in the area of environmental and social safeguard issues, and has been categorized 
as Category C.  
 
During preparation, the task team did take account of social diversity in the country.  
There are over 30 different ethnic groups in Mongolia, of which the Khalkh are the 
majority (80%).  Of the selected pilot aimags, Uvs in the far west has an ethnically 
diverse population, including Dorvod (40% of the population) and Bayad minority groups 
(35%), as identified in the social assessment carried out for the Sustainable Livelihoods 
Project.  Khenti has a small minority Buriad population.  These groups are, however, not 
distinguished from the majority Khalkh by language, religion or herding/livelihood 
practices.  OP 4.20 has therefore not been triggered and a separate Indigenous Peoples 
Development Plan is not deemed necessary.  
 
As the IBLI products will be available to all herders, regardless of ethnicity, the 
potential benefits of the project may be accessed regardless of ethnic identity and, given 
its nature, the project is not expected to have any specific effects on the minority 
populations.  However, through the M&E component, diversity issues will be 
systematically monitored to track whether access for all is enabled.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not relevant   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not relevant   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not relevant   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
While no specific safeguard policies have been triggered, the task team, GoM and its 
consultants have gone to some lengths to ensure consultation of key stakeholders, in 
order to enable consideration of their interests and influence and to promote 
harmonization with complementary initiatives.  This has been through individual 
meetings and workshops with relevant actors across the governmental, private financial 
and civil society sectors and has also included field-based research with potential 
beneficiary groups in the three pilot aimags.   
Page  4
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
not applicable   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  5
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Nathan M. Belete 
04/12/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Daniel R. Gibson 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
 
Comments:   
