Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1656 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/27/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Morocco 
Project ID: P094007 
Project Name: MA-RURAL ROADS II 
Task Team Leader: Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 15, 
2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 27, 2006 
Managing Unit: MNSIF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (97%);Central government administration (3%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Injuries and non-communicable diseases (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
303.00 
 
FRANCE: FRENCH AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT 
61.00 
 
EC: EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK 
73.00 
 Financing 
Gap 
65.00
502.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project's major development objective would be to significantly increase rural populations' 
access to all weather roads. The project should contribute to achieving the general objectives of 
the Second National Program of Rural Roads (NPRR-2) which are to increase the level of access 
of the rural population from 54% in 2005 to 67% in 2010 (and 80% by the end of the Program in 
2015).   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would adopt a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) and rely on a pooled funding 
approach under which all donor's contributions to the NPRR-2 would be centralized and 
consolidated under a Program-specific Facility, the CFR (Caisse de Financement Routier). This 
Second Rural Roads Project (RRP-2) would be implemented concomitantly to the on-going first 
Rural Roads Project (RRP-1) and would consist of one component: it would contribute to 
partially financing the first 5-year CFR's rural road program. This should represent about 600 km 
Page  2
of rural roads to be improved or constructed over the project's period for a total estimated cost of 
about $48 million, with $45 million to be financed by the Bank.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
The Project's funds would be consolidated within the CFR and affected to the financing of the 
whole NPRR-2, and not to specific sub-projects pre-identified by the Bank. Consequently, the 
project would cover the exact same scope as the NPRR-2, that is to say the entire country. All 
rural road projects to be constructed/improved under the NPRR-2 were identified using the 
Provincial Priority Roads Master Plan developed by the Directorate of Roads (DRCR) and 
approved by the local communities through a consultation process.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The implementing agency, the Directorate of Roads (DRCR) at the Ministry of Equipment and 
Transport, has an environmental and social unit, as well as a department responsible for handling 
land issues. This unit, which is composed of an environmental specialist and an engineer 
specialized in social issues, is responsible for managing potential environmental affairs and land 
expropriation issues related to DRCR's road projects. The DRCR has a large experience with 
Bank roads projects and is currently implementing the first Rural Roads Project (RRP-1) 
approved in 2004 to support the NPRR-2. For the purpose of the RRP-1, a comprehensive 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were 
prepared. The EMP, which includes environmental screening tools, terms of references for 
environmental analysis of rural road projects, and environmental clauses in civil works bidding 
documents, was conceived by an environmental consulting firm, revised by the Bank and 
DRCR's environmental and social unit, and added to the Project Implementation Plan (PIP). 
Training workshops were also organized to strengthen environmental expertise within the 
implementing and executing agencies and to familiarize technical staff with the project-specific 
environmental instruments. The RPF was on its side entirely prepared by the environmental and 
social unit, on the basis of the country's well-established legislative framework for handling 
expropriation and DRCR's strong expertise in the matter. This RPF was slightly fine-tuned to 
comply with the Bank's resettlement policy. In practice, it is expected that, under the NPRR-2, 
most lands will be donated by the community for the construction of the road projects. Those 
projects will indeed provide significant social and economic benefits to the rural populations 
living along the roads. The environmental and social unit will however ensure land donation is 
done on a purely voluntary and equitable basis, without any coercion, and thus will 
systematically oversee projects which required land donation. A recent supervision mission 
conducted in February 2005 confirmed that the implementing agencies at the provincial level, the 
DPEs, had consistently and thoroughly used the EMP and the RPF for the first rural road projects 
to be launched under the RRP-1. All environmental and social documents provided by the DPEs 
have also been systematically double-checked at the central level by the environmental and 
social unit. Following the adoption of a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) for the whole Program, 
these EMP and RPF, initially developed for the RRP-1, will be applied in the future to all rural 
road projects implemented under the NPRR-2, irrespective of their financier. Ex-post reviews 
will be carried out on an annual basis to assess DRCR's compliance with the Program's 
environmental and social guidelines during preparation, implementation and supervision of sub-
projects. Such reviews will also give an update on DRCR's overall capacities on safeguard 
policies and its needs for additional capacity building activities.   
Page  3
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Meskerem Brhane (MNSRE) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Potential adverse environmental impacts during both construction and operation are restricted 
in magnitude and severity.  Roads to be improved under the NPRR-2 Program do not have major 
irreversible environmental impacts; on the contrary all roads would contribute to positive 
environmental and social impacts especially in terms of providing access to agricultural areas, 
and to social infrastructure, services and markets. In addition, the project will set as a condition 
that its funds do not finance any road under the NPRR-2 that would require deforestation, or 
would adversely affect natural habitats, biodiversity, and cultural heritage sites.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
The Bank will require chance find procedures to be included in the Program's EIA, in 
accordance with OPN 11.03, to address any cultural property issue which could occur during 
road construction.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
A
vast majority of roads to be executed under the Program are on existing right of ways and 
there will not be significant changes in road characteristics such as width or alignment.  
Therefore, the project (which will fund part of the Program) will not entail resettlement of 
population. Only minor land expropriation or voluntary donation would be required.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/01/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
Page  4
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The EMP and RPF for the whole Program were completed in November 2004. Since then, 
they have been consistently and adequately used by the implementing agencies. This 
confirms that those plans and frameworks are well-designed and adapted to the context of the 
NPRR-2 Program. Within that context, no corrective measures are expected to be applied on 
the current EMP and RPF.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mohammed D. E. Feghoul 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
