Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC439 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: January 15, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Nigeria 
Project ID: P086716 
Project Name: Sustainable Management of 
Mineral Resour 
Task Team Leader: Jeffrey Davidson 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 8, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 6, 2004 
Managing Unit: COCPD 
Lending  Instrument:  Specific  Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Mining and other extractive 
(80%);General public administration sector 
(20%) 
Theme: Rural non-farm income generation 
(P);Other environment and natural 
resources management (S);Small and 
medium enterprise support (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:  Paul Francis, Africa Olojoba 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):   $ 75.0 m 
IDA:   $ 75.0 m 
Other financing amounts by source:  Government of Nigeria   
($ 5.0 m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The development objectives of the proposed operation are to: 
 
(i) Increase the Government's long-term institutional and technical capacity to manage Nigeria's 
mineral resources in a sustainable way; 
(ii) Establish a basis for poverty reduction and rural economic renewal in selected areas of the 
country via the development of non-farm income generating opportunities through small-scale 
and artisanal mining. 
 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
A. Component I. Local Economic Development in Artisanal and Small-scale Mining Areas 
(est. US$24 million) 
 
A.1
 
Baseline studies and pilot projects organization of the sector.
 The Ministry of Solid 
Minerals Development (MSMD) has already formed an implementation committee to carry out 
Page  2
 
 
its “blueprint plan” (July 2002) for the formalization and promotion of small-scale mining.  The 
Committee has visited a number of key mining areas and has started organizing miners into 
cooperatives.  The blueprint was constructed on the basis of the accumulated experience and 
anecdotal knowledge of MSMD field officers with “unauthorized” mining, but very little 
documentation exists and no systematic studies of the nature and scope of these activities were 
undertaken.  The proposed project will assist the design and implementation of a number of 
baseline surveys and profiling exercises that will provide a substantiated basis for policy and 
program design, implementation and monitoring of progress.  Six pilot projects would be 
identified, one for each of the MSMD’s six regional zones.  These projects would test different 
approaches to stimulating legal and responsible mining activity, linked economic development, 
and community well-being.  All projects will have an integrated design addressing  technical, 
organizational, social and environmental aspects, although the emphases may vary between 
projects. The projects would be most likely situated in areas of existing mining activity, 
involving mines already in production,  under development, or proposed for development.  In 
addition,  other smaller projects will be supported in additional states to enhance specific aspects 
of the activity (health issues, environmental management, etc.).  
 
 
A.2 Small grants program
. Given Nigeria's considerable potential, mining can be turned into an 
entry point for growth of incoming-earning opportunities through enterprise development.  For 
the small artisans, however, capacity building is needed to enable them to access market 
opportunities and to allow small firms to fully benefit from the flow of information and know 
how.  This is needed at several levels, starting from individual business and financial skills to 
manage self-employment and micro-enterprises, through training and assistance in the purchase 
of marketing and advisory services, as well as equipment.  Training will be both formal (see A.4 
below) and informal,  made real through the planning and implementation of support activities 
and micro-enterprises that can be financed in part through a small grants program, e.g. 
organization and registration of miners associations, production cooperatives, and/or marketing 
associations; child care services, catering, cloth mending, tool supply and repair, etc.  Assistance 
will also be provided to communities to help them identify, plan and carry out community-level 
investments in productive infrastructure to add further value to mined materials, such as 
marketing centers, mineral transformation and processing facilities, and fabricating businesses.  
Such investments would be supported through matching grants schemes.   
 
A.3 Targeted programs for the development of specific commodities
. Nigeria has a 
substantial potential in several industrial minerals and construction materials whose development 
could be easily fostered to satisfy domestic demand and export opportunities in niche markets.  
The project would support MSMD’s interest in organizing technical assistance programs for 
domestic entrepreneurs to develop the internal production and marketing of barite, bentonite, as 
well as gemstones. 
 
A.4 Component coordination and training
. Professional firms would be hired to oversee the 
design, launching and implementation of the pilot projects during the first few years with a 
gradual transfer of design and implementation oversight to small-scale mining units established 
at the regional and possibly state levels as skill and experience is gained. Additional input and 
monitoring of progress would be provided by the most prominent experts in the field, 
Page  3
 
 
coordinated under the supervision of CASM, the Communities and Small-scale Mining global 
knowledge sharing initiative, housed at the World Bank. 
 
The Jos School of Mines would be strengthened and equipped to become a regional pole of 
excellence for training and outreach in the area of small-scale mining.  The program would be 
expanded to include short term courses on specific topics to enhance the managerial and 
financial capabilities of small entrepreneurs (see A.2 above). Its equipment would be updated to 
allow for the introduction of improved technologies, mining and processing methods, and 
business practices. 
 
 
B. Component II. Strengthening Governance and Transparency in Mining (est. US$20 
million) 
 
B.1 Legal and fiscal reform:  
The promotion of a competitive minerals industry in Nigeria 
requires a review and an update of the legal, fiscal and regulatory frameworks for the sector, as 
well as a clear statement of Government’s objectives and policy to promote mineral development 
at both smaller and larger scales as appropriate. Government is aware of the need and is currently 
revising the 1999 Mining Code, which was itself an effort to update the 1945 mining law 
promulgated under British colonial rule.   A preliminary draft of a new code is now being 
circulated internally for comment, but a wider circle of stakeholders, including other members of 
Government, the private sector and civil society, will need to be consulted before a framework is 
finalized. Particular attention should be devoted to the roles and responsibilities federal and state 
authorities, the management and sharing of mining revenues with local governments and affected 
communities, and measures to ensure responsible closure and reclamation of new mines, both 
large and small.  
 
B.2 Institutional Capacity Building: 
The establishment of the Ministry eight years ago seems 
to have provided the Geological Survey and Mines Inspectorate with more autonomy and has 
allowed for the emergence of new thinking and initiative, but the departments on the whole 
remain under-funded and lack the tools required to promote and manage a modern market driven 
mineral sector.  Administration of minerals development is also hindered by the overlapping 
activities and claimed responsibilities of federal and state authorities.  While mineral rights and 
responsibilities for the oversight of mineral development are vested in the federal government, 
some states have set up their own administrations, and have taken control over the development 
of certain minerals.  Both Central and Regional administrations need to be retrained and 
reequipped. Roles and mandates need to be clearly defined, and a unit created to enhance the 
promotion of private mining investments.  
 
B.3. Mining Cadastre: 
The procedures for the granting and management of minerals licenses 
need to be streamlined and computerized.  The Mines Inspectorate undertook a manual exercise 
to compile mineral titles in 1998-1999 that needs to be updated.  A private consultant is currently 
working on a software package to store title and mineral deposit information.  Despite these 
efforts, the granting of a minerals license can sometimes take more than 3 years, which has 
forced some exploration license holders to move beyond exploration to exploitation, without 
having applied for mining leases.
    
Page  4
 
 
 
B.4. Environmental and Social Management: 
 Effective environmental management  is a 
cornerstone of future solid minerals development in Nigeria. The MSMD has been working with 
the Ministry of Environment with regards to the elaboration of environmental guidelines for new 
mining, but concern was also expressed with regard to the reclamation of old and abandoned 
mine sites.  The means are not currently available to address legacy issues.  A sector 
environmental assessment will be carried out,  along with an inventory of abandoned sites,  
which together will identify the environmental legacy  of “unauthorized” small-scale mining and 
of the divestiture and closure of state owned mining operations, as well as the implications for 
the definitive closure and reclamation of selected sites. It will also identify any critical 
environmental legacy and management issues that ought to be addressed as part of the project.  
Profiles of the social-economic impacts of existing “unauthorized” mining will be developed as 
part of the social-economic baseline work on artisanal and small-scale mining to be undertaken 
during project preparation, and ESI scoping studies would be undertaken as part the site selection 
process for the pilot projects. 
 
A formal dialogue with government and other affected stakeholders will be initiated to prepare 
appropriate management responses and mitigation measures for the handling of social impacts 
that would be associated with future larger-scale, private sector driven mineral development.  As 
part of the dialogue, attention will also be focused on defining government and community 
expectations regarding corporate social responsibility and ways of fostering sustainable social 
development around large-scale commercial mining during its life-cycle and after its closure. 
 
C. Component III. Private Sector Development (est. US$22 million) 
 
C.1. Restructuring of mining state-owned enterprises
. Government has decided that the 
Nigerian Mining Corporation (NMC) should get out of mining and other productive activities 
and focus on detailed geologic exploration. The Bureau of Public Enterprises(BPE), as the 
agency responsible for the implementation and oversight of the “restructuring” process, is 
currently selling off the brickworks of and will then turn to selling off its quarries.  This effort 
falls under the auspices of an existing WB project.  
 
Nevertheless, a strategic assessment of the potential for self-financing of the future NMC needs 
to be conducted to better define the future profile of its activities.  This work will be designed 
and executed after consultation with the BPE and relevant Ministries, and PSIA will be consulted 
as to the type and scope of assessment that would be appropriate for the situation.  On the other 
hand, the Nigeria Coal Corporation (NCC) has ceased production and is virtually bankrupt. 
Considering the importance of the role that coal could play in Nigeria’s energy matrix and in 
reducing pressure on the country’s remaining forest resources, a special task force mandated by 
the President is reviewing the options for NCC. A reassessment of Nigeria’s coal reserves needs 
to be done as a pre-condition for future involvement of the private sector in the development of 
this product.   
 
C.2 Strengthening of the Geologic Infrastructure.
 Nigeria urgently needs to update its basic 
geological information because it is a powerful tool for private investment promotion and would 
provide advanced indicators for future potential eruptions of small scale mining activities. The 
Page  5
 
 
main objective of this component is to provide the basic and reliable geological information 
necessary to facilitate the promotion of private investments in the mining sector and to support 
the planning of the social-economical development of the country.  In order to achieve this goal, 
Government is seeking: (i) to undertake the regional airborne geophysical coverage of selected 
areas, to complete the work already under implementation; (ii) to update and publish of the 
existing coverage of geological maps at 1:000.000 scale, for sub-areas selected on the basis of 
their mineral resources and environmental characteristics; (iii) to create a computerized 
Geological and Mineral Information System (MIS), to store, process and facilitate access to the 
information to a multi-sector base of users; and (iv) to reorganize and strengthen the Geologic 
Survey of Nigeria Agency and the use of its central laboratory at Kaduna.  The technical 
coordination and independent supervision of the geo-scientific information activities will be 
provided by a foreign geologic survey under a twinning arrangement.
 
 
D. Component IV.  Project Coordination and Management ( est. US$4 million) 
 
A Project coordination unit will be established to engage in project procurement, financial 
management and disbursement under the auspices of the Ministry of Solid Minerals 
Development.  In addition, technical task teams will be established in the Ministry to administer 
the three project components.  These task teams will be in charge of preparing terms of 
reference, supervising implementation and monitoring and evaluation of project results.  In 
addition, a steering committee, consisting of the Director of Mines, the Director of the 
Geological Survey Agency of Nigeria, an Administrative Director for the Ministry, and an 
advisor to the Ministry will be formed.   
 
 
D.  Project location  
 
Project activities will be located in regions covered by the proposed six zonal offices (Kaduna, 
Ibadan, Bauchi, Jos, Enugu and Benin) of the Mines Inspectorate, and concentrated in those 
areas and states where domestic mining activity is already significant.  These areas will be more 
explicitly defined during project preparation. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
The project will help the Borrower continue to deepen its understanding and ability to apply and 
comply with Bank safeguard policies.  The Government has already committed itself to 
improving environmental and social governance in general, and has experience with safeguard 
policy applications and compliance within the framework of other Bank funded projects.  The 
Presidential Committee on Solid Minerals Development has highlighted the importance of 
managing environmental and social issues properly as part of the development of an organized 
and viable mineral industry, and the introduction of safeguard policies to the Ministry of Solid 
Minerals Development through this project will only reinforce these priorities.
 
 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Page  6
 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] Environmental 
Assessment
 (OP
/BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats (OP
/BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management (OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP
/BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests (OP
/BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams (OP
/BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ TBD] 
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP
/BP
/GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways (OP
/BP
/GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
May 17, 2004 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
June 2004 (if applicable) 
 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  7
 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
a) SEA 
launch February 2004  
       complete  July 2004 
      b) RPF 
 
March 2004 
 
 
 
July 2004 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Jeffrey Davidson 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas Walton 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Peter Van der Veen 
Date 
Comments 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
