Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  10/11/2005 
Report No.:  AC1609
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Nigeria 
Project ID:  P073686 
Project Name:  Fadama Development-II / Critical Ecosystem Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Simeon Kacou Ehui 
GEF Focal Area: Biodiversity 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 31, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 29, 2005 
Managing Unit:  AFTS3 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Environmental policies and institutions (P);Biodiversity (P);Other environment 
and natural resources management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
10.03 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.98 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
0.44
1.42 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
1.     Global environmental objectives to which the project contributes: The proposed 
project contributes to the overall operational goal of the GEF focal area on land 
degradation (i.e., desertification and deforestation) and to the operational program on 
sustainable land management.  Through the partnership between the Government of 
Nigeria, IBRD, AfDB, GEF, other bilateral donors, NGOs and communities, the NFDP II 
project (both the IDA and GEF co-financed) seeks to sustainably increase the income of 
fadama users, those who depend directly, or indirectly, on fadama resources (farmers, 
pastoralists, fishers, hunters, gatherers, and service providers).  The global objective of 
the proposed Project is to enhance the productivity of fadama areas and the livelihood 
systems they support through sustainable land use and water management.  This will be 
achieved through sustainable land management practices that enhance fadama ecosystem 
integrity by restoring watershed functions, stabilizing soil loss, riverbank protections, 
reducing resource use conflicts and protecting biological diversity.   
 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
1.     The proposed Critical Ecosystem Management Project (CEMP) is a full size GEF 
grant ($10.03 million), fully integrated with the IDA-supported NFDP II ($100 million 
IDA Credit).  
 
2.     The Fadama II Project (including the GEF component) is expected to provide a 
framework for addressing both poverty reduction objectives and the sustainable 
management of fadama ecosystems which are vulnerable to unsustainable land use 
changes and agricultural practices. The GEF program is financed through an IDA Credit 
of US$38.67 million (already approved as part of a US$100 million credit for NFDP-II, 
Credit 3838-UNI ), a GEF grant of US$10.03 million, government counterpart funds of 
about US$1.42 million, and $6.91 million co-financing from AfDB, for a total project of 
US$57.03 million.  The US$10.03 million GEF contribution (corresponding to 18% of 
total project cost) will finance the incremental cost of regional and global benefits 
through the following components.  
 
Component 1:  Capacity Building ($21.7 million, of which $1.42 million financed by 
GEF)  
 
3.     The aim of this component is to build the capacity of fadama users and other key 
stakeholders.  While IDA financing (38% of the component cost) supports building the 
capacity of fadama user associations (FUAs) in order to enable them to access project 
advisory services and to invest in productivity and income enhancement activities, the 
aim of the GEF financing (7% of the component cost) is to enhance the capacity of 
different stakeholder groups--including relevant federal, state and local government, 
NGOs, community based organizations, and fadama users in the six priority states (Imo, 
Kebbi, Kwara, Kogi, Ogun, and Bauchi)--for sustainable land and watershed 
management.  
 
4.     This component includes a review of federal and state policies and regulations, and 
support for the development of a framework for state level coordination and monitoring 
&
evaluation of watershed management activities among key state agencies 
(environment, agriculture, forestry, natural resources).  Finally, the component includes 
support for a review of policies and legislations related to watershed management at the 
federal level and also a detailed ecological assessment of the GEF intervention sites.  
 
Component 2:  Integrated Ecosystem Management at Watershed level ($4.76 million, of 
which $4.11 million financed by GEF)  
 
5.     This component addresses the technical, social and location specific activities to 
improve the management of critical watersheds that ensure fadama productivity and 
sustainability, in a few (pilot) areas with high potential for upscaling and replicability.  
Major activities include strengthening existing watershed planning and coordination 
mechanisms among the relevant state agencies (to complement activities under 
Component 1); sustainable management of forest resources for the protection of fadama 
areas (especially, supporting the establishment of community forest reserves in highly 
Page  3
degraded and conflict ridden rain forest and savannah areas); developing a lake 
management plan for a proposed RAMSAR site; and a study and monitoring activities to 
understand the impact of upstream reservoir management and river flow regime on 
fadama areas.  Furthermore, a monitoring plan will be devised to improve the 
management of ground water and shallow aquifers in selected fadama areas.  This plan 
complements the IDA credit support which focuses on on-site water quality monitoring 
(related mainly to agro-chemical use).  
 
Component 3:  Community Sustainable Land Management ($14.05 million, of which 
$3.96 million financed by GEF)  
 
6.     This component supports a range of advisory services, training, information 
sharing,  awareness programs, and adoption of land use practices that will enable fadama 
users to adopt productivity-enhancing techniques and more profitable marketing, and at 
the same time ensure the sustainability of the fadama resource base.  While IDA 
financing (60% of  the component cost) finances traditional advisory services, including 
environmentally friendly practices (particularly, the promotion of Integrated Pest 
Management, and irrigation efficiency), the aim of GEF financing (28% of the 
component cost) is to support fadama users, through fadama community associations 
(FCAs), community groups, and NGOs, to adopt sustainable land use and agricultural 
practices that enhance the structural and functional integrity of fadama ecosystems, and 
improve rural livelihoods.  
 
7.     GEF support will be in the form of grant co-financing, using a demand-driven 
approach for two types of alternative land use practices: (i) land use changes in critical 
areas, such as, river banks, flood-prone or ground water recharge areas, and forest or 
natural habitats of significant biodiversity values; and (ii) sustainable agricultural 
practices in fadama areas added to IDA-supported LDPs.  The grants will be disbursed 
through FCAs, community groups and NGOs. The size of the grant ceiling will be 
calibrated with the IDA grant (for advisory services) and finalized at appraisal.  Potential 
activities that would be supported under this component include: (i) fadama biodiversity 
conservation; (ii) alternative livelihoods in highly degraded critical fadama areas; (iii) 
energy efficient use of solid fuels for watershed protection and carbon sequestration; (iv) 
community woodlots on riverbanks and other degraded areas; and  (v) sustainable 
indigenous farming practices (such as, reduced tillage methods, nutrient management, 
soil and water conservation techniques, efficient pasture and rangeland management, 
etc.).  
 
Component 4:  Project Management and M&E ($16.52 million, of which $0.54 million 
financed by GEF)  
 
8.    This component focuses on project management mechanisms, including monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E) plans to implement NFDP-II.  While 81% of financing for this 
component is through the IDA Credit, GEF financing (3%) will support the full 
integration of GEF-funded activities into the two main NFDP-II subcomponents under 
Page  4
this component, while keeping track of the specific inputs, outputs, and impacts of the 
GEF activities:  
 
(a) Project Management Subcomponent supports strengthening the effectiveness and 
quality of project operations: (i) at the federal level, the National Fadama Development 
Office (NFDO)--attached to the Projects Coordinating Unit (PCU) of the Federal 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (FMARD), responsible for overall 
project coordination, will include a GEF desk manned by a GEF Project Officer; and (ii) 
the State Fadama Development Office (SFDO), housed at the Agricultural Development 
Program (ADP), will include Environmental Officers tasked with the coordination of the 
GEF program at the state, local government, and community levels.    
 
(b) Monitoring and Evaluation Subcomponent will measure performance at various 
project milestones, and includes three main elements: (i) Management Information 
System (MIS) integrating NFDO and SFDO levels with data generated by FCAs; (ii) 
impact evaluations and beneficiary assessments to enhance project implementation 
performance; (iii) monitoring of the project's environmental management plan (EMP), 
which includes mitigation measures related to agricultural production, processing, and 
marketing, to be incorporated in LDPs, and institutional capacity strengthening in 
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Integrated Pest Management (IPM); and 
(iv) monitoring the performance of the GEF activities.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The Project will be located in six of the eighteen States of the NFDP-II project.  The 
States and sites include: Kogi (Lokoja-Koton Karfe); Kwara (Ajasse-Ipo); Ogun (Eriti); 
Bauchi (Andiwa Lake - to be finalized at appraisal); Kebbi (Jega and Dimbegu) and Imo 
(Oguta Lake).   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba (AFTS3) 
Ms Kristine Schwebach (AFTS1) 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTS3) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
X
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  5
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
(a) The Project is designed to enhance the productivity of fadama areas and the livelihood 
systems they support through sustainable land use and water management. Activities that 
would cause an adverse effect on the environment will not be funded.  
 
(b) Under the main NFDP-II Project, an ESMF was prepared. This will be adopted for 
the proposed GEF project, and complemented with an environmental and social checklist.  
The EMP in the ESMF document gives full details of the anticipated impacts and takes 
into consideration appropriate mitigation measures, including those related to long-term 
impacts.  
 
(c) The Project will not involve the acquisition of land or other assets, and would also 
not envisage resriction of access to assets or sources of livelihoods.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
(a) No adverse long-term impacts are anticipated.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
(a) Not Applicable.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
(a) Under the main NFDO-II Project, the Borrower had already prepared the necessary 
safeguards instruments, i.e., ESIA/ESMF and RPF.  These safeguard instruments were 
disclosed prior to project appraisal in accordance with Bank's policy on disclosure. An 
assessment of Borrower capacity was made during the appraisal mission of the main 
Fadama II Project.  The State Fadama Development Office (SFDO) is staffed with one 
Environment Officer, who will be responsible for implementation and following up on 
project activities at the State level, and will be complemented with short-term national 
safeguards consultants as and when the need arises.    
 
Environmental Category of the GEF Project is rated B although the main IDA Fadama 
II Project is rated A.  The environmental and social impacts from the interventions in the 
Project areas will be minor and insignificant.  They are mostly site-specific, easily 
remedied and have no long-term cumulative impacts, typical of Category B projects.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
(a) The key stakeholders are:  Federal Ministry of Environment, Federal Ministry of 
Agriculture and Rural Development, Federal Ministry of Water Resources, Project 
Page  6
Coordinating unit, the NFDO, the participating States SFDOs, participating communities, 
participating LGAs and beneficiary population.  
 
(b) The ESMF Report contains a detailed consultation plan including guidelines on 
public disclosure of the ESMF.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/23/2003 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
05/27/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
05/31/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Originally, the proposed GEF Fadama II/Critical Ecosystem Project was to be fully 
blended with the IDA-funded Second National Fadama Development II Project (Fadama 
II) - P063622, Credit 3838-UNI.  However, during the Quality at Entry Review (QER), it 
was decided that the GEF financing of the components be delinked from the IDA 
operation and supported as a stand-alone operation with its design and implementation 
arrangements fully integrated with the main IDA-funded Fadama II Project.  The 
safeguard documentation (EIA) was originally disclosed in-country for the main Fadama 
II Project on May 5, 2003.  On ASPEN's recommendation, Fadama II PCU released an 
"Addendum to the Public Notice" issued for the main Fadama II to inform public on the 
availability of the same safeguard documentation from the same locations when first 
announced in May 2003.  This Addendum was issued on May 27, 2005, in the daily 
PUNCH of Nigeria.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
Page  7
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
 
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints 
been carried out? 
No 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these 
constraints? 
No 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include 
provisions for certification system? 
No 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways 
 
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
Yes 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo 
to the RVP prepared and sent? 
No 
What are the reasons for the exception?  Please explain: 
No 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
No 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simeon Kacou Ehui 
10/04/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Africa  Eshogba Olojoba 
10/04/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Kristine Schwebach 
10/04/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor 
10/04/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
10/04/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Joseph Baah-Dwomoh 
10/04/2005 
Comments:   
