Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  12/15/2005 
Report No.:  AC1929
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID:  P083929 
Project Name:  Punjab Municipal Services Improvement Project (PMSIP) 
Task Team Leader:  Jaehyang So 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 2, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: April 13, 2006 
Managing Unit:  SASEI 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sanitation (35%);Solid waste management (35%);Water supply (30%) 
Theme:  Access to urban services and housing (P);Municipal finance (S);Municipal 
governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
65.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
10.00
10.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is to improve urban services provision in a sustainable 
manner.  The key objectives and the corresponding indicators are the following:  
 
Improve the quality and management of infrastructure:  
 
(i)  finance infrastructure repair and renewal through performance-matching grants,  
 
to be measured through:  
 
-- improvement in selected service delivery indicators.  
 
Build capacity:  
 
(ii)  at provincial level, manage a process of performance improvement for TMAs,  
 
to be measured through:  
 
--  implementation of adequate arrangements to monitor TMA  
 
performance,  
 
--  implementation of sound project appraisal criteria,  
 
--  provision of adequate assistance & guidelines to TMAs, and  
 
Page  2
(iii) at local (TMA) level, improve practices in terms of planning, financial 
management, and optimal utilization of resources,  
 
to be measured through:  
 
--  prioritization of objectives and number of prioritized  
 
projects implemented,  
 
--  implementation of improved financial management procedures  
 
and systems (accounting, capital budgeting, strategic  
 
planning),  
 
--  implementation of adequate operation and maintenance plans.   
 
3. Project Description 
The Punjab Municipal Services Improvement project is designed to improve the planning 
and management capacity in TMAs and to improve infrastructure service delivery in 
TMAs, using the concept of performance management.  The project consists of two 
components:  1) capacity grants and development grants to TMAs; and 2) technical 
assistance to the Punjab Provincial Government and PMDFC.  
 
Component One:  Capacity and Development Grants to Tehsil Municipal Authorities  
 
This sub-component would finance needed capacity and infrastructure investments in 
TMAs.  Capacity grants would finance needed improvements in TMAs to improve urban 
planning, financial management including budget management, and investment planning 
for service delivery.  It is envisioned that the capacity grants will offer not only the 
technical assistance but the resources to implement the topics of technical assistance.  For 
example, in addition to providing technical assistance on the importance of mapping as a 
basic requirement on service delivery planning, the capacity grant will also finance the 
development of a base map for the TMA.  This sub-component would finance the 
development of capacity enhancing items, such as base maps, land use maps, 
computerized accounting systems, computerized complaint registers, annual customer 
surveys to monitor TMA performance.  
 
Development grants will finance infrastructure investments in the TMAs.  Development 
grants will be awarded based on performance of the TMAs. The sub-component would 
start by financing relatively simple investments which include rehabilitation and 
extension of existing infrastructure.  As TMA capacity to plan, prioritize and implement 
infrastructure investments grows, it is envisioned that the size and complexity of 
investment would also increase.  The assessment of TMA capacity on infrastructure 
projects would be determined by annual reviews.  
 
Component Two:  Technical assistance to the Punjab Provincial Government and 
PMDFC  
 
This sub-component would assist Punjab provincial government to enhance their ability 
to monitor and manage the TMAs.  At the provincial level, this sub-component would 
include the development of a provincial level monitoring and evaluation database to 
assist the Punjab provincial government to enforce the PLGO and to track TMA 
Page  3
performance against the PLGO.  In the long run, relative performance of the TMAs in the 
Punjab, as tracked in this database is expected to contribute to the identification of better 
management and better performing TMAs which may in the long run be able to perform 
at a higher level (access municipal finance through market mechanisms).  
 
Since the Punjab provincial government has delegated the day to day monitoring and 
implementation of TMAs to the PMDFC, it is envisioned that some of this sub-
component will finance needed capacity increases to PMDFC.  
 
PMDFC has prepared an Environmental and Social Framework for review and 
assessment of individual sub-projects.  The framework envisages three categories of 
projects, E-1, E-2 and E-3, requiring different levels of analysis.  Most of the sub-projects 
will have limited impacts, such as water system  upgrading and local drainage, but some 
of the E-1 category projects may be equivalent to Bank Category A and so the overall 
project has been given a Category A rating.  Proposed sub-projects which are rated E-1 
by PMDFC will be reviewed by the Bank to determine the level of assessment required.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will be open to the 122 TMAs in the Punjab province.  TMAs will be selected 
to participate in the project based on achievement of selected capacity indicators. TMAs 
will be eligible to apply for grants to fund any infrastructure service area under their 
management.  This may include, but not be limited to: water supply, sanitation, drainage, 
solid waste management, road investment and maintenance, parks, firefighting, among 
others.  Certain of the investments may involve acquisition of land.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr David C. Hanrahan (SASES) 
Mr Warren Waters (SASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  4
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The types of projects currently under consideration for possible support include: water 
supply and sewage, sanitation, solid waste management, transportation, storm water 
drains, street lighting, and community centers.  Other typical urban investments may be 
proposed for funding.  The scale and cost of these works is expected to be limited and the 
impacts predictable and manageable. Since these works are in urban areas, it is likely that 
some resettlement will be required for some sub-projects.  Because the works will be 
within or close to existing urban areas, there are no expected impacts on the natural 
environment, and would therefore not trigger Bank Policies on Natural Habitats, Forests 
or Pest Management.  A few sub-projectss such as wastewater treatment plants or roads 
in congested urban areas may require a full environmental assessment.  Any projects 
rated E-1 by PMDFC will be reviewed by the Bank to determine the level of assessment 
required.  
 
In urban areas, there is always the possibility that elements of physical cultural heritage 
could be affected, which would trigger the Cultural Heritage Policy.  However, the types 
of urban infrastructure investment envisaged are normally planned and designed to avoid 
affecting monuments, etc. Consultation on each sub-project and review by PMDFC are 
expected to be adequate to ensure that no conflicts or problems arise in this context.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The investments supported are all intended to improve local services and will be designed 
to minimize any adverse effects.  No significant indirect or long term impacts are 
expected.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Each of the individual investments proposed for support under the project must be 
separately justified, including assessment of alternatives, as appropriate.  PMDFC are 
reviewing each proposal.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
PMDFC has adopted a policy to promote environmentally sound, socially acceptable and 
commercially viable urban infrastructure projects and has prepared an Environmental and 
Social Framework (ESF) which sets out the Corporationâ
 ™s Policy, the framework for 
environmental and social screening, appraisal and monitoring; and the organizational 
structure. The ESF adopts a categorization approach similar to that of the Bank and many 
other agencies.  This system would identify any sub-project of a type or scale that would 
require a full EIA or RAP and these would be individually reviewed by PMDFC and the 
Bank.  
 
Page  5
The ESF address social risks by requiring consultation and participation in planning and 
implementing activities, ensuring fair and timely compensation, and providing grievance 
redress mechanisms. For all investments, PMDFC will complete a land acquisition 
screening form. Any subproject could require Social Assessment Reports to plan 
necessary participation and consultation with beneficiaries; for those resettling fewer than 
40 families an abbreviated Social Management Plan will document adequate mitigation 
measures; for those subprojects resettling 40 or more households a Full Resettlement Plan 
is required. Before civil works commence a site handover certificate must document 
entitlements are delivered before displacement.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultations are the basis of preparation of the TMA investment plans and involve a 
broad range of stakeholders including urban residents of all socio-economic levels, 
members of elected bodies, civil society and private sector agencies, municipal and 
provincial officials.  These groups will participate in the preparation of the draft Social 
and Environmental Management plans during field investigations of sub-project impacts 
as described in the ESF, including consultation, disclosure and grievance redress 
mechanisms. The grant process also involves feedback mechanisms through monitoring 
and evaluation of the implementation of the plan by the citizens, before further planning 
and investment cycles.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/11/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/12/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
12/08/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/11/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/30/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
12/12/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  6
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  7
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Jaehyang So 
12/12/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr David C. Hanrahan 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Warren Waters 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Pramod K. Agrawal 
12/12/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Sonia Hammam 
12/15/2005 
Comments:   
