Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1524 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/27/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P094936 
Project Name: Northern Areas Education Project - II 
Task Team Leader: Ameer Hussein Naqvi 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 22, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: SASHD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Primary education (50%);Secondary education (50%) 
Theme: Education for all (P);Education for the knowledge economy (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
20.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
5.00
5.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
(a) 
Increase equitable access to quality education; and  
 
(b) 
Strengthen institutional development.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project's outcomes are likely to be:  
 
(a) Increase student learning in Languages, Mathematics and Science;  
 
(b) Increase the percentage of teachers using materials and modern pedagogical methods;  
 
(c) Increase PCR, Net Enrollment Rates (NER) at primary and middle school level and 
transition rates from the primary to the middle level; and  
 
(d) Make the community schools sustainable  
 
The project's components are likely to be:  
 
1. 
Increase equitable access to quality education, through:  
 
Page  2
(a)nMaterials development at the primary and middle school levels and improving classroom 
instruction for language, science and math teaching;(b) Teachers professional development 
program and system of performance monitoring for primary, middle and (if possible) secondary 
school teachers; (c) Expansion of educational facilities and adopting measures to ensure 
sustainability of community schools to increase access in under-served areas, especially for girls 
in conservative areas; (d)rehabilitation of existing government primary schools, community 
schools, middle and secondary schools; upgrading primary schools to middle level and middle 
schools to secondary level.  Options for ensuring sustainability of CS will include: (i) making the 
budget for CS part of the regular recurrent budget; or (ii) enhancing the current endowment 
funds to a level that can generate sufficient income to meet the requirements of a CS;  
 
(e) Testing demand side interventions to bridge gender gaps and ensure access of disadvantaged 
groups to schooling, especially in conservative areas.  
 
2. 
Strengthen institutional development, through:  
 
(a) Strengthen the DOE at the Secretariat, Directorate, district levels and below for better 
supervision and support to schools, good governance, decentralized planning, management 
(including financial) and decision-making, and with an effective role for PTAs/SMCs? for better 
school management, student and teacher attendance; increasing involvement of women in 
management and administration functions; and staff development activities including in-country 
and foreign training, performance monitoring and motivational schemes; (b) Strengthen 
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) functions through upgrading EMIS facilities and GIS/School 
Mapping; establishing baselines and conducting evaluations; focus on completion rates and 
aligning indicators to the performance of teachers, supervisors and managers at all levels.  
 
The project's monitoring indicators are likely to be:  
 
(a) Increase student learning in Languages and Mathematics by 2% and 3%, respectively, by 
mid-term and by an additional 2% in Mathematics and 3% in Languages by project 
completion;(b) Double the percentage of teachers using teaching-learning materials; (c)Increase 
PCR by 3% by project completion, especially for girls and disadvantage children;(d) Increase 
NERs at primary level by 5% and at middle school level by 3%; (e) Increase transition rates 
(grades 5 to 6 and 8 to 9), and overall by 5%;(f) implement sustainability measures for 
community schools by mid-term review.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Whole of the Northern Areas of Pakistan, generally known as Federally Administered Northern 
Areas (FANA).   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Bank supported primary education through Northern Education Project (NEP) from 
February 1998 to September 2003.  Except for one teacher training college, school buildings 
were constructed by the communities.  No adverse environmental effect was noted during the 
project implementation.  The Directorate of Education, NAs prepared a construction manual for 
the guidance of the communities. A supervisory system was also developed for an in built 
monitoring of the construction work.  
 
Page  3
In phase-II, construction activities for proposed rehabilitation, upgrading and expansion of 
existing primary, community, middle and secondary schools will be part of the project.  During 
the project preparation, the Task Team (TT) will review the existing arrangements and the 
required procedures and mechanisms to manage environment and social impacts due to the land 
acquisition and construction activities.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Construction activities like rehabilitation, upgrading and expansion of existing primary, 
community, middle and secondary schools will be part of the project.During the project 
preparation, the Task Team (TT) will review the adequacy of the required procedures and 
mechanisms to manage environment and social impacts due to the land acquisition and 
construction activities.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
To ensure that communities will provide land for school construction on voluntary basis.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 
X
Status of FANA is not clear as of yet if that is part of Pakistan or have to be considered as 
part of Kashmir issue.  Therefore, a possible safeguard issue is "disputed territory". The TT will 
explore and include appropriate provisions in the PAD to safeguard this policy and ensure that 
support to FANA is not intended in any case to affect the claim of others, if any, on the territory.  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  10/27/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
Between June and September 2005   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Ameer Hussein Naqvi 
03/29/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Frederick Edmund Brusberg 
03/29/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Michelle Riboud 
03/29/2005 
Comments:   
