Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC287
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/19/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.l. Project Statistics
Country: PAKISTAN                                 Project ID: P078997
Project: Sindh On-Farm Water Management           Task Team Leader: Usman Qamar
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 15, 2003   IBRD Amoumt ($m):
Bank Approval: February 26, 2004                  IDA Amount ($m): 50.27
Managing Unit: SASRD                              Sector: Irrigation and drainage (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Rural policies and institutions (P); Water
Status: Lending                                   resource management (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
A. 1.1  The project development objective is that fanners in the project area better manage water
and increase agricultural productivity, supported by improved irrigation infrastructure and service
delivery. This objective would be achieved by: (a) improving the efficiency, reliability, and equity
of irrigation water distribution; (b) supporting agricultural productivity enhancement measures to
complement and enhance the benefits of improved water management; and (c) enhancing long-term
financial sustainability of the irrigation system by fostering self-sustaining farmner organizations at
the watercourse and distributary canal levels, which is a key element of the decentralized and
financially sustainable institutional apparatus, GOSindh is endeavoring to establish.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The proposed four-year project would focus on canal commands where upper tier institutional reforms are
in progress and Area Water Boards (AWBs) have been established. The Agriculture Department has
carried out an integrated social and enviromnental assessment (ISEA) of the project. The ISEA findings
and recomunendations have provided the basis for the project design and implementation framework. The
project includes five mutually complementary components:
A.     Social Mobilization and Capacity Building. This component involves developing sustainable
farmer organizations (FOs) who can effectively operate and maintain the irrigation and drainage system,
through social mobilization and capacity building. Numerous WCAs and more than 190 FOs have already
been established in Sindh. Further social mobilization efforts are currently underway. The project will
supplement these efforts by establishing further WCAs and FOs and building their capacity. Training and
Capacity building for WCAs and FOs would focus on getting these organizations ready for taking over
O&M and abiana (water charge) collection responsibilities as well as improving productivity. Irrigation
and Drainage Management Transfer Agreements (IDMTs) would be concluded between the AWBs/SIDA
and the FOs to define the tenns of transfer and roles and responsibilities of all parties. The WCAs and
FOs would be involved in planning, designing, anid implementing irrigation improvement works under the
project, as well as in providing agricultLral support services.
B.     High Payoff Improvements of Irrigation Facilities:
i) Tertiary level improvenments on approximately 10% of Sindh 's irrigated area, including:



2
ISDS
(a)       improvement of about 4,000 watercourses, comprising, earthen improvements, lining,
installation of pucca nuccas (concrete turnouts) culverts, communtity structures (e.g. washing bays for
women), cattle crossings and buffalo baths;
(b) construction of approximately 200 water storage tanks in the barani (rain-fed) areas of Sindh; and
ii) linproven ent of distributary canals, targeting about 100 distributary/minor canals managed by
FOs. The improvement/rehabilitation works would generally include:
(a) restoration of outlets, weak sections of channel banks and berms, and de-silting;
(b) repair of regulator gates, cross regulators and diversion structures, protection works upstream and
downstream of structLres and chainel sides, cattle crossings and cattle ghats (cattle drinking water
points); and
(c) installation of gauges and control structures for flow measurement at the distributary head and
each mogha (watercourse off take outlets).
iii) Improvement/rehabilitation of branch canals, targeting about 25 branch canals supplying water
to the distributary canals on which FOs are established. Rehabilitation works would be similar to those
envisaged for distributary canals. In addition, the following type of works would be considered:
(a) motorization of regulator gates, where necessary;
(b) installation of gauges and control structures for measturing flows at the head of the branches and
distributary off take points; and
(c) installation of a telecommunication system for monitoring and managing flows in branch canals to
improve water scheduling and safety of operations.
The ISEA has developed eligibility for WCAs and FOs to access project resources, and prioritization
criteria for targeting the above investments at relatively poorer farming communities (e.g. farmers at the
tail-end of the irrigation system, smaller land holders, waterlogged areas, saline groundwater areas) as well
as for encouraging participation of women and tenants in WCAs and FOs. These criteria are included in
the Implementation Framework.
C.     Productivity Enhancement Program, comprising precise leveling of 100,000 acres (40,000 ha) of
farm land using laser guided equipment; establishment of some 100 demonstration centers to disseminate a
full range of improved water management and irrigation agronomy practices/techniques; training of
FOs/WCAs in improved water management, cultural practices and new technology (land leveling, zero
tillage, sprinkler and drip systems, etc.); integrated pest management (IPM), Integrated Plant and Nutrient
Management (IPNM), infonnation systems, market/marketing, etc. An information system would be
introduced within SIDA, AWBs and FOs, including establishment of 3 pilot information kiosks managed
by AWB and FOs. Timely availability and dissemination of infonnation on expected and actual water
availability at barrages, off-takes of main and branch canals and distributaries would help in managing
available water more efficiently and productively. This system would be especially useful when the canal
systems are operated on rotation schedules to cope with water shortages.
D.     Monitoring and Evaluation, including design and implementation of a monitoring and evaluation



3
ISDS
system and establishment of a spatial GIS database. The M&E system would provide continuous feed back
to the implementing agencies on the project perfonnance and assess its physical, agricultural, social,
financial / fiscal, environuental and economic impact, so that, corrective actions could be undertaken in a
timely manner. Detailed design of the M&E system will be completed within 3 months of project start, and
baseline surveys would be carried out as sub-projects for distributary and minor canal rehabilitation and
watercourse improvement are selected.
E.     Project management support, including, inter alia, technical assistance for project launch,
supervision (quality assurance), mid-tenn review, development of a project management information
system, productivity enhancement, preparation of and assistance in implementing a training and capacity
building program for project staff, FOs and WCAs, promotion of participation of women and tenants in
project activities, and preparation of a strategic social and environmental assessment of the entire Sindh
province.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, infonration about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The Province of Sindh is located in the southeast part of Pakistan, with the province of Punjab in its north,
Balochistan to its west, India on the east and south-east, and the Arabian Sea to its south. Its total
geographical area is 14.09 million hectares (constituting 17.5 percent of Pakistan) and comprising four
topographically distinct parts, with the Kirthar mountain range on the west; a central alluvial plain bisected
by the Indus river in the middle, a desert belt in the east and the Indus delta in the south.
The climate of the province is arid and hot. Rainfall is generally low --averaging less than 260 mm a year--
and temperatures in summer exceed 37 degrees centigrade resulting in high evaporation rates and making
irrigation essential for agriculture. Rainfall contributes only 2 to 3% of the total water supply during rabi
(winter crop season from mid-October to mid-April). Canal water, groundwater and sub-irrigation
contribute approximately 75%, 5% and 15%, respectively. About 5.7 million ha is commanded by canals.
Net area sown is about 3 million ha, with about 1 million ha sown twice a year. With groundwater in most
of Sindh being brackish and unsuitable for crop irrigation, over 95% of the irrigated areas rely on surface
water resources.
Around 78% of the area in Sindh province is underlain by saline groundwater, which is unsuitable
for irrigation (more than 1000 mg/l TDS). Close to the edges of the canals system, shallow fresh
groundwater can be found. Unlike the Indus Basin Irrigation System, the drainage network in
Pakistan is not contiguous and integrated. Surface and sub-surface drainage systems are inadequate,
resulting in much of the drainage affluent being either retained in the basin or disposed into rivers
and canals. There are 13 existing surface drainage systems in Sindh, which serve a total area of
over 6.2 MA (2.5 M ha). In addition there are two sub-surface drainage systems, which serve an
area of 0.10 MA (0.04 M ha). Due to inadequate drainage cover, nearly one-fifth of the canal
command areas have been affected by water logging and salinity. Due to the flat topography (very
low slopes) flooding of south eastern parts is common after heavy rain spells or cyclones which
occur from time to time.
While the average farm size is small (4.3 ha), land ownership is skewed in favor of large holders. There
are over 800,000 fanns with a total area of about 3.5 million ha. Over 93% of the farms are small (less
than 7 ha) and represent 64% of the total farm area. Large farms (greater than 7 ha) are only 7% in
number but represent nearly 36% of the total farm area. 50% of the farms, representing 59% of the total



4
ISDS
farm area, are operated by owners, while 42% of the fanns, representing 29%, by tenants and the
remaining 8%, representing 12% of total farm area, by owners-cuin-tenants. The skewed nature of
landholdings tends to make large holdings unproductive and productivity falls off through fallowing and
inefficient agricultural practices.
There are a number of protected areas, including game reserves, wildlife sanctuaries and wetland sites that
fall within the irrigated areas in Sindh, and could potentially become a part of the project area. Prominent
among these are the Nara Game Reserve, Nara Desert Wildlife Sanctuary, and Takkar Wildlife Sanctuary
in the Khairpur district, and the Rann of Katch Wildlife Sanctuary in districts Badin and Tharparkar. The
wetland sites generally cover areas of less than 5,000 ha each, and are typically generated by the
accumulation of seepage from canals, surface runoff and direct inflows from surface drains. Species of
concern include marsh crocodiles and migratory birds that use these areas as winter refuges on migratory
routes.
Sindhi society is intricately structured into a hierarchical formation of considerable complexity and
antiquity in a patrimonial domain. It is a pyramid of depressed incomes with widespread rural poverty at
the base (sharecroppers or haris) and high levels of wealth at the narrow apex (landlords or waderas). The
decision-making process generally involves just the apical players, while small farmers and sharecroppers
have only modest participation. Further complexity is added with elements of state authority interacting
with traditional society for the regulation of justice and revenue. There is a meshing and manipulation of
state authority and traditional hierarchy at every level. Bonded labor is another unfortunate aspect of
tradition in Sindh, whereby indebted tenants and sharecroppers undertake wangdr (labor without pay),
which does not suffice to work off their debts.
While farming activities are largely performed by the men, women's participation in agricultural activities
such as planting seedlings, cotton picking, and weeding is fairly extensive. In areas and households where
there are either no men or have migrated to the cities to find work, women are left to handle the agricultural
role of men. Inspite of this, women role in the agricultural sector generally remains unrecognized as a
majority does not own land and has low visibility.
Indigenous people in Sindh include the Mohanas --or the boat people-- living on Manchar Lake, and the
Tharis who live mostly in district Tharparkar, which lies outside the project area. Within the Tharis there
are several subgroups, including Bhils, Kolis, Menghwars, Ods and Chinas, all of whom have a distinct
identity and culture. Most of these groups are poor and landless. Even those with land are no better-off as
their lands are in the desert of Tharparkar and not productive.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: With the project undertaking only rehabilitation works and its impact on the environment and on
rural livelihood's expected to be positive, the project has been classified as category 'B'.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on CI for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        * Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   * Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes 0 No



5
ISDS
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes * No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     0 Yes * No
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If infornmation is not available,
describe steps to be talken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. 1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
GOSindh has carried out an Integrated Social and Environmental Assessment (ISEA) to identify and assess
any safeguard issues and potential environmental and social impacts of the project. The Sindh Environment
Protection Agency (SEPA) has reviewed the Environmental Assessment and approved execution and
implementation of the project, with the condition that any works carried out in a protected area will require
prior clearance from the Sindh Wildlife Department. (Letter from SEPA is attached in project files).
Applicability of safeguard policies is summarized below.
Safeguards Tri$Izered: Physical interventions are limited to the rehabilitation of existing canals and
watercourses. Three safeguard policies are, however, triggered: Enviromnental Assessment, Pest
Management, and Projects in International Waterways.
1. Environmental Assessment: The overall findings of the ISEA are that the project would lead to more
reliable, efficient and equitable water distribution with an overall improvement in the environment and
rural livelihoods in the project area. Nevertheless, the ISEA flags the following issues as areas of
concern: (i) the impact of soil and silt removal and disposal during rehabilitation activities, which may
contaminate soils, communtmity wells, and water ponds, and block the natural drainage; (ii) use of lined
sections of watercourses for washing clothes; (iii) increased use of chemical pesticides hanning human
health and the environment; (iv) some tree clearing that may be required where watercourses need to be
realigned; (v) lack of participation of small, tail-end and women farmers in WCA's and FOs; and (vi)
sharecroppers obliged to work for watercourse improvements without being paid. Frameworks have
been developed under the ISEA to mitigate against these and enhance the positive impacts of the
project. These measures include: (i) safe disposal or recycling of silt for agricultural purposes and
construction of washing bays and cattle baths to avoid polluting water; (ii) setting specifications for the
quality of borrow earth to avoid deterioration in the quality of existing soil; (iii) implementing a pest
management plan; (iv) avoiding cutting of trees as far as possible, and where essential, planting at least
double the number of cut trees as replacement; (v) enhancing the skills and abilities of farmers, through
training in new technologies, better water management practices, and in assessing and collecting
abiana; (vi) empowering communities, including women, through improved participation opportunities
in WCAs and FOs; (vii) incorporating mechanisms that recognize and pay for labor contributed by
sharecroppers; (viii) strengthening the institutional capacity of WCAs and FOs; (ix) reducing conflict
and improving social relationship between farmers at the head and tail-ends of canals and
watercourses; and (x) improving networking among WCAs, FOs, area water boards (AWBs),
community organizations and NGOs.
2. Pest Management: Increased use of pesticides has disturbed the agro-ecosystems in the country.



6
ISDS
Pesticides have been instrumental in the killing of non-targeted and friendly organisms, and have also
induced pest resurgences. On the other hand, the social costs of pesticide use have been high, including
occupational poisoning, pesticide residues on food, drinking water contamination, pest resistance, loss
of biodiversity, and costs of prevention and abatement measures and awareness campaigns. The use of
pesticides in the project area could increase as project interventions improve availability of water with
corresponding increase in cropping intensity. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has, therefore, been
prepared to rationalize the use of pesticides in the project area. The National Agricultural Research
Center (NARC), with support from FAO, is currently implementing a National Integrated Pest
Management Project. The Sindh Department of Agriculture is an active participant in this program,
and has so far trained over 3,000 fanners in IPM technology. Recently, a National IPM project of
much larger size has been approved by the federal govermnent under which 55,000 farmers would be
similarly trained. To rationalize the use of chemical pesticides, the PMP adopts the strategy of
promoting IPM in the project area, besides introducing the concept of Integrated Plant and Soil
Nutrient Management (IPSNM) to reduce the use of chemical fertilizers. The main activities under the
PMP would be training of farmers in IPM practices, introduction of IPSNM, monitoring of pesticide
residues on selected crops (horticulture produce/vegetables), research, and dissemination of
information, which would be undertalcen as a part of the productivity enhancement component of the
project. The project would, straightaway, start implementing a pilot operation constituting activities
other than the training of farmers while a decision about training of farmers in IPM would be
undertaken after an appraisal of the initial performance of the National IPM project. The PMP would
be implemented by the Director General, Extension and Research in close collaboration with WCAs
and FOs, and the activities under it would be monitored as part of the monitoring and evaluation of the
project.
3. Projects in International Waterways: Since the proposed Project involves rehabilitation of irrigation
channels, which receive water from the Indus river --an international waterway--, OP 7.50 applies.
However, the project essentially involves rehabilitation of existing irrigation facilities and does not
involve works and activities that would exceed the original scheme, change its nature, or alter or
expand its scope and extent to make it appear a new or different scheme. The distribution of water in
the rivers that flow from India into Pakistan is covered by the Indus Waters Treaty signed by the two
countries in 1960. While the countries have engaged in a nutmber of conflicts and the tensions in the
region have not fully subsided, the treaty has remained intact and continues to be a source of stability
in the region. The risk of reductions or variations in river water flows into Pakistan from India on
account of noncompliance with the treaty is, therefore, low. The task team also reviewed Article VII of
the Indus Waters Treaty of 1960 between India and Pakistan and concluded that: (i) a notification by
Pakistan to India under paragraph (2) of the said Article VII is not required, as the project will not
cause interference with the waters of any of the Rivers and will not affect the other riparians materially,
and (ii) the exception to the external notification requirements of OP 7.50, set forth in paragraph 7(a)
of OP 7.50, is fully applicable. Accordingly, a waiver from the notification requirement was sought
and received. (Memo in project file).
The Following Safeguards are Not Triggered:
1. Forestry: The project does not involve any forest sector activities and the project interventions will
not have a significant impact upon forested areas.
2. Natural Habitats: Project interventions will be confined to established irrigated areas, with
rehabilitation works limited to land that has already been under cultivation. Most of the wetlands in the
project area are fed by the seepage from major canals, surface runoff, and direct inflows from surface
drains. Seepage from watercourses accounts for a very small portion of wetland recharge. The project
does not involve the lining of canals, and less than 30% of the length of the watercourses will be lined.



7
ISDS
Since no new land development is expected, and the project activities are not expected to impact the
seepage of water into the wetlands, the project is not expected to have any adverse or beneficial impact
on wildlife and natural habitats. Moreover, as mentioned under para II.D. la. above, SEPA has
categorically stated that "any project activity in the protected areas shall be initiated with the prior
consent or clearance of Sindh Wildlife Department." (Letter from SEPA is attached in project files).
3. Safety of Dams: The project does not involve the construction of any storage reservoirs or dams.
4. Involuntary Resettlement: The project involves the rehabilitation of existing canals and
watercourses; construction of new canals or watercourses is not envisaged. Involuntary acquisition of
private land and physical displacement is, therefore, not involved. Watercourse improvements,
hoWever, may involve minor realignment requiring some voluntary land acquisition. In such situations,
the experience of similar projects implemented in the past, has been that WCAs/FOs carry out such
voluntary land donation or acquisition with consensus. Even so, evidence of any voluntary land
acquisition and compensation will be documented to ensure fairness and transparency. Schemes that
involve involuntary land acquisition and/or resettlement will not be undertakenz. This will be
covenanted.
5. Indigenous Peoples: Indigenous people are not the target beneficiaries of the project. The project
area does not include the Tharparkar desert where most of them live. Poor and landless indigenous
people, however, do move to the inrigated areas in search of wages, working on farms and construction
sites. Though most of this movement is temporary, it is not uncommon to find these people settled in
irrigated areas as sharecroppers. Those living in the irrigated areas would benefit from improved
employment opportunities resulting from the project. The participatory mechanisms detailed in the
ISEA aim at better inclusion of share croppers, including those belonging to these groups.
6. Cultural Property: The project involves only rehabilitation work; no new schemes or excavations are
envisaged. The ISEA, nonetheless, requires procedures to be followed in the event of any chance finds
during rehabilitation works. Requirements under the federal and provincial laws for dealing with
chance finds will be followed in such instances.
7. Projects in Disputed Areas: The project would not finance any investment in any disputed area.
I1.D. lb. Describe aniy potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
The expected cumulative impacts due to project components and the application of the Environmental
Assessment and Pest Management safegLiards are positive and include: more efficient use of water and
higher productivity due to improved water management practices, and trainings; more equitable distribution
of water through participation of fanners in institutions that are more inclusive and better managed; and
improved use of pesticide and pest management practices.
II.D. lc Describe any potential long term impacts due to anlticipated future activities in the project area.
The potential long term impacts due to future activities in the project area are expected to be positive as
described in II. D.Ib. above. Nonetheless, the hierarchical structures of Sindhi society represent an
important set of challenges and opportunities that are reflected in the project design. The primary challenge
is that benefits have rarely trickled down to the base of the pyramid, and state-sponsored poverty alleviation
strategies have had limited impiact on the poor. The opportunities lie in the rapid application of new
strategies which can transfonn productivity. Mechanisms for ensuring that farmer organizations supported



8
ISDS
by the project are more equitable structures have been incorporated in the implementation framework. This
is the first water management project in the country that recognizes sharecroppers as stakeholders in the
irrigation system and is encouraging their participation. Still, such mechanisms are not envisaged to be
radical steps; rather, they will take the lead from ongoing stnictural transfornations and continuities
particularly those resulting from the new and far more progressive Sindh Water Management Ordinance
(SWMO) 2002. The emphasis will be on ensuring a more humane transition through enlightened practices
that aim at giving voice to the small, tail-end and women fanners and sharecroppers while at the samne time
avoiding conflict situations with established hierarchy.
I1.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
The ISEA examined the following options: (i) no project; (ii) doing a project using existing structures and
methods; and (iii) doing a project with improved and strengthened institutions and more inclusive
methodology. The first two options were rejected as the irrigation system in the province has deteriorated
over time and needs immediate attention, and the recognition that trying to deliver through an existing
system, that has had, at best, liited impact, was not appropriate.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the bonrower to address safeguard issues
Measures for compliance with environmental and social safeguards have been built into the project design
at every level, from selection of institLtions (eligibility) to selection of subprojects (prioritization),
implementation of subprojects (supervision) and capacity building and monitoring. Following are the
details of these measures:
Eligibility Criteria - The eligibility criteria for WCAs/FOs to qualify and subprojects proposed by them to
be able to access project resources are included in the Implementation Framework. These criteria, inter
alia, require WCAs and FOs to comply with the requirement of participation of small and tail-end
fanners, specified in the SWMO. The Director General Agriculture Engineering & Water Management
(DGAEWM) and the field teams under him will have overall responsibility for ensuring that institutions
and subprojects proposed by them meet these criteria.
Prioritization and Incentives - The Framework also includes criteria that give priority for targeting project
investments to relatively poorer fanning communities (e.g. fanners at the tail-end of the irrigation system,
smaller land holders, waterlogged areas, saline groundwater areas) and incentives for WCAs and FOs to
encourage participation of women and tenants. The DGAEWM and his field teams will rank subprojects
in accordance with the prioritization criteria and also encourage the adoption of these incentives by others.
Design and Supervision - The project implementation assistance consultants will be responsible for
providing sub-project designs that meet enviromnental and social standards and adequately incorporate
mitigation measures as articulated in the Framework (and summarized in para II D. 1 .A. 1 above). The
consultants will also ensure that these standards and mitigation measures continue to be met during
implementation. In this respect they will pay special attention to monitoring that wages are paid to
sharecroppers contributing labor.
Capacity Building - Capacity of the DGAEWM, WCAs, and FOs, to manage the environmental and
social impacts as envisaged by the ISEA will be built and enhanced, particularly in areas, including
conflict management, gender sensitivity, and poverty analysis. This capacity building support will be
provided by the implementation consultants in partnership with Training Institutes and NGOs.



9
ISDS
Monitoring & Evaluation - A provincial steering committee supported by M&E consultants, financed
under the project will have overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluating project outputs and
outcomes, and compliance with environunental and social safeguards as well as the implementation of the
pest management plan and related monitoring.
To operationalize the environmental management plan, an environmental manual consisting of the
following will be developed and adopted before implementation is started: (i) guidelines for implementation
of the EMP; (ii) a standard checklist for identification of environmental impacts and applicable mitigation
measures; and (iii) formats for quarterly enviromnental monitoring reports.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders with whom extensive consultations were held during the preparation of ISEA and
Implementation Framework, included: (i) large, small, and tail-end fanners; (ii) sharecroppers; (iii)
Government of Sindh agencies, including Agriculture, Irrigation, Local Govemment, and Wild Life
Departments; (iv) the Sindh Enviromuent Protection Agency; (v) WCAs, FOs, and AWBs; (vi) community
organizations, including women groups; (vii) civil society organizations; and (viii) indigenous people, and
farm laborers. These consultations included field investigations, focus group discussions, key informant
discussions, household surveys and, village profiles, based on which the project was designed. Similar
consultations are expected to be continued and mainstreamed during the course of project implementation.
Moreover, the project intends using NGOs and civil society organizations for training and capacity building
of government officials and WCA, FO and AWB members specially on participatory techniques,
community mobilization and gender issues.
E. Safeguards Classificationt (select in SAP). Categoty is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguLard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
teclnically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[  SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development fimds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.



10
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirelnents
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          E.rpected     Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                4/15/2003      7/24/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            4/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/30/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive  Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlemnent Action Plan/Framewvork-:                      Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Franewvork:             Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 4/15/2003     7/24/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/15/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/30/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Si2ned and submitted bv       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Usman Qamar                                 09/11/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Qazi Azmat Isa/Person/World Bank       09/11/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Paul Jonathan Martin/Person/World Bank
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: L. Panneer Selvam                        09/17/2003
Sector Manager/Director       Constance A. Bernard                        09/17/2003
Comments
Signed by Gajanand Pathmanathan



