Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1980 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Pakistan 
Project ID: P099046 
Project Name: AJK-Community Infrastructure Services Project (AJK-CISP) - Earthquake 
Additional Financing 
Task Team Leader: Raja Rehan Arshad 
Estimated Appraisal Date:  
Estimated Board Date: December 1, 2005 
Managing Unit: SASAR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (50%);Sub-national 
government administration (20%);Other social services (15%);Roads and highways 
(10%);Health (5%) 
Theme: Decentralization (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Participation and civic 
engagement (P);Access to urban services and housing (S);Other human development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
40.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the proposed AJK CISP project is to improve the well-being of unserved and 
underserved low income communities through the delivery of cost effective and sustainable 
community development schemes, and basic infrastructure and services, using participatory 
community-based approaches.  This would be achieved by:  
 
(i) strengthening the role and capabilities of local governments at the district and lower levels to 
extend technical, financial, and management support to community-based organizations (CBOs);  
 
(ii) mobilizing and building the capacity of CBOs to increase their participation in development 
activities; and  
 
(iii) effective governance, transparency, and accountability through improvements in 
operational, monitoring and evaluation, and financial and budgetary procedures for project 
implementation.  
 
Page  2
In the context of the Government's plan to decentralize administration to local governments, the 
Project will support the development of a participative development framework to be 
implemented by the district and other lower levels of government working closely with 
communities and their community-based organizations (CBOs).  
 
The main objective of the Category Z project, AJK Emergency Recovery Project (ERP) is to 
assist the GoAJK in implementing a program to restore vital economic and social infrastructure 
damaged and/or destroyed by the October 2005 earthquake.  Performance of the project would 
be measured by how well GoAJK is able to restore the damaged infrastructure to stimulate a 
return of economic activity to normalcy.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The AJK CISP will have three complementary components, briefly described as follows:  
 
(a) 
Decentralized planning and implementation assistance (US$ 3.08 million).  This 
component will develop the capacity of the state, district, communities/CBOs through: (i) 
specialized services and training assistance in institutional strengthening through improved 
procedures for project implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and training and capacity 
building activities;  (ii) project implementation support,  through incremental staff cost for state, 
district and field staff; (iii) operating costs and recurrent cost; (iv) Pakistan and overseas learning 
visits; and (v) Studies on:  
 
(i) water quality testing; and  
 
(ii) baseline/time savings including time bound knowledge attitude practice (KAP) surveys. 
This component will finance capacity building activities and services by consultants and other 
service providers (such as local consulting groups, private sector firms, NGOs, training and 
academic institutions).  
 
(b) 
Community development (US$ 2.133 million).  This component will include: (i) 
mobilization, organization, and capacity building through training and technical assistance in the 
development of Community Action Plans (CAP) as the basis for the active participation of 
communities in the planning, implementation, and management of their development programs 
including systematic training on various parts of the scheme cycle including survey design, 
construction technologies and community initiatives, and field support activities; (ii) health and 
environmental sanitation awareness (HESA) program to reduce morbidity by generating demand 
for safe water, sanitation, and other basic infrastructure, and for the improvement of the overall 
environment; and (iii) support to women and children (SWC) in areas of health, skills and 
management training, economic/functional literacy, and livelihood improvement through 
linkages with economic and micro-credit facilities.  A complementary economic literacy (or 
functional literacy) assistance as appropriate will be provided for 10 to 15 percent of 
participating community households; emphasis will be on adult literacy and in activities to help 
deal with other emerging urban challenges especially for the youth living in  many urban low 
income areas. This component will finance mostly capacity building and training activities for 
the CBOs and their members, and related equipment as needed.  
 
(c) 
Community infrastructure (US$ 21.94 million).  This component will involve 
investments in basic infrastructure and services, with priorities to be established in partnership 
with the communities through their CBOs.  This operation is designed in such a way that the 
Page  3
actual locations of the proposed interventions are not identified at this stage since a demand-
driven planning approach will be used during implementation.  A menu of infrastructure to be 
provided includes: (i) water supply; (ii) community latrines; (iii) drainage; (iv) street pavements; 
(v) street lighting; (vi) primary solid waste collection; (vii) internal pathways; (viii) foot bridges; 
and (ix) tagging/numbering streets.  Trunk and other specialized infrastructure facilities will also 
be included to ensure that basic infrastructure functions efficiently.  Particular attention will be 
given to ensuring the integration of community programs, e.g., water supply and/or sanitation 
schemes with health and sanitation activities.  The Project will finance civil works and related 
equipment, technical services for pre-feasibility studies and infrastructure design, and capacity 
building in supervision of works, operation and maintenance, project monitoring, etc.  
 
The Category Z, AJK ERP project would comprise the following three components:  
 
(a) 
Restoration of Economic and Social Infrastructure: The component will include, but not 
be limited to, restoration and reconstruction of social and physical infrastructure such as roads, 
education and health facilities, water supply and sanitation systems, street pavement, foot 
bridges, etc.  
 
(b) 
Strengthening of the Safety Nets and Capacity Building: This component would include 
two subcomponents: (i) Strengthening of safety nets, including among other things providing 
cash grants and in-kind assistance to the affected communities and households and (ii)capacity 
building/training in order to enable communities to reconstruct with improved standards and to 
better handle disasters in the future.  
 
(c) 
Project Management and Implementation Support:  This component will finance project 
management and monitoring. It will provide support to provincial and district level governments 
by financing staff and consultant recruitment and incremental operating costs. This component 
will also finance third party inspection and validation.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Azad Jammu Kashmir (AJK) has a population of 2.92 million, the majority of which live in rural 
areas. AJK has seven districts, namely Muzaffarabad, Bagh, Poonch, Sudhnuti, Kotli, Mirpur 
and Bhimber. Muzaffarabad is almost half of AJK in terms of land area and houses one quarter 
of the population. The northern parts of AJK has high mountains and narrow valleys. As one 
moves south the valley widens and productive use increases. The scattered settlement pattern 
over hilly terrain in AJK makes development difficult and costly.  The terrain, resources and 
socio-economic conditions vary across different regions.  Muzaffarabad, the largest district is 
less accessible and the poorest, especially the northern part of Neelum valley.  As one moves 
south from Muzaffarabad towards Bagh, then Poonch, Sudhonti and Kotli, the VAlley widens up 
and agricultural production increases.  The area is more accessible, especially from Pakistan. The 
border area with India remains a restricted zone, otherwise life carries on as usual, Kotli is 
partially hilly, and Bhimber and Mirpur further south are plains and are similar to agricultural 
regions of northern Punjab. Settlement size is larger here and agricultural production is more.  
 
Social organizations in AJK are molded around biradaris (clans), and one village may have up 
to four to five Biradaris. Across AJK, one to two biradaris dominated almost half the villages 
surveyed, while the rest were homogenous with almost equal number of population. Political 
interests are not related to biradari, and political competition is equal within and between 
Page  4
biradaris. The organization at the village level comprises of representatives (elders and 
influential persons) from different neighborhoods within the village, who meet on occasions or 
when needs arise.  The organization resolves family and property disputes and discusses and 
directs welfare activities. In the past, many of the self help activities related to construction of 
Mosques, schools, link roads and bridges have been carried out using this platform. In the more 
recent past, community based Government projects and NGO activities have strengthened these 
organizations by making them development oriented, motivating participation by youth and 
women and by introducing to them contemporary system of management and leadership 
development.  
 
The project supports low income communities with s
pecial assistance to womenâ
 ™s
activities.  A key social issue that the Project seeks to address is how to secure the active 
participation of all ethnic, gender, and economic groups in sub-schemes preparation, design, and 
implementation and ensuring that CI and CD schemes respond to their genuine needs and 
demands.  An overview of the main social issues confronting the Project is summarized in the 
social assessment report carried out during project preparation (see Annex 12 of PAD).  
 
Environmentally Sensitive Areas (ESAs) can be defined as the areas of environmental 
significance that are comparatively more sensitive to development undertakings. The 
development initiatives in such areas should be planned in such a way that the environment of 
the area is not disturbed or changed.  The ESAs as defined in OP4.04 of the areas that are 
significant value in their natural state.  For all projects in ESAs an EIA is required. Any CI-
schemes identified in ESAs having negative environmental impact will not be financed under the 
CISP.  
 
While the AJK CISP will work in all areas of the state, under the AJK ERP works will be 
carried out in the districts affected by the earthquake namely Muzaffarabad, Poonch 
(Rawalakot), Bagh, and Sadhnoti.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
Activities under the AJK ERP include restoration of road and bridges, repair of water supply 
schemes, and repair and construction of buildings. They are not expected to generate major 
negative environmental effects  
 
The applicability of the safeguard policies to the project have been determined in the social and 
environmental assessments. Guidelines for for arrangements for the borrower to address 
safeguard issues have been developed and are included in the Environmental Management 
Framework (EMF) and detailed out in the AJK CISPâ
 ™s  Operational Manual. The same EMF 
is applicable to the AJK Emergency Recovrey Project (ERP). In additional the AJK ERP Project 
Paper provides detailed Environmental and Social Guidelines in Annex 4.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Ms Zia Al Jalaly (SASES) 
Mr Javaid Afzal (SASES) 
 
Page  5
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The AJK CISP is expected to contribute to the improvement of environmental conditions in 
rural, and urban areas by providing and expanding basic infrastructures.  For instance, some of 
the main environmental health improvements expected under the water supply and sanitation 
component include: (i) time and energy savings for women and children by bringing sources of 
water closer to the home; (ii) increased water supply for bathing, washing, and cleaning; (iii) 
improvements in hygiene and sanitation practices; and (iv) reduced bacterial contamination due 
to controlled disposal of human waste.  
 
Typical investment components are expected to include: (i) water supply; (ii) latrines and 
public toilets; (iii) drainage; (iv) low-cost sewerage; (v) internal pathways and footbridges; (vi) 
street paving; (vii) street lighting and sweeping; (viii) primary solid waste collection; and (ix) 
community centers and meeting rooms. These small-scale infrastructure are not expected to 
generate major negative environmental effects.  However, a number of adverse impacts could 
occur if the investments are not properly planned, sited, designed, constructed, and operated and 
maintained.  
 
Activities under the AJK ERP include restoration of road and bridges, repair of water 
supply schemes, and repair and construction of buildings. They are not expected to generate 
major negative environmental effects.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
X
OP 7.6 applies as the proposed activities will be applied in AJK, an area over which India 
and Pakistan have been in dispute since 1947.  By financing the proposed Credit, IDA, does not 
intend to make any judgment as to the legal or other status of any disputed territories or to 
prejudice the final determinati
on
of
the partiesâ
 ™ claims.  
 
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  11/30/2005 
 
Page  6
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Environmental Assessment already launched and will be completed by June 30, 2006.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Raja Rehan Arshad 
11/09/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ms Kseniya Lvovsky 
11/10/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Adolfo Brizzi 
11/10/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  7
