                                            PAKISTAN
        PUNJAB BARRAGE REHABILITATION & MODERNIZATION PROJECT

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           PAD STAGE
                                                                                 Report No.: AC889



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 19/August 26, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Pakistan                              Project ID: P088994
Project Name:                                  Task Team Leader: Xiaokai Li
Punjab Barrage Rehabilitation &
Modernization Project
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 10,        Estimated Board Date: December 20, 2004
2004
Managing Unit: SASRD                           Lending Instrument:
                                               Specific Investment Loan
Sector: Irrigation and Drainage (60%);         Theme: Other Agriculture ­ Irrigation &
Water Resources Management (40%)               Drainage (P); General Water Resources (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
Paul Martin (Environmental) and Asger Christensen (Social)
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IBRD: 112
Other financing amounts by source: 16                                              ($m)



B. Project Objectives [from section 3 of PAD]

The main objective of the project is to prevent the failure of the Taunsa Barrage that provides
irrigation for 2 million acres and drinking water in the rural areas of Southern Punjab benefiting
several million people. This objective would be achieved through: (i) rehabilitating and
strengthening the Taunsa Barrage and associated structures; (ii) renovation of the electro-
mechanical facilities; and (iii) improving operation and maintenance and emergency
preparedness.



C. Project Description [from section 4 of PAD]

While the detailed project description is not yet to be finalized at appraisal, the project is to
include the following three components.

Component 1.       Rehabilitation and Strengthening Works
The main works include (a) a 4,300 ft long subsidiary weir located 1,500 feet downstream of
the barrage to raise the tailwater level and ensure proper energy dissipation at high river flows;
(b) repair of the barrage floor by removal of weak concrete and replacement with a new layer of
concrete, and grouting to seal joints and fill voids in the foundation; (c) sediment mitigation
measures for the D.G Khan canal at the right bank; and (d) installation of a safety monitoring
system by placing some critical monitoring instruments in the barrage and its foundation. The
output of this component will be a secure barrage structure with effective energy dissipation and
restored design discharge capacity, and a functional monitoring system.

Component 2.       Renovation of Gates and Appurtenances for Barrage and Canal
                   Headworks

This component involves renovation of the barrage gates and hoists and improvement in the
operating and control system including necessary O & M equipment and possibly upgrading of
flow measurement equipment at Taunsa. This component will lead to upgrading of the operating
facilities with higher level of automation and remote control.

Component 3.         Consulting Services and Implementation Support
This component covers: (i) consultants for feasibility study, detailed design and construction
supervision of Taunsa Barrage; (ii) consultants for detailed designs for rehabilitation of five
other barrages, namely, Jinnah, Khanki, Suleimanki, Trimmu, Balloki and Islam; and (iii) an
independent panel of experts for feasibility study, design, safety review and construction quality
enhancement. (iv) support for the Project Management Office including equipment and the
appointment of specialist in project management, procurement and financial management.

D. Project location (if known)

The project will be located on the mainstream of the Indus River in the section of Punjab
Province. The Taunsa barrage is located 30 km downstream of Taunsa Sharif Town, in the arid
zone of southern Punjab.



E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PAD]

Pakistan has a long working relationship with the Bank, and has experiences with many water-
related and infrastructure project operations. Punjab Province has recently involved in the Bank-
supported National Drainage Program (NDP) and Punjab On-farm Water Management Project
under preparation. The Government of Pakistan has similar requirements for environmental
assessment for infrastructure projects and its responsible agencies are familiar with the Bank
safeguards policies. For environmental and social assessment, an EIA/SA prepared by the
implementing agency and its consultants, has been approved by the EPB and PWB.



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

                   Safeguard Policy
Applicable?
                   If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
      [Y]          Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                   Restoration of the design conditions by rehabilitating and strengthening the
                   existing structures will trigger an environmental impact assessment (EIA). There
                   will be no significant change to the hydrological regime, however, so no long-
                   term ecological or social impacts are anticipated. An EMP will cover the
                   management of construction phase environmental and social impacts, including
                   site housekeeping, temporary facilities, borrow sites, the management of sediment
                   and water quality, and opportunities for the expansion of local employment.
      [N]          Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
                   The ponded area upstream of the Tuansa Barrage was designated a Ramsar site
                   (i.e. a wetland of international importance) in 1996. According to the Ramsar
                   citation, the site forms a very important wintering area for waterbirds, a breeding
                   area for several species, and a staging area for certain cranes and shorebirds. The
                   Indus dolphin and otter are present in the river in small numbers, and the
                   endangered long-nosed crocodile, or gharial, has been reported at the barrage.

                   Since the rehabilitation of the barrage will not lead to any significant changes in
                   the hydrological regime, no ecological impacts are anticipated.
      [N]          Pest Management (OP 4.09)

      [N]          Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
                   The Social Assessment completed by the implementing agency indicates that
                   sufficient unused land is available within the existing IPD compound for storage
                   and lay-down areas, so it will not be necessary to acquire land temporarily for
                   these purposes during construction.
      [N]          Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
                   No indigenous groups would be involved in the project.
      [N]          Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

      [Y]          Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
                   The barrage is not a water impounding structure, therefore negligible incremental
                   inundation damage would occur in the case of failure. However, given the
                   severity of the impacts that failure would cause, the task team decided to make
                   use of the provisions of OP 4.37 in the preparation of the project.
      [N]          Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
                   It was confirmed by the Archeological Bureaus at the federal and provincial
                   levels, during the task team's June 2004 visit, that no cultural properties to be
                   affected by the rehabilitation of Taunsa Barrage. This is also indicated in the draft
                   EIA prepared by the implementing agency.
      [N]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*



*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims on the
disputed areas

     [Y]            Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
                    It applies because the Indus River is international waters. A request for waiver of
                    notification of other riparians has been cleared by the legal department and RVP.
                    However, an official confirmation from the government on their meeting the
                    Indus Waters Treaty obligations, is being sought.



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [X] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)

If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that
EA category (mandatory):

The project is designated a category B because (i) it supports the rehabilitation of existing
structures, and (ii) this rehabilitation is necessary to sustain the existing irrigation system, and is
therefore independent of any decision regarding possible future expansion of irrigation.



III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared.

Given this project is being processed as an emergency operation and is relatively straightforward,
the task team was advised to forego the QER. However, an advisory committee was established
with staff from the Center, Region and Sector Unit, to advise the task team on important issues
related to the project.

B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

The safeguards related studies and assessment by international consultants of the IPD for this
project are essentially completed. The EIA has been cleared by the Provincial Environmental
Protection Bureau (EPB) and Wildlife Department (PWD) of Punjab following a public hearing
in August 2004, and the EIA has been made publicly available at the office of the District Officer
(Environmental) in Dera Ghazi Khan, in the Punjab Public Library, Lahore, and will be available
in the InfoShop.

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                               Xiaokai Li                                                   August 26, 2004
  Approved by:


1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Frederic Brusberg    August 27, 2004
 Comments
Sector Manager:                  Adolfo Brizzi         August 27, 2004
 Comments

