Page  1
PAKISTAN 
PUNJAB BARRAGE SAFETY PROJECT 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC??? 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  June 4, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country:  Pakistan 
Project ID: P088994 
Project Name:   
Punjab Barrage Safety Project 
Task Team Leader:  Xiaokai  Li 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 31, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: December 9, 2004 
Managing Unit: SASRD 
Lending Instrument:  
Specific Investment Loan 
Sector:  Irrigation and Drainage (60%); 
Water Resources Management (40%) 
Theme: Other Agriculture 
–
Irrigation & 
Drainage (P); General Water Resources (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:   
Paul Martin (Environmental) and Asger Christensen (Social) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD:  130 
Other financing amounts by source:  20 
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The development objective of the proposed project, targeted at millions of farmers in the poor 
rural areas of Punjab Province, is to prevent the occurrence of disastrous barrage failure and 
therefore provide improved and reliable water supply for irrigation and drinking purposes and 
farmers’ income. This objective would be achieved through: (i) rehabilitating and strengthening 
the most vulnerable barrage and associated structures, primarily eliminating the likelihood of 
barrage failures; (ii) renewing and modernizing the electro-mechanical facilities; and (iii) 
technical assistance for strengthening capacity for operation and maintenance and emergency 
preparedness.  
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN] 
 
The Bank was approached by the government end of 2003 for assistance in rehabilitating six of 
the old barrages in Punjab. Following the recent Bank identification mission, the government 
requested the Bank to fund the Taunsa barrage which is said to be the most problematic and sick 
barrage based on the previous studies and lately investigations. The Bank was also requested to 
process the project on emergency basis along a fast track. Consequently this project will be 
Page  2
focused on the rehabilitation and strengthening of Taunsa but will include the preparatory studies 
for the other barrages which the government is interested in pursuit of further assistance from the 
Bank. While the project scope is not yet fully defined, the project is likely to include the 
following three components. 
 
Component 1. 
 
Barrage Safety Works  
This includes the urgent repair and rehabilitation works both downstream and upstream of the  
Taunsa barrage such as energy dissipation works, and foundation treatment to make the barrage 
safe, river training works and fish ladders. The output of this component will be strengthened 
barrage structures and restored design discharge capacity and operational mode. Taunsa Barrage 
is 1,324 m wide with 64 bays, and has a design discharge of 28,317 m3/s  and maximum head 
across of 9.15 m with a normal pool level of 136 m. It feeds water into three main canals and 
provide water for irrigating some 1.6 million ha of land directly and indirectly, and also water for 
dinking to those rural people living near the canals.   
 
Component 2. 
 
Modernization of Operating Facilities 
The component involves modernization of the electro-mechanical facilities, including repair 
and/or replacement of gates, hoists and other electric and mechanical equipment, introduction of 
automation and remote control system, to ensure that they can be operated effectively, 
particularly in the case of emergency. This component may be co-financed with JICA.   
 
Component 3. 
 
Technical Assistance and Support to Project Implementation  
It covers a wide range of  technical assistance and implementation support activities:   
·
Consultants for design and construction supervision of selected barrages financed by the 
Project.; 
·
A
panel of independent experts for design and safety review and quality enhancement; 
·
Feasibility studies for the remaining problematic barrages in Punjab Province; 
·
Training of O & M staff,  improvement of operation, maintenance and surveillance 
(OMS) manual; 
·
Development of emergency preparedness plan (EPP) and contingency plan for flood & 
draught management 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
 
The project will be located on the mainstream of the Indus River in the section of Punjab 
Province. The Taunsa barrage is located 30 km downstream of Taunsa Sharif Town, in the arid 
zone of southern Punjab.  
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
Pakistan has a long working relationship with the Bank, and has experiences with many water-
related and infrastructure project operations. Punjab Province has recently involved in the Bank-
supported National Drainage Program (NDP) and Punjab On-farm Water Management Project 
under preparation. The Government of Pakistan has similar requirements for environmental 
assessment for infrastructure projects and its responsible agencies are familiar with the Bank 
safeguards policies. For environmental assessment, Punjab EPA’s approval will be sought.     
Page  3
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[Y] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
Restoration of the design conditions by rehabilitating and strengthening the 
existing structures will trigger an environmental impact assessment (EIA). The 
EIA will cover: 
(i) the environmental and social impacts of any upstream or downstream changes 
to the hydrological regime once the rehabilitation is completed, including any 
change in the alignment of the river's approach to the barrage.  These are likely to 
include, but not be limited to, changes in the availability of land available to lease 
for recession agriculture, and ecological impacts associated with changes in the 
seasonal location of the waterline; and, 
(ii) management of construction phase environmental and social impacts, 
including site housekeeping, temporary facilities, the management of sediment 
and water quality, and opportunities for the expansion of local employment. 
[Y] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
The ponded area upstream of the Tuansa Barrage was designated a Ramsar site 
(i.e. a wetland of international importance) in 1996.  According to the Ramsar 
citation, the site forms a very important wintering area for waterbirds, a breeding 
area for several species, and a staging area for certain cranes and shorebirds. The 
Indus dolphin and otter are present in the river in small numbers, and the 
endangered long-nosed crocodile, or gharial, has been reported at the barrage.  
 
The rehabilitation of the barrage will allow the hydrological regime to be 
optimized.  The impact of these changes on the ecology of the Taunsa Barrage 
Ramsar will be considered as part of the Environmental Assessment.  Under the 
Ramsar convention, any changes in the character of the wetlands should be 
notified to all Contracting Parties. 
[N] 
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[Y] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
The SA will determine: 
(i) how much, if any, land may need to be acquired, permanently or temporarily 
for construction purposes; and,  
(ii) the extent to which changes in the hydrological regime will affect the 
availability of land to lease for recession agriculture. 
 
Based on this assessment, appropriate arrangements will be established if required 
to compensate for any loss of livelihood. 
[TBD] 
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
Not known at this stage if indigenous groups would be involved. 
[N] 
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
Page  4
[Y] 
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
The barrage is not a water impounding structure, therefore negligible incremental 
inundation damage would occur in the case of failure. However, given the 
severity of the impacts that failure would cause, the task team decided to make 
use of the provisions of OP 4.37 in the preparation of the project. 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
There are no cultural properties to be affected around Taunsa barrage according to 
IPD, but evidence needs to be sought from existing archeological survey. 
[N] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[TBD] 
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
It may apply because the Indus River is international waters. So the task team 
may need to seek a waiver from the requirement of notification by Pakistan to 
other riparian countries because this project is a rehabilitation operation without 
changing the river flow regime. 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that 
EA category (mandatory): 
 
The project is designated a category B because (i) it supports the rehabilitation of existing 
structures, and (ii) this rehabilitation is necessary to sustain the existing irrigation system, and is 
therefore independent of any decision regarding possible future expansion of irrigation. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
To be determined, since this project is to be processed as an emergency operation. 
 
B.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The safeguards related studies and assessment by international consultants for this project are 
already under way and are expected to be completed in August 2004. The task team members 
responsible for the environmental and social safeguards will guide the Borrower in the required 
assessment to comply with the Bank safeguards requirements.  
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Xiaokai  Li 
May 13, 2004 
A
pproved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederic  Brusberg 
May 17, 2004 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Adolfo Brizzi 
May 17, 2004 
Comments 
