                               Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                 Report No: 30272
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/03/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PAKISTAN                                              Project ID: P077306
Project: Pakistan TAx Administration Reforms Project           Task Team Leader: Mudassir Khan
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 14, 2003                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 29, 2004                                   IDA Amount ($m): 196.00
Managing Unit: SASFP                                           Sector: General public administration sector (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Tax policy and administration (P); Trade
Status: Lending                                                facilitation and market access (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objective of the Porject is to fundamentally reform the Central Board of Revenue. A more
efficient and effective revenue administration will facilitate and promote voluntary compliance and increase
overall collection result, and guarantee and fairer and more equtable applicaiton of tax laws. In additon, the
new human resource policy framework and management system combined with modernized procedures and
institutonal structure will lead to an increase in the transparency and integrity of tax adminstration
operations. Thus, tax administration will become a major tool in government's efforts for pursuing a sound
fiscal policy and achieving an optimum tax level.

The Tax Administration Reform Project (TARP) seeks to support the reforms initiated by the government
for improving tax administration . The overriding objective is to raise tax revenue through improved
compliance with tax laws and broadening of the tax base; improving effectiveness, responsiveness and
efficiency of tax administration through institutional and procedural reforms; improving collection through
transparent and high quality tax services; and strengthening audit and enforcement procedures.

This Project follows the successful completion of an IDF Grant which was extended to the Government in
2000 to facilitate development of implementation plans for institutional reform of the Central Board of
Revenue (CBR). TARP supports continuation and effective implementation of the reforms initiated to
enhance the capability of the tax system. Specifically, project objectives include:

1.       Improving efficiency and effectiveness of revenue operations: Creating a new CBR that is
autonomous, transparent, efficient and organized around functional lines, that encourages self assessment
as well as a fair and equitable process of tax administration and appeals. This will include modernizing tax
operations for faster and reliable processing of tax returns, increased capacity of record keeping and
management of data through effective integration of business processes with information systems. In
addition, this will include improvements in staff productivity and morale through adoption of best practice
policies for recruitment, training, performance evaluation and compensation.

2.       Improving collection through transparent and high quality tax services: Promoting voluntary
compliance with tax and custom laws through an intensive taxpayer education and facilitation program,
re-engineering of CBR's business processes and reorienting its operational culture towards a transparent,
service-oriented organization. This will include building effective-working relationships with taxpayers and
minimizing contact between taxpayers and tax officials to reduce discretion on part of tax officials as well

                                                       2
                                                                                                         ISDS


as opportunities for corruption.

3.       Improving trade facilitation through modern and internationally acceptable customs procedures:
Introducing simplified, modern and risk based import and export clearance and related procedures.
Bringing this system in line with internationally acceptable standards for improving trade facilitation.

4.       Strengthening audit and enforcement: Ensuring compliance through a risk based audit system as
well as fair and effective enforcement mechanisms that directly respond to changes in the environment
using information technology and a new intelligence and risk management system.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The proposed Project will support the Government revamp the tax administration system. It would support
initiative to redress major shortcomings in tax administration through investment in human resource and
information technology, modernizing collection and audit procedures, fostering voluntary compliance, and
strengthening the institutional framework for tax enforcement.

The Government is committed to fundamental reform of institutions, incentives and accountability to
breakout from a vicious cycle of high rates, predatory administration, tax evasion and low revenues to a
virtuous cycle of lower rates, equitable tax structures, fair administration, voluntary compliance and higher
revenue. CBR reform is an important pillar of Government's broader strategy for reforming public sector
institutions. Similar reforms have also been initiated at the State Bank of Pakistan, Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan, WAPDA, and the Office of the Auditor General. In addition, the
Government with Bank assistance is in process of preparing a wide-ranging public sector capacity building
program which aims to enhance the skill base of its key ministries, agencies and regulatory bodies in an
effort to introduce broad based civil service reforms.

As its commitment, the Cabinet approved the reform strategy for CBR which allowed it to prepare a
comprehensive reform program. In addition, the Government established a Cabinet Committee for Federal
Revenues headed by the Finance Minister which not only gives CBR autonomy to implement the reform
program but to institute mechanisms which would sustain the reforms once they have been implemented.

The proposed Project is designed around a comprehensive reform strategy and includes the following seven
components: (i) Management and Institutional Development; (ii) Improving Revenue Operations; (iii)
Strengthening Revenue Services; (iv) Creating a Tax Compliant Culture; (v) Adopting Responsive IT
Systems; (vi) Infrastructure Up-gradation and Development; and (vii) Project Management and
Implementation.

1.       Management and Institutional Development

The CBR's human and institutional development strategy will support and enhance the broader tax reform
strategy by driving:

·        Strategic changes within CBR's organizational structure;
·        Transformation of the organization's culture & ethos;
·        Development of sound people-management policies and procedures.

         1.1.     Organization and Policy

CBR headquarters is currently organized on a hybrid basis and there are excessive line functions reporting

                                                        3
                                                                                                               ISDS


to the chairman. At the field level, direct and indirect tax administration are totally separate. The direct tax
administration is based wholly on the geographic distribution of taxpayers with multiple layers of
decision-making and supervision. A service function and program is lacking. Appropriate structures to deal
with large taxpayers have only recently been introduced on a pilot basis. Government rules and regulations
do not provide sufficient administrative and financial flexibility for an efficient management of its
operations. CBR does not have the necessary discretion to re-allocate budgeted funds within main
appropriations to react to changing expenditure needs. In addition, the lack of budgetary resources to carry
out necessary construction/renovation work, the dependence on the Public works Department for the
execution of construction/renovation work and the inappropriately low government ceiling for the lease of
office space do not allow infrastructure improvements required..

This subcomponent will support activities aimed at introducing a functional structure at CBR headquarters
and in the field offices. Activities would include streamlining the management structure at CBR
headquarters and setting up functionally organized regional support hubs. A formal annual planning
process will be introduced. The subcomponent will also assist in reviewing the requirements for more
financial, functional, and administrative flexibility and related accountability mechanisms. It also aims at
improving the legal framework for tax administration and strengthening tax policy capacity. Support to the
design and implementation of a comprehensive integrity strategy for the CBR will be provided.

         1.2      Human Resource Development

CBR did not have a dedicated HRM function until 18 months ago. The consequence of this led to the need
to address a wide range of human resource development and management issues. These include:
considerable overstaffing, particularly in some lower level professional grades; lack of a proper career
management and development system; lack of clarity of functional responsibilities, as job descriptions are
badly out of date; lack of adequate pay at professional levels to retain core staff; lack of targeted training to
meet the practical needs of the current and proposed functional workforce; selection of managers based on
seniority and not on merit; lack of managerial training at all levels; absence of a performance evaluation
system ; and lack of management information to support strategic workforce planning. CBR faces
considerable problems to address these issues due to the lack of autonomy in managing its human
resources. In particular, CBR would require the following rights and flexibility to create the necessary
HR-related conditions for a successful reform process: i) the possibility to create a sufficient number of
new cadre posts; ii) the possibility to implement a compensation scheme ­ including function- and
performance-related benefits ­ which allows to attract and retain qualified staff; iii) the ability to remove
surplus staff and individuals found unsuitable for employment in the CBR; iv) the ability to recruit
short-term consultants at market rates.

In the training area, a key problem is that officers are trained at infrequent intervals (after initial, highly
academic course of study after hiring), and that training is often conducted by external higher education
institutions that lack the focus on practical tax administration issues needed for continual skill upgrading.

As to integrity-related issues, there is no specific code of ethics and conduct to address the root causes of
breaches of integrity in the CBR, and no requirement that staff be trained in integrity-related courses, sign
an employee ethics statement when they are hired, or receive credit for attention to professional integrity
during yearly performance appraisals..

The subcomponent will support activities aimed at introducing an appropriate skill mix and level of
expertise required to create a professional workforce in the CBR. It will support a voluntary retirement and
quasi- retrenchment program necessary to facilitate the creation of a competency based organization with

                                                          4
                                                                                                           ISDS


the higher skills levels that will be required in a fully modernized CBR. It will also assist CBR in
developing a new wage and benefits structure, including building in performance incentives based on
transparent criteria. A performance appraisal system and new procedures for promotion also will be
developed.

On the training side, all organizational training and staff development would be brought together under a
unified Training and Development Unit reporting to the member HRM. The subcomponent also will assist
in developing training courses that would be delivered to headquarters and field staff. Training would be
focused on the implementation of the technical and operational requirements of each component. he project
would ensure that training for the new functions will take place in a phased manner as the rollout of the
new policies and procedures and supporting IT systems occur. In addition, an HRMIS system will be rolled
out to record development activities for each individual staff member as part of a new career development
initiative related to performance evaluation and promotion. Capacity to meet training under the project
would be strengthened in the principal training locations of the CBR (i.e., Karachi, Lahore, and
Islamabad).

         1.3      Internal Audit

CBR lacks a dedicated internal audit function. In practice this has led to a situation where CBR confronts
interference and inquiries from outside agencies, such as the National and Regional Accountability
Bureaus, the Federal Investigation Agency, and the Investigation Bureau. This has led to questionable
inquiries into its daily operations. Quite often issues raised during such investigations are highly technical
in nature for which the probing agencies lack the competency to conduct.

This subcomponent will establish a specialized internal audit functions in the CBR. It will set up a central
internal audit office for planning, program direction, procedures, training and evaluation of the internal
audit program throughout the CBR for which staff would rely on intelligence built into the system to
identify possible errors and irregularities. Field-based internal audit units will be established to implement
internal audit plans in the operational components of customs, direct, and indirect tax.

         1.4      Internal Affairs

In the current organizational structure detection of and enforcement against collusion with the taxpayers is
the responsibility of the Director General of Inspections and the Director General of Inquiries, which have
the overall responsibility for disciplinary measures. In practice, there are substantial delays in enforcing
disciplinary measures and a lack of focus in the organization on expediting processing corruption case.

This subcomponent will assist in creating a specialized internal affairs function at CBR headquarters. The
internal affairs function will be responsible for investigating allegations against CBR officials and detecting
corrupt practices and corrupt officials.



2.       Improving Revenue Operations

CBR will reorganize itself to meet the management and functional requirements and challenges of a modern
tax administration system. The long term vision of CBR provides for a functionally integrated tax
administration system; moving to such a structure will avoid the present duplication of functions such as
audit, collection and enforcement across departments. Managing direct and sales taxes separately makes it
more expensive to comply and more difficult for taxpayers who have multiple tax dealings to comply. The

                                                        5
                                                                                                            ISDS


integration will provide taxpayers with a single point of access, enabling them to easily obtain all the
information required to assess their tax liabilities. However, recognizing the challenges of the change
process during the transition period, CBR will maintain the separation of function by tax type in the initial
reform period with the aim of gradually reducing this over time while carefully considering the legal,
political, geographical and revenue implications.

In order for CBR to make this major reform program a success, it will ensure that its organizational
structure supports the procedural and operational changes, which arise from the reforms. The following
are some of the main sub components that will be addressed by the proposed project.

         2.1      Direct Tax

Direct tax administration is generally regarded to be the area of CBR performance with the greatest need of
reform. The structure is a deep and highly bureaucratic one that expands to hundreds of base level offices,
each of which has a high degree of independence. The operating techniques are outdated and ineffective
and the use of technology is quite limited.

The administration of direct tax remains problematic for a large number of reasons. The direct tax
organization structure consists of five distinct levels and is both costly and ineffective. Tax officials have
too much to do and therefore cannot accomplish their assigned tasks with completeness and quality.
Taxpayers are constantly inconvenienced with the necessity to meet with tax officials and "negotiate"
various documents, assessments and payments. Taxpayers have a direct linkage by the system to one tax
official who can abuse the relationship with little risk of reprisal. Compensation is so low as to fail to
provide a reasonable standard of living for tax officials and their families. Office space, equipment and
services are inadequate and there is little use of technology. Training of tax officials is inadequate.
Taxpayers file a large number of complaints and appeals, the outcome of which is very frequently a partial
or total reversal of the prior decision made.

The cumulative result of the above conditions is that the final direct tax determinations are frequently weak,
negotiated, and in many cases arbitrary determinations, which do not in any substantive way reflect the true
tax liability of a taxpayer under the law. This substantially reduces the amount of tax that is ultimately
assessed and collected. In addition, the total base of taxpayers registered and paying taxes falls far short of
the number that are obligated to file and pay income taxes under the tax law.

The project will support government's planned reform of direct tax by; flattening the organization
structure, improving the identification and registration process, specializing the handling of large and
medium taxpayers affairs, establishing a tax-payer self-declaration approach, maintaining a taxpayer
database containing all assessment and payment data, establishing capability to quickly detect taxpayer
non-filing and non-payment.

The future organization structure for administration of direct tax will also be based upon a functional
approach. Several functional members will provide functional program planning, policies, direction,
training and evaluation from the central office of the CBR. Tax administration activities will eventually be
collocated into twelve regional tax offices (RTOs), with extended operations for taxpayer facilitation
purposes into 60-75 taxpayer facilitation centers (TFCs). There will also be three large taxpayer offices
(LTUs). There is already a good start with the creation of Karachi LTU that is serving around 300
gazetted taxpayers. Around 50 officials from both the Income Tax and Sales Tax Departments have been
brought together, organized and collocated on a functional basis. Eventually the LTUs are expected to
cater to more than 600 large taxpayers. In addition, a Medium Taxpayer Unit (MTU) has been setup in

                                                        6
                                                                                                          ISDS


Lahore. Based on its experience, CBR plans to established another 5 in the next year. These MTUs will
become part of the 12 regional tax offices that will co-locate Sales tax and Income tax, providing for
greater sharing of information, resources and removing duplication of certain common functions.

Direct taxes will require use of information technology to support several functions. The direct tax
organizational units (e.g., LTUs and RTOs) will require appropriate hardware, system software and
network support. In addition to the hardware, this subcomponent envisages the development of following
software systems:

§        Taxpayer registration system: This system will register taxpayers for direct taxes. Currently, CBR
is using a National Taxpayer Number for all taxpayers. However, for ease of data capture from data
sources outside CBR, it is recommended that the CBR uses National Identification Card (NIC) number for
individual taxpayers and continue to use NTN for business taxpayers.
§        Income tax information processing and accounting system: This system will process a filed tax
return and update a taxpayer's account. The Tax Management System (TMS) developed at the MTU can
be expanded to provide this functionality.
§        Case tracking System for collection/enforcement: This system will track a case and provide its
status (received, closed and inventoried, etc.) as it proceeds through the system.
§        Computerized audit selection system: This system will select cases for audit based on audit
selection criteria established by member audit.

In order to achieve the objectives stated above, this subcomponent will support a series of reform initiatives
including: (1) legal authority, (2) organization and management, (3) business processes and procedures, (4)
human resources (including training and recruitment), (5) facilities and infrastructure, and (6) information
technology.

         2.2      Sales Tax and Central Excise

The Federal Sales Tax Act, 1990, enables the federal government to impose ST based upon the value added
at each stage of selling of the goods. Internationally, this form of taxation is known as Value Added Tax
(VAT). At present there are three positive rates: the rate applied to most goods is 15 % Several raw
materials, mainly chemicals, edible oils and plastics, are taxed at 20 %., zero % for certain categories and
20 % for some categories. Goods sold other than by a retailer to unregistered purchasers have a further 3
% tax imposed on them. Exemption is provided for a number of goods including most basic foodstuffs,
drugs, computer hardware and software, selected agricultural equipment, commercial ships and aircraft.
Exports, sales to diplomats, and supplies in the Export Processing Zone are all zero-rated. The ST does not
apply to transactions within the federally administered tribal zones (FATA) and provincially administered
tribal zones (PATA) An Act of parliament cannot be enforced in these districts without agreement of the
Provincial Assembly and Governor. Agreement to enforce the Federal Sales Tax Act has not been
obtained. The constitution empowers the Federal Government to levy excise duties other than on liquor,
opium or narcotics.

The most pressing issue with ST and excise duties that this component will address is the limited number of
ST registrants and their poor compliance. There are 150,000 units registered for ST out of a total potential
of between 800,000 to 1.5 million.

This component will also review the number of goods and services that currently receive an exemption. To
bring ST in Pakistan in line with general international practice, the share of ST should be distributed
equitably and requires increase in the scope of goods and services liable. ST will also be developed to

                                                        7
                                                                                                          ISDS


allow for tax input credits for office equipment, office supplies, building materials, electricity consumed
and other items used to support taxable activities. The input tax claims and ST refunds system will be
reviewed and streamlined.

Sales taxes will need use of the Taxpayer registration, Case tracking and Computerized audit selection
systems discussed above. In addition, Sales tax information and communication system would be developed
to process and reconcile a filed sales tax return.

        2.3      Customs

The long-term objectives of the customs reform component are to modernize import and export clearance
procedures, and related procedures that impact upon trade facilitation, in accordance with internationally
accepted principles and methods. The building blocks of the CBR's reform strategy in customs are based
upon the following principles, guidelines and procedures. The application of the principle of customs
controls will allow the CBR to:

·       focus on high-risk areas and therefore ensure more effective use of available resources;
·       increase ability to detect offences and non-compliant traders and travelers;
·       offer compliant traders and travelers greater facilitation; and,
·       expedite trade and travel.

Risk management has been universally adopted as a key principle in customs procedural reform. According
to the General Annex of the Revised Kyoto Convention, "Customs controls should be carried out on a
selective basis using risk management The Chapter defines "risk management" as "the systematic
application of management procedures and practices which provide Customs with the necessary
information to address movements and consignments which present a risk" techniques to the greatest
extent possible".
Customs will move progressively away from "blanket" controls and detailed procedures that impact on all
or most importers and exporters, to interventions that are highly targeted towards identified risk shipments,
traders and goods.

Reforms will also introduce self-assessment and provide the speedy clearances to those that have proved
and maintained their dependability. Face-to-face contact will be limited and CBR plans to strictly limit
access by customs agents to secure accommodation. Plans call for development of a system enabling
electronic preparation/submission of declarations, internet/EDI transmission, selection of declaration for
audit based on risk analysis, and electronic assessment/release.

3.      Strengthening Revenue Services

        3.1      Audit

At present, there are different audit schemes for different taxes, and the development of audit programs
varies both in quantity and quality. In certain cases, individual employees have developed advanced control
programs and audit case selection systems. Rewards are based upon fulfillment of the goal set for
collection rather than the number and quality of audits.

Some of the problems plaguing the audit function include; lack of cost effectiveness, non differentiation of
the various forms of control, audit experiences not extracted and distributed throughout CBR, the auditing
process characterized by a bargaining process between the auditor / collector and the taxpayer, and the

                                                         8
                                                                                                             ISDS


selection of cases for audit not carried out according to a structured risk assessment ­ carried out
randomly.

The project will support the establishment of a Tax Audit Function as a separate functional stream. It will
also develop an automated approach to audit-case selection based upon consideration of the risks of under
reporting and underpayment of taxes and case distribution among auditors with specialized functions. The
audit function will be strengthened through independent quality reviews and audit parameters will be
imbedded in the Information Management systems, allowing the system to identify returns/filings for
further scrutiny.

         3.2     Collection and Enforcement

The establishment of an effective collection and enforcement function is a critical element of any tax
administration reform. Accordingly, CBR will establish a Collections and Enforcement Function at the
head office which will be responsible for providing direction, developing policies and procedures and
providing support to regional operations. The Function will be responsible for identifying non-filers and
taking appropriate action. It will also assist in updating registration records. To summarize, the Function
will be responsible for the following activities:

·        Enforcement / Collection;
·        Monitoring of filing and payments including withholding taxes;
·        Demand outstanding returns;
·        Recovery of outstanding taxes;
·        Imposing interest and penalties;
·        Conducting internal/external surveys; and,
·        Collecting data on taxpayer assets, to aid eventual enforced collection.

An integral part of the Collections and Enforcement Function will be development of a computer system
and tax database that will facilitate the collection of taxes. This will issue notices, calculate interest and
penalties, and identify non-filers.

Unlawful practices at the taxpayer level, are addressed under 'collection and enforcement' in the section
`creating a tax complaint culture'.

         3.3     Appeals and Dispute Resolution

This function is generally characterized by a mutual distrust between taxpayers and the CBR. Delaying
tactics on the part of some taxpayers, as well as poor quality or incomplete audit reports have resulted in
delays in the judicial system (cases can take up to 2 years or more) and a large number of pending cases.
Without improved audit details, the expeditious disposal of adjudication / appeals cases is severely
hindered.

Furthermore, there is a lack of knowledge among CBR staff regarding newly decided cases and precedence
cases. This results in a number of tax decisions not upheld by the appeal bodies. As such, the large
number of annulled or modified tax decisions lessens the efficiency and the credibility of the CBR.

The proposed project will support the reform efforts to improve this function. In order to build a
relationship of mutual trust, the CBR is continuing to develop appeals and adjudication systems and
processes that are fair, expeditious and transparent. There will be a single avenue of appeal for all kinds of

                                                         9
                                                                                                           ISDS


taxes. This will be comprised of an initial administrative (quasi-judicial) level, which, in turn will be
followed by a judicial phase.

CBR Member Legal will be responsible for developing this national appeals program and its associated
procedures, and staff at the local level will be responsible for implementing them. The national appeals and
adjudication program will be uniformly administered across the different tax disciplines, and will preserve
and enhance the taxpayers' rights to appeal, ensuring the appeal system is transparent and more "user
friendly".

3.4      National Intelligence and Risk Management

At present there is inadequate focus on intelligence and risk management and there is limited operational
capacity. This function however, becomes highly critical with the introduction of Universal Self
Assessment and involves much more than simple data collection. It is also important to identify while the

CBR under the project will create a corporate National Intelligence Division (NID) with a co-located Risk
Management Unit (RMU). Its capability will span all operational areas of Direct and Indirect taxes and
Customs, and will form a new functional area under Member Revenue Services.

RMU will analyze and report on the overall taxpayer environment (strategic analysis), and individual
taxpayer performance and level of risk (planning analysis). Its primary responsibility will be to ensure that
statistically and analytically sound information is available to audit and enforcement. Whereas, NID will
primarily be responsible for identifying and preparing cases for investigation where serious evasion of tax
or prohibition is suspected.

This would require specialized training as well as systems capability for staff to perform these functions
effectively.

3.5      Customs and Tax Frauds

Customs and tax frauds pose a serious economic, industrial and social threat to Pakistan. CBR under the
project will introduce measures that would protect against these threats.

Investigation is an inherent component of all the tax systems administered by the CBR but is fragmented
between Customs and the Tax divisions. In some cases investigation staff are also the intelligence officers
and are required to investigate both internal and external situations with consequent conflicts of interest and
conflicting priorities. The first step is setting up the Customs and Tax Fraud Division (CTFD). It follows
that any staff recruited must have similar personal qualities and receive even more extensive technical
training. The staff will work in teams with team members specializing in the different taxation disciplines.
CTFD will be required to build liaisons with other national and international organizations as part of its
operating strategy. The building of trust and the breaking down of barriers is a slow and painful process
but one that must be completed for CTFD to reach its full potential and effectiveness.

Major tax evasion and smuggling are international crimes that require international solutions. CTFD will
be responsible to bring perpetrators of such offences into custody and for prosecution under the relevant
legislation. In this regard, CTFD must also win professional respect, trust and confidence of its
counterparts. Therefore the people selected for international liaison must be competent and should be
empowered to decide and act (albeit within a well defined area of responsibility) in the furtherance of
building an image of a professional and dedicated investigation force beyond corrupting. A whole program

                                                         10
                                                                                                          ISDS


of specialist training (e.g., covert surveillance, interviewing, search of premises, high speed driving,
defensive driving, arrest and constraint, and radio discipline etc.) will be carried out.

4.       Creating a Tax Compliant Culture

         4.1      Taxpayer Education and Facilitation

Tax facilitation and education is currently minimal and will need to be strengthened considerably if
universal self-assessment requiring the taxpayer to maintain transaction documentation is to be successful.
The tax education and facilitation function will include a strong and well coordinated communications
program promoting the development of greater compliance and a user friendly, supportive interface
between the CBR and corporate and individual taxpayers. It will also introduce a program outlining the
principles of a good tax administration system (transparent, fair, automated, simple and cost-effectiveness);
develop a quality assurance monitoring program; and introduce easy-to-comply-with forms and document
requirements that are compatible with a computerized operation.

The tax administration system will provide taxpayers with a single point of access, enabling them to easily
obtain all the information required to assess their tax liabilities. This will be instigated through the
establishment of 60 to 75 Taxpayer Facilitation Centers (TFCs). A key objective of the TFCs will be to
promote tax facilitation through the promotion of self-assessment for tax liability.

The TE & F will research, plan, design, develop, implement and manage programs to elicit ideas, opinions
and feedback from the taxpayers, TE & F staff, and other stakeholders. It will establish an ongoing
monitoring and quality assurance program, involving the launch and facilitation of forums between
appropriate internal and external stakeholders.

         4.1.1    Communications Program: The quality of service that taxpayers can currently access
varies across Pakistan. The reform strategy will address this inequality and raise service standards across
all areas. A key component of this effort will be the application of modern basic communication
principles, ensuring that taxpayers have access to a flow of information that is:

·        Relevant ­ what the taxpayer needs;
·        Timely ­ when the taxpayer needs it;
·        Of high quality ­ correct and undisputable; and,
·        Simple ­ enabling the taxpayer quick and efficient access.

Explanatory literature will also be developed and updated regularly. The literature (publications, brochures
and booklets) will cover dissemination of laws, rules, procedures and changes from time to time
particularly with reference to the universal self-assessment and record keeping requirements.

The publication of a monthly or quarterly newsletter as part of the communication strategy, in
collaboration with other components, will be evaluated and implemented in the medium-term reform period.

         4.1.2    Internet Facilities: The information super highway, or the Internet, is an important driving
force behind the new work methodology, enabling improved communications both between CBR and the
taxpayers as well as within CBR. By making IT an integral part of the organization, CBR will
revolutionize the way it functions and manages its relationships with taxpayers by reducing the interaction
with taxpayers. Internet will be used for:

                                                       11
                                                                                                            ISDS


·        Internal and external information;
·        Training taxpayers and staff;
·        Internal and external communication;
·        Electronic filing;
·        Distribution of forms;
·        Providing a forum for discussion and complaints;
·        Registration and de-registration;
·        Publishing explanatory booklets for reading and printouts;
·        Processing of incoming tax forms as well as its outgoing correspondence. CBR will initiate
consultative interaction with stakeholders and               oversee development of computer software for
electronic submissions of returns and statements.

         4.1.3   Call Centers: Considering evolving demands, a call center will be established to facilitate
taxpayer contact through e-mail, letters, faxes and telephone calls. The numerous advantages of this will
be as follows:

·        CBR TE & F employees may be located in the Call Centre, which in turn, does not need to be
located in or near existing offices or in expensive l        ocations (indeed, centres are often located in
areas with an employment need);
·        Telecommunication will go through wires or will be transmitted;
·        The call center will be supported by a database with all the asked and answered questions. This
safeguards the high quality of answers;
·        Database questions and answers will be monitored by expert tax staff ensuring quality control of
answers;
·        Call Center staff will directly answer 80-90 % of the questions and remits - the remainder will be
relayed to back-up-experts;
·        Employees need not be tax experts; rather, they will have other qualities, such as computer literacy
(ability to handle database search-engines), a      service oriented approach and other people-centered
skills;
·        The call center will be flexible, connecting more staff during peak demand periods using modern
telephone techniques. The telephone system          will be a huge net connecting people and computers;
·        The cost for establishing the center will be reasonable, resulting in a cost per question that is very
low;
·        Expert knowledge can be readily accessed; and,
·        The staff will be allocated according to fluctuating demands of direct contacts ­ as phone calls ­
and indirect contacts.

The potential to successfully introduce this component of the TE & F function is high. At present, `hits' on
CBR's web-page show that a number of taxpayers are willing to use modern technology to an extent that
would not otherwise be possible were contact restricted to face-to-face consultations. Moreover, the call
center will answer both internal and external questions and queries. As such, it will also be used as a
communication tool to unify tax administration procedures and practices within the CBR itself.

         4.2     Taxpayer Identification and Registration

The ability to identify taxpayer's revenue activities is an essential element of a modern tax system and
begins with registration. CBR's intent is to have a highly accurate taxpayer registration system for all tax
purposes and for all taxpayers. This will: (a) facilitate exchange of data; (b) avoid duplicate and erroneous
registrations; and (c) establish a database of taxpayer information. Data scrubbing exercises have already

                                                        12
                                                                                                          ISDS


been conducted by the MTU in Lahore to clean up and organize National taxpayer Numbers of taxpayers
in its jurisdiction; this exercise will be extended to national scale with project rollout. Third party
information will be matched against information declared by each taxpayer to ensure full and correct
reporting and payment of taxes. Interfaces will be built with such external reporting sources to capture
appropriate data.

         4.3      Quality Assurance and Monitoring

In an environment where there is considerable distrust between the tax administration and taxpayer
population, and where the notion of taxpayer service receives little attention, the introduction of
self-assessment and voluntary compliance-schemes are major challenges. This will require a greater
commitment in the application of resources over the reform period, allocating sufficient personnel and
funding, and planning and management support to ensure the sufficient development of the TE & F.

In this regard, a quality assurance monitoring program is necessary both for the taxpayer and the CBR.
This will ensure that CBR's taxpayer education and facilitation function responds to taxpayer expectations
and motivates the use of increased resources. Information Technology will provide much of the CBR's QA
functions of performance measurement and monitoring; the system will generate standard reports as well as
support ad hoc queries in support of these functions.

5.       Adopting Responsive IT Systems

The information technology strategy will help the CBR transform the way it functions and supports it's
reform objectives. The strategy will be driven by selected CBR officers from the tax administration and IT
departments, supported by tax specialists and other specialists covering areas such as audit, HR,
information communication technology (ICT) and taxpayer education.

Therefore the ICT strategy will be based on the following principles:

·        Determining a technology path that will support CBR's ICT needs of today and its future
objectives considering its users' skill level, and the need for a practical approach to bring technology to
users; and
·        Providing technology to enable CBR to achieve its revenue and reform targets by making
procedures and their application transparent and             providing easy access to timely and accurate
information for decision making.

The goal of the ICT strategy is to move from a highly manual to an automated environment in which
computers are used to facilitate decision making by various functional and technical teams/ authorities. To
support this, information will be made available at all strategic points within the organization to:

·        Improve management control to levels approximating those experienced in industrialized countries;
·        Increase transparency of tax administration;
·        Reduce interaction with taxpayers in day-to-day operations;
·        Manage information for broadening the tax-net, increasing revenues, and facilitating trade;
·        Identify and adopt international best-practices;
·        Allow for multi-directional communication under the electronic signatures ordinance, 2002.

Despite substantial past investments in information technology by CBR, desired results have not been
achieved because standard IT development methodology has not been followed. IT project management

                                                        13
                                                                                                             ISDS


has been inadequate with almost no preparation for a user interface, little management ownership and
isolated systems development. Moreover, the development of IT systems in the past has proceeded in an ad
hoc and unplanned manner so that most departments operate stand-alone modules that are not integrated
into the main system. There is also a general recognition that CBR's IT projects have been high cost, have
produced little and failed to boost performance significantly.

Learning from these previous mistakes, CBR's IT strategy includes a long-term harmonized information
management structure that provides complete, accurate, and up-to-date information, which is delivered in a
useful manner and at a reasonable cost. The ICT strategy moves away from manual systems to
independent PC LANs and enterprise-wide, network-based clients. This model of computing is centered
around open, high-performance workstations, servers, and networks. It will move processing work to end
users' desktops while maintaining shared resources, thus reducing the load on centralized resources. The
hardware independent model would also allow applications to inter-operate across different hardware
platforms. Finally, the server technology will supply a more flexible architecture that enables cost-effective
distributed computing. The structure will provide the foundation for swift, effective and efficient execution
of all tax administration tasks.

This will require that the entire process and work culture is re-engineered. In doing so, a realistic schedule
for IT deployment and upgrading skill level of affected staff will be essential. Experience indicates that
organizational capacity in terms of human resource plays a critical role in successfully deploying a new
business strategy using information technology.

The CBR will maintain a two tier MIS system in which the 1st tier will import and process operational
level information from all regional tax administrations, provide transaction data to functional Members
across all administrations and provide relevant information to the Technical Members. This will make the
line business more transparent from ground zero up to the very top of the management chain, giving top
managers more control over the operation of the field tax administrations.

The system will be designed to meet the information needs of each level under the offices of functional and
line Members. It will provide the necessary technical and operational management reports and statistics to
meet functional requirements within and across each tax administration according to agreed data & form.
The network and hardware requirements will be influenced by office layout and the total numbers of
supporting staff in each tax and functional wing.

The 2nd tier of the central MIS will provide a routine and customised management reporting facility across
all administrations to the CBR and to other GoP agencies. The system will provide all statistical
information and tools necessary to support multi-dimensional revenue analysis and prediction / projection
capabilities for CBR's national budget exercise.

The central MIS system will also provide modules to capture and process all HR, financial and
budget-related information including asset management. This part of the system will import, process and
post data to national taxpayer profiles. The system will allow restricted users to access multi-dimensional
and cross section profiles of any taxpayer and similar taxpayers within a geographical area and / or
nationwide, etc.

There will also be developed a Central Information Depository System (CTFDS) providing easy, on-line
access to all relevant acts, all SROs, case history, transaction profiles, sector profiles, revenue profiles,
industry profiles, manuals, rules, procedures, publications and announcements. Currently, CBR employees
do not have easy access to this information impacting their productivity. The provision of this repository

                                                        14
                                                                                                          ISDS


would enhance employee productivity and improve working conditions.

6.       Infrastructure Up-gradation and Development

CBR's workforce tolerates working conditions which hinders their efficiency considerably. To address
this, CBR will improve the physical working environment for its employees. As re-engineering and
computerization of working processes (and the reduced number of tax offices) leads to reductions in the
number of staff required, the per-capita cost of providing better working conditions becomes more
manageable. Better conditions will then generate further improvements in productivity.

7.       Program Management and Implementation

This component would finance a structure for implementing the project, including: a Project Management
Unit (PMU) which would provide overall coordination as well as take responsibly for managing the
incremental changes necessary to effect implementation of each component and related activities of the
Project. The PMU would also be responsible for reporting on Project implementation and manage all
disbursement, procurement and financial management activities under the project and according to Bank
Guidelines.

An integral part of the PMU responsibilities will be establishing the monitoring and evaluation component
of the proposed project. The PMU has established performance indicators detailed in the Project
Implementation Plan (PIP) to monitor impact of the project and measure its success. The key areas that
will be monitored include; the ratio of revenue collected to GDP, taxpayer satisfaction surveys, audit
enforcement, labor efficient processes, the use of IT and the improved organizational structure. In each of
these areas the PMT will prepare a baseline scenario with objective and subjective performance targets.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
N.A.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes      No     TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes      No     TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes      No     TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes      No     TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                 Yes      No     TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                        Yes      No     TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                            Yes      No     TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                 Yes      No     TBD

                                                        15
                                                                                                           ISDS


    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes      No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Its a tax administration reform project and there are no safeguard issues

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Not applicable

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
This project does not trigger any of the safeguard policies, however, keeping in view the social impact of
any of the project activities on lives of the people, stakeholder consultations have been ongoing. The
stakeholders include the following:
(i) Staff of CBR, (ii) Government and agencies and autonomous bodies, (iii) accounting firms and bodies,
(iv) tax lawyers, (v) trade associations, (vi) Federal and Provincial Chambers of Commerce, (vii) Private
Sector businesses, (viii) individual taxpayers, and (ix) civil society at large. A series of consultations were
held with these groups in different parts of the country to inform them about project design and its
objectives and recieve feedback. Regular consultations are also built-in as part of project design for
dissimenating information and assessing the impact.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

                                                      16
                                                                                                       ISDS


F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                        Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                       Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                            Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. There are no
safeguard issues.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Mudassir Khan                                      10-31-03
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Zia Aljalaly/Person/World Bank                     10-31-03
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Frederick Edmund Brusberg                               12-02-03
Comments
Category C is endorsed.

Sector Manager/Director               Joseph Del Mar Pernia                              11-01-03
Comments
This is cleared.

