                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                                 Report No: AC466
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/03/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PAKISTAN                                              Project ID: P077306
Project: Pakistan Tax Administration Reforms Project           Task Team Leader: Mudassir Khan
Authorized to Appraise Date: May 7, 2004                       IBRD Amount ($m): 24.40
Bank Approval: November 23, 2004                               IDA Amount ($m): 78.50
Managing Unit: SASFP                                           Sector: General public administration sector (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)             Theme: Tax policy and administration (P); Trade
Status: Lending                                                facilitation and market access (P)


I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The development objective of the Project is to fundamentally reform the Central Board of Revenue (CBR)
for a more efficient and effective revenue administration system. The project aims to facilitate and promote
voluntary compliance, increase the overall collection result and guarantee fairer and more equitable
application of tax laws. Additionally, the new human resource policy framework and management system
combined with modernized procedures and institutional structure will lead to an increase in transparency
and integrity of the tax administration operations. The project aims to strengthen tax administration to
contribute to the achievement of fiscal targets and facilitate the collection of optimum tax revenues.

The Tax Administration Reform Project (TARP) seeks to support the reforms initiated by the government
for improving tax administration. The overriding objective is to raise tax revenue through improved
compliance with tax laws and broadening of the tax base; improving effectiveness, responsiveness and
efficiency of tax administration through institutional and procedural reforms; improving collection through
transparent and high quality tax services; and strengthening audit and enforcement procedures.

This Project follows the successful completion of an IDF Grant which was extended to the Government in
2000 to facilitate development of implementation plans for institutional reform of CBR. TARP supports
the continuation and effective implementation of the reforms initiated to enhance the capability of the tax
system. Specifically, project objectives include:

    a. Improving organizational efficiency and effectiveness of revenue administration: Create an
        autonomous, transparent, and efficient CBR that is organized around functional lines, encourages
        self assessment and dispenses a fair and equitable process of tax administration. This will include
        modernizing tax operations for faster and reliable processing of tax returns, increased capacity for
        record keeping and management of data through effective integration of business processes and
        information systems. In addition, this will include improvements in staff productivity and morale
        through adoption of best practice policies for recruitment, training, performance evaluation and
        compensation.

    b.   Promoting compliance through strengthened audit and enforcement capacity and transparent
        and high quality tax services: Compliance will be enforced through a risk based audit system as
        well as fair and effective enforcement mechanisms that directly respond to changes in the
        environment using information technology and a new intelligence and risk management system.

                                                        2
                                                                                                             ISDS


         Voluntary compliance with tax and custom laws will be promoted through an intensive taxpayer
         education and facilitation program, re-engineering of CBR's business processes and reorienting its
         operational culture towards a transparent and service-oriented organization. This will include
         building effective-working relationships with taxpayers and minimizing contact between taxpayers
         and tax officials to reduce discretion on part of tax officials and subsequent opportunities for
         corruption.

     c. Improving trade facilitation through modern and internationally acceptable customs
         procedures: Introducing simplified, modern and risk-based import and export clearance and
         related procedures, and bringing the system in line with internationally acceptable standards to
         improve trade facilitation.

     d. Improving integrity and fairness of tax administration: Implementation of a comprehensive
         anti-corruption strategy, including the creation of an internal audit and internal affairs unit, regular
         taxpayer and staff feedback surveys, and the dissemination of a new code of conduct. To design
         and implement a new administrative dispute resolution mechanism.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The proposed Project will support the Government revamp the tax administration system. It would support
initiative to redress major shortcomings in tax administration through investment in human resource and
information technology, modernizing collection and audit procedures, fostering voluntary compliance, and
strengthening the institutional framework for tax enforcement.

The Government is committed to reform institutions through incentives and accountability to breakout from
a vicious cycle of high rates, predatory administration, tax evasion and low revenues to a virtuous cycle of
lower rates, equitable tax structures, fair administration, voluntary compliance and higher revenue. CBR
reform is an important pillar of Government's broader strategy for reforming public sector institutions.
Similar reforms have also been initiated at the State Bank of Pakistan, Securities and Exchange
Commission of Pakistan, WAPDA, and the Office of the Auditor General. Additionally, the Government
with Bank assistance is in the process of preparing a wide-range of public sector capacity building program
which aims to enhance the skill base of its key ministries, agencies and regulatory bodies in an effort to
introduce broad-based civil service reforms.

As its commitment, the Cabinet approved the reform strategy for CBR which allowed it to prepare a
comprehensive reform program. Moreover, the Government established a Cabinet Committee for Federal
Revenues headed by the Finance Minister, which not only gives CBR autonomy to implement the reform
program but also to institute mechanisms which would sustain the reforms once they have been
implemented.

The proposed Project is designed around a comprehensive reform strategy and includes the following seven
components: (i) Management and Institutional Development; (ii) Improving Revenue Operations; (iii)
Strengthening Revenue Services; (iv) Creating a Tax Compliant Culture; (v) Adopting Responsive IT
Systems; (vi) Infrastructure Up-gradation and Development; and, (vii) Project Management and
Implementation.

1.       Management and Institutional Development

The CBR's human and institutional development strategy will support and enhance the broader tax reform
strategy by driving:

                                                       3
                                                                                                           ISDS




    l Strategic changes within CBR's organizational structure;
    l Transformation of the organization's culture & ethos; and,
    l Development of sound people-management policies and procedures.


        1.1.      Organization and Policy

CBR headquarters is currently organized on a hybrid basis with excessive line functions reporting to the
Chairman. At the field level, direct and indirect tax administration are totally separate. The direct tax
administration is based wholly on the geographic distribution of taxpayers with multiple tiers of
decision-making and supervision. A service function and program is lacking. Appropriate structures to
deal with large taxpayers have only recently been introduced on a pilot basis. Government rules and
regulations do not provide sufficient administrative and financial flexibility for an efficient management of
its operations. CBR does not have the necessary discretion to re-allocate budgeted funds within main
appropriations to react to changing expenditure needs. In addition, the lack of budgetary resources to carry
out necessary construction/renovation work, the dependence on the Public works Department for the
execution of construction/renovation work and the inappropriately low government ceiling for the lease of
office space do not allow required infrastructure improvements.

This subcomponent will support activities aimed at moving from a tax-type to a functional structure at
CBR headquarters and in the field offices. Activities would include streamlining the management structure
at CBR headquarters and consolidating the fragmented office network for income tax and sales tax
administration into twelve regional tax offices (RTOs). A formal annual planning process will be
introduced and the performance measurement system will be revised and broadened. The subcomponent
will also assist in reviewing the requirements for more financial, functional, and administrative flexibility
and developing related accountability mechanisms. It also aims to improve the legal framework for tax
administration and support strengthening of tax policy capacity. In addition, support to the design and
implementation of a comprehensive integrity strategy for the CBR will be provided.

        1.2       Human Resource Development

This subcomponent addresses the following core areas of human resource development:

                  1.2.1   Human Resource Management: The organization is significantly overstaffed,
particularly at lower organizational levels. Furthermore, the expectation of job security is stronger for a
career untied to performance criteria. This will need to change, especially when more widespread use of
information technology and reengineering of business processes take place during the modernization
process. This is expected to bring about competition for jobs requiring new competencies and change the
operational and administrative environment of CBR.

This subcomponent will support: workforce rationalization; creation of new and redefining existing
professional positions to meet new functional and operational requirements; development of a human
resource management policy framework; and, adoption of new pay and benefits regime, including
merit-based pay and incentive systems.

                  1.2.2   Training Delivery: The current training system is not geared to address the
existing training needs of CBR. For most staff, there is no explicit linkage of training to career
advancement or promotion, and neither training needs analysis is carried out by the local offices of CBR.
Finally, lack of performance evaluation leads to a haphazard application of an essentially supply driven

                                                         4
                                                                                                            ISDS


training. The CBR in-house study on "Traning needs analysis" recently published needs to be implemented.

This subcomponent would support: (i) development of a new CBR training strategy to meet the
requirements of the new functional organization, including the core area of management. It would also help
CBR establish an integrated training directorate for tax and customs administration; (ii) coordinate
preparation and supervision of training needs analysis and prepare requisite training plans for all staff as a
part of the annual performance evaluation process; (iii) prepare annual training plan focusing on specific
training in functional areas for upper-level staff and management skills for officers; (iv) offer refresher
courses for technical staff and officers; (v) organize an internal induction training, not through the Civil
Service Administration, focused exclusively on content germane to tax administration; (vi) provide
advanced training on an assessed needs basis, and establish facilities so that courses can be carried out on a
decentralized basis; and, (vii) allocate budget resource to the training function.

                  1.2.3   Improve Professional Ethics: A Code of Conduct and Ethics need to be
implemented in addition to the general code of conduct that applies to all government officials promulgated
in 1964. Because the working environment of CBR differs from that of most public servants, experience
from other countries suggests that development of a separate code for routine revenue administrative work
is needed. Timely enforcement is a critical element in implementing such codes. In CBR, there are
protracted delays in processing cases of corruption caused by understaffing, which will need to be
remedied.

This subcomponent supports development of a special code of conduct and ethics through: (i) training of
managers to brief staff on its contents, their rights and responsibilities, and enforcement procedures; (ii)
training of staff assigned to investigate inquiries into staff alleged breaches of the code; and, (iii)
development of clear guidelines for managers and supervisors on how to deal with complaints alleging staff
corruption.

         1.3      Internal Audit

CBR lacks a dedicated internal audit function to ensure that the business processes established are properly
followed.

This subcomponent will establish a specialized internal audit functions in CBR. It will set up a central
internal audit office for planning, program direction, procedures, training and evaluation of the internal
audit program throughout the CBR. Field-based internal audit units will be established to implement
internal audit plans in the operational components of customs and taxation.

         1.4      Internal Affairs and Vigilance Units

In the current organizational structure there is no dedicated department in CBR responsible for the
detection of cases of collusion between revenue administration officials and taxpayers. In practice, this has
led to a situation where CBR is confronted with multiple interference and inquiries from outside agencies,
such as the National and Regional Accountability Bureaus, the Federal Investigation Agency, and the
Investigation Bureau. This has led to questionable inquiries into CBR's daily operations, as quite often
issues raised during such investigations are highly technical in nature and the probing agencies do not have
the necessary competency and knowledge. Regarding disciplinary measures against corrupt officials, the
main responsibility lies with the Director General of Inspections and the Director General of Inquiries. In
practice, there are substantial delays in enforcing disciplinary measures and a lack of focus in the
organization on expediting processing corruption case.

                                                       5
                                                                                                         ISDS




This subcomponent will assist in creating a specialized internal affairs function and vigilance function at
CBR headquarters. These functions will be responsible for investigating allegations against CBR officials
and detecting corrupt practices and corrupt officials.

         1.5.    Change Management

This sub-component will support activities aimed at developing and implementing appropriate strategies for
managing organizational change at all levels of the tax administration, including communication strategies
to explain the rationale and potential impact of the planned changes to all managers, officers, staff,
taxpayers and other stakeholders.

2.       Improving Revenue Operations

CBR will reorganize itself to meet the management and functional requirements and challenges of a modern
tax administration system. The long term vision of CBR provides for a functionally integrated tax
administration system; moving to such a structure will avoid the present duplication of functions such as
audit, collection and enforcement across departments. Managing direct and sales taxes separately makes it
more expensive to comply and more difficult for taxpayers who have multiple tax dealings to comply. The
integration will provide taxpayers with a single point of access, enabling them to easily obtain all the
information required to assess their tax liabilities. However, recognizing the challenges of the change
process during the transition period, CBR will maintain the separation of function by tax type in the initial
reform period with the aim of gradually reducing this over time, while carefully considering the legal,
political, geographical and revenue implications.

In order for CBR to make this major reform program a success, it will ensure that its organizational
structure supports the procedural and operational changes arising from the reforms. The following are
some of the main subcomponents that will be addressed by the proposed project.

         2.1     Direct Tax

Of the three revenue administrations, Direct Tax is the one which has the greatest need of reform. Its
operations are performed through costly, inefficient and ineffective processes and procedures at 96
locations by more than 750 circles. The collective revenue yield of such operations has been chronically
poor and grossly short of potential. Mutual dissatisfaction of taxpayers and of the CBR's staff is
persistently high, under current operations.

The project will support government's planned reform of direct tax by: flattening the organization
structure, improving the identification and registration process, specializing the handling of large and
medium taxpayers affairs, establishing a tax-payer self-assessment/self-declaration approach, maintaining
a taxpayer database containing all assessment and payment data, establishing capability to quickly detect
taxpayer non-filing and non-payment.

Twelve Regional Tax Offices (RTOs) will be the focal points for all Direct Tax operations in the mid to
long term (except for large taxpayers, which will be handled by LTUs). The functional program areas to
be carried out at each of the 12 future RTOs are Taxpayer Facilitation (includes Registration); Taxpayer
Audit; Collection & Enforcement; Investigation of Tax Fraud/Evasion; Information Processing; Human
Resources; Information Technology; and Legal.

                                                       6
                                                                                                          ISDS


Direct taxes will require use of information technology to support several functions. The direct tax
organizational units (e.g., LTUs and RTOs) will require appropriate hardware, system software and
network support. In addition to the hardware, this subcomponent envisages the development of following
software systems:

   l Taxpayer registration system: This system will register taxpayers for direct taxes. Currently,
        CBR is using a National Taxpayer Number for all taxpayers. However, for ease of data capture
        from data sources outside CBR, it is recommended that the CBR uses National Identification Card
        (NIC) number for individual taxpayers and continue to use NTN for business taxpayers.
   l Income tax information processing and accounting system: This system will process a filed tax
        return and update a taxpayer's account. The Tax Management System (TMS) developed at the
        MTU can be expanded to provide this functionality.
   l Case tracking System for collection/enforcement: This system will track a case and provide its
        status (received, closed and inventoried, etc.) as it proceeds through the system.
   l Computerized audit selection system: This system will select cases for audit based on audit
        selection criteria established by member audit.

Among the most important project strategies and initiatives for Direct Tax are:

   l Establish more specialization units for handling of direct operations for the country's largest
        taxpayers;
   l The operations of the LTU will serve as "a model office" for replication to CBR's operations
        elsewhere;
   l Two more LTUs will be established in the mid term. The three LTUs will be the focal point in the
        future for all operations applicable to the country's largest taxpayers;
   l Decentralize operations for other taxpayers based on functional structures;
   l The operations of the MTU will serve as an interim "model office" for the re-engineered operations
        of Direct Tax and will be replicated to other sites across the country in the short term;
   l Based on the results of the Lahore "model office test", five more MTUs are already scheduled to be
        established;
   l In the medium to long term, the MTUs will become part of the 12 Regional Tax Offices (RTOs),
        where Income and Sales Tax operations will first be co-located, and in the long term, integrated.
   l Several data processing operations for Income Tax under a universal self-assessment system will
        be established to process income tax returns, tax payments, and other documents. Among the
        numerous operations' requirements for data processing centers are rapid processing of all
        documents; electronic documentation of accurate information for the integrated tax information
        system's databases; and "capture" of key data for taxpayer control and enforcement ­
        risk-management information; identification of non-filers and stop filers; verification and matching
        of 3rd-party information for audit, collection & enforcement; etc.

In order to achieve the objectives stated above, this subcomponent will support a series of reform initiatives
including: (1) legal authority; (2) organization and management; (3) business processes and procedures;
(4) human resources (including training and recruitment); (5) facilities and infrastructure; and, (6)
information technology.

        2.2      Sales Tax and Central Excise

The Federal Sales Tax Act, 1990, enables the federal government to impose ST based upon the value added
at each stage of selling of the goods. Internationally, this form of taxation is known as Value Added Tax

                                                       7
                                                                                                          ISDS


(VAT). At present, there is a universal rate of 15 percent applied to most goods. Exemption is provided
for a number of goods including most basic foodstuff, drugs, computer hardware and software, selected
agricultural equipment, commercial ships and aircraft. Exports, sales to diplomats, and supplies in the
Export Processing Zone are all zero-rated. The ST does not apply to transactions within the Federally
Administered Tribal Zones (FATA) and Provincially Administered Tribal Zones (PATA). An Act of
Parliament cannot be enforced in these districts without agreement of the Provincial Assembly and
Governor. Agreement to enforce the Federal Sales Tax Act has not been obtained. The constitution
empowers the Federal Government to levy excise duties other than on liquor, opium or narcotics.

The most pressing issue with ST and excise duties that this component will address is the limited number of
ST registrants and their poor compliance - about 88,000 registered units.

This component will also review the number of goods and services that currently receive an exemption. To
bring ST in Pakistan in line with general international practice, the share of ST should be distributed
equitably and requires increase in the scope of goods and services liable. ST will also be developed to
allow for tax input credits for office equipment, office supplies, building materials, electricity consumed
and other items used to support taxable activities. The input tax claims and ST refunds system will be
reviewed and streamlined.

Sales taxes will need use of the taxpayer registration, case tracking and computerized audit selection
systems discussed above. In addition, sales tax information and communication system would be
developed to process and reconcile a filed sales tax return.

        2.3      Customs

The long-term objectives of the customs reform component are to modernize import and export clearance
procedures, and related procedures that impact upon trade facilitation, in accordance with internationally
accepted principles and methods and will also improve revenue collection. The building blocks of the
CBR's reform strategy in customs are based upon the following principles, guidelines and procedures. The
application of the principle of customs controls will allow the CBR to:

   l focus on high-risk areas and therefore ensure more effective use of available resources;
   l increase ability to detect offences and non-compliant traders and travelers;
   l offer compliant traders and travelers greater facilitation; and,
   l expedite trade and travel.


Risk management has been universally adopted as a key principle in customs procedural reform.
According to the General Annex of the Revised Kyoto Convention, "Customs controls should be carried
out on a selective basis using risk management". The Chapter defines risk management as -- the
systematic application of management procedures and practices which provide Customs with the necessary
information to address movements and consignments which present a risk techniques to the greatest extent
possible.

Customs will move progressively away from "blanket" controls and detailed procedures that impact on all
or most importers and exporters, to interventions that are highly targeted towards identified risk shipments,
traders and goods.

Reforms will also introduce self-assessment and provide the speedy clearances to those that have proved
and maintained their dependability. Face-to-face contact will be limited and CBR plans to strictly limit

                                                        8
                                                                                                         ISDS


access by customs agents to secure accommodation. Plans call for development of a system enabling
electronic preparation/submission of declarations, internet/EDI transmission, selection of declaration for
audit based on risk analysis, and electronic assessment/release.

3.      Strengthening Revenue Services

        3.1      Audit

At present, there are different audit schemes for different taxes, and the development of audit programs
varies both in quantity and quality. In certain cases, individual employees have developed advanced control
programs and audit case selection systems. Rewards are based upon fulfillment of the goal set for
collection rather than the number and quality of audits.

Some of the problems plaguing the audit function include: lack of cost effectiveness; non differentiation of
the various forms of control; audit experiences not extracted and distributed throughout CBR; the auditing
process characterized by a bargaining process between the auditor/collector and the taxpayer; and, the
selection of cases for audit not carried out according to a structured risk assessment ­ carried out
randomly.

Selection of cases for audit, under risk-assessment systems is very difficult anywhere in the world. A great
deal of work still needs to be done to establish a viable system in the CBR, and the time is now to do so,
before the next round of tax returns is filed under USAS. Despite the need for transparency in tax
administration, this data should not be shared with taxpayers and tax practitioners as is the practise world
wide.

The project will support the establishment of a Tax Audit Function as a separate functional stream. It will
also develop an automated approach to audit-case selection based upon consideration of the risks of under
reporting and underpayment of taxes and case distribution among auditors with specialized functions. The
audit function will be strengthened through independent quality reviews and audit parameters will be
imbedded in the Information Management system, allowing the system to identify returns/filings for further
scrutiny.

        3.2      Voluntary and Enforced Collection

The establishment of an effective collection and enforcement function is a critical element of any tax
administration reform. Accordingly, CBR will establish a Collections and Enforcement Function at the
head office which will be responsible for providing direction, developing policies and procedures and
providing support to regional operations. The Function will be responsible for identifying non-filers and
taking appropriate action. It will also assist in updating registration records. To summarize, the Function
will be responsible for the following activities:

   l Enforcement / Collection;
   l Monitoring of filing and payments including withholding taxes;
   l Demand outstanding returns;
   l Recovery of outstanding taxes;
   l Imposing interest and penalties;
   l Conducting internal/external surveys; and,
   l Collecting data on taxpayer assets, to aid eventual enforced collection.

                                                         9
                                                                                                             ISDS


An integral part of the Collections and Enforcement Function will be the development of a computer system
and tax database that will facilitate the collection of taxes. This will issue notices, calculate interest and
penalties, and identify non-filers. It will interface with external sources of information like banks and
utility companies to identify non-filers or stop-filers and to facilitate collection.

Unlawful practices at the taxpayer level, are addressed under 'collection and enforcement' in the section
`creating a tax complaint culture'.

         3.3     Appeals and Dispute Resolution

Improved Revenue services will also focus on appeals and dispute-resolution processes. The Appeals and
Dispute Resolution sub component will address development of systems, procedures and processes which
must be perceived as fair, expeditious and transparent by all interested parties. Highlighted will be a
single, two-phase avenue of appeal for all kinds of taxes. The first phase will be at an administrative, but
quasi-judicial level, followed by a judicial level, if necessary. The national appeals and adjudication system
will be uniformly administered across the different tax disciplines.

This sub component would also support pilot efforts to meet the objectives described above. For example,
the soon to be established pilot "Dispute Resolution Complex" at the present Sales Tax (East) Collectorate
in Karachi will test functional specialization of re-engineered dispute resolution processes. This pilot
proposes to improve:

    l Alignment of tax laws;
    l Infrastructure and facilities;
    l Training and tenure posting of adjudicating officers;
    l Protection from extraneous influences and investigating agencies;
    l Countrywide computerization of Adjudication Collectorates;
    l On-line access of the adjudicating officers to data on valuation, imports-exports, local production
         of goods, information/profiles of taxpayers, case laws, latest ruling/judgments of superior courts;
         and
    l Computer-generated adjudication orders.


         3.4     National Intelligence and Risk Management

At present, there is inadequate focus on intelligence and risk management and there is limited operational
capacity. This function however, becomes highly critical with the introduction of Universal Self
Assessment and involves much more than simple data collection.

This sub component provides for creation of an intelligence-gathering function at the national level which
will cover and support all operational areas of the three Revenue streams at the field level ­ Direct Tax,
Sales and Excise Taxes, Customs, Exports. A national risk-management function will be co-located with
the intelligence function to provide similar support field operations. The risk-management function will
design automated systems and databases based on ratios/taxpayer profiles/industry and goods
"profiles"/etc. to gather, analyze and identify cases for audit and enforcement which have the greatest risk
for revenue loss to the Government. The intelligence function will focus heavily on creation and use of
automated databases for the identification and preparation of cases for field investigation which meet
criteria for potential tax/customs fraud or evasion.

         3.5     Customs and Tax Frauds

                                                        10
                                                                                                            ISDS




Customs and tax frauds pose a serious economic, industrial and social threat to Pakistan. CBR under the
project will introduce measures that would protect against these threats.

This subcomponent would support creation of an integrated Tax & Customs Fraud function with
specialists to investigate alleged offenses by taxpayers/traders under the relevant legislation and recommend
for prosecution those confirmed cases, after careful, thorough, documented and professional investigation.
Together with a highly-qualified, highly-trained staff of investigators, the function will be provided with
well developed, integrated IT and communications systems.

This highly-specialized function does not yet exist in the CBR and will need to be established. Assistance
will be sought from Revenue and Customs Investigation organizations of other countries, since the CBR's
investigation staff will also be required to establish liaison with international and national organizations to
facilitate mutual support and assistance in their respective investigations.

4.       Creating a Tax Compliant Culture

         4.1      Taxpayer Education and Facilitation

Tax facilitation and education is currently minimal and will need to be strengthened considerably if
universal self-assessment requiring taxpayers to maintain transaction documentation to be successful. The
tax education and facilitation function will include a strong and well coordinated communications program
promoting the development of greater compliance and a user friendly, supportive interface between the
CBR and corporate and individual taxpayers. It will also introduce a program outlining the principles of a
good tax administration system (transparent, fair, automated, simple and cost-effectiveness); develop a
quality assurance monitoring program; and introduce easy-to-comply-with forms and document
requirements that are compatible with a computerized operation.

The tax administration system will provide taxpayers with a single point of access, enabling them to easily
obtain all the information required to assess their tax liabilities. This will be instigated through the
establishment of 60 to 75 Taxpayer Facilitation Centers (TFCs). A key objective of the TFCs will be to
promote tax facilitation through the promotion of self-assessment for tax liability.

The TE & F will research, plan, design, develop, implement and manage programs to elicit ideas, opinions
and feedback from the taxpayers, TE & F staff, and other stakeholders. It will establish an ongoing
monitoring and quality assurance program involving the launch and facilitation of forums between
appropriate internal and external stakeholders.

                  4.1.1    Communications Program: The quality of service that taxpayers can currently
access varies across Pakistan. The reform strategy will address this inequality and raise service standards
across all areas. A key component of this effort will be the application of modern basic communication
principles, ensuring that taxpayers have access information.

Explanatory literature will also be developed and updated regularly. The literature (publications, brochures
and booklets) will cover dissemination of laws, rules, procedures and changes from time to time
particularly with reference to the universal self-assessment and record keeping requirements.

                  4.1.2    Internet Facilities: The information super highway, or the Internet, is an important
driving force behind the new work methodology, enabling improved communications both between CBR

                                                         11
                                                                                                            ISDS


and the taxpayers as well as within CBR. By making IT an integral part of the organization, CBR will
revolutionize the way it functions and manages its relationships with taxpayers by reducing the interaction
with taxpayers.

                  4.1.3    Call Centers: Considering evolving demands, a call center will be established to
facilitate taxpayer contact through e-mail, letters, faxes and telephone calls. The potential to successfully
introduce this component of the TE & F function is high. At present, `hits' on CBR's web-page show that
a number of taxpayers are willing to use modern technology to an extent that would not otherwise be
possible were contact restricted to face-to-face consultations. Moreover, the call center will answer both
internal and external questions and queries. As such, it will also be used as a communication tool to unify
tax administration procedures and practices within the CBR itself.

         4.2      Taxpayer Identification and Registration

The ability to identify taxpayer's revenue activities is an essential element of a modern tax system and
begins with registration. CBR's intent is to have a highly accurate taxpayer registration system for all tax
purposes and for all taxpayers. This will: (a) facilitate exchange of data; (b) avoid duplicate and
erroneous registrations; and, (c) establish a database of taxpayer information. Data scrubbing exercises
have already been conducted by the MTU in Lahore to clean up and organize National taxpayer Numbers
of taxpayers in its jurisdiction; this exercise will be extended to national scale with project rollout. Third
party information will be matched against information declared by each taxpayer to ensure full and correct
reporting and payment of taxes. Interfaces will be built with such external reporting sources to capture
appropriate data.

5.       Adopting Responsive IT Systems

The information technology strategy will help the CBR transform the way it functions and supports it's
reform objectives. The strategy will be driven by selected CBR officers from the tax administration and IT
departments, supported by tax specialists and other specialists covering areas such as audit, HR,
information communication technology (ICT) and taxpayer education.

Therefore the ICT strategy will be based on the following principles:

        l Determining a technology path that will support CBR's ICT needs of today and its future
              objectives considering its users' skill level, and the need for a practical approach to bring
              technology to users; and,
        l Providing technology to enable CBR to achieve its revenue and reform targets by making
              procedures and their application transparent and providing easy access to timely and accurate
              information for decision making.

The goal of the ICT strategy is to move from a highly manual to an automated environment in which
computers are used to facilitate decision making by various functional and technical teams/ authorities. To
support this, information will be made available at all strategic points within the organization to:

        l Improve management control to levels approximating those experienced in industrialized
              countries;
        l Increase transparency of tax administration;
        l Reduce interaction with taxpayers in day-to-day operations;
        l Manage information for broadening the tax-net, increasing revenues, and facilitating trade;

                                                       12
                                                                                                            ISDS


        l Identify and adopt international best-practices; and,
        l Allow for multi-directional communication under the electronic signatures ordinance, 2002.


Despite substantial past investments in information technology by CBR, desired results have not been
achieved because standard IT development methodology has not been followed. IT project management
has been inadequate with almost no preparation for a user interface, little management ownership and
isolated systems development. Moreover, the development of IT systems in the past has proceeded in an ad
hoc and unplanned manner so that most departments operate stand-alone modules that are not integrated
into the main system.

Learning from these previous mistakes, CBR's IT strategy includes a long-term harmonized information
management structure that provides complete, accurate, and up-to-date information, which is delivered in a
useful manner and at a reasonable cost. The ICT strategy moves away from manual systems to
independent PC LANs and enterprise-wide, network-based clients. It will move processing work to end
users' desktop while maintaining shared resources, thus reducing the load on centralized resources.
Finally, the server technology will supply cost-effective computing and will provide the foundation for
swift, effective and efficient execution of all tax administration tasks. This will require that the entire
process and work culture is re-engineered. Experience indicates that organizational capacity in terms of
human resource plays a critical role in successfully deploying a new business strategy using information
technology.

Information input, output, and storage requirements are a basic ingredient in any systems planning across
the CBR, no less than transaction processing. Data management will thus be a key consideration in the
Information Systems Planning process. A decision on the extent of storage of previous years' data will be
made by all relevant stakeholders as part of a data management plan, prior to the commencement of any
large data conversion exercise. The storage, retrieval and cataloging of these records, in electronic form
preferably, will involve a coordinated plan starting from changes in tax law/regulation to design of the
physical systems for movement of paper, all the way down to design of paper forms for annual returns
going forward; a study and commensurate optimization along the entire chain of information flow in
physical and electronic form is called for.

The CBR will maintain a two-tier MIS system which will provide all statistical information and tools
necessary to support multi-dimensional revenue analysis and prediction/projection capabilities for CBR's
national budget exercise. The central MIS system will also provide modules to capture and process all HR,
financial and budget-related information including asset management.

A Central Information Depository System will also be developed providing easy, on-line access to all
relevant acts, all SROs, case history, transaction profiles, sector profiles, revenue profiles, industry
profiles, manuals, rules, procedures, publications and announcements. Currently, CBR employees do not
have easy access to this information impacting their productivity. The provision of this repository would
enhance employee productivity and improve working conditions.

6.       Infrastructure Up-gradation and Development

CBR's workforce tolerates working conditions which hinders their efficiency considerably. To address this,
CBR will improve the physical working environment for its employees. As re-engineering and
computerization of working processes (and the reduced number of tax offices) leads to reductions in the
number of staff required, the per-capita cost of providing better working conditions becomes more
manageable. Better conditions are likely to translate into further improvements in productivity.

                                                        13
                                                                                                          ISDS




Office modernization so far is mainly focused on a small number of pilot sites. There is a basic need to
develop a comprehensive accommodation modernization plan. This plan should be developed
simultaneously with the reorganization of the tax administration as any delay in the latter could mean
significant additional costs in independently implemented capital investments and refurbishments. In
addition, offices will need to be consolidated and in the case of sales tax and direct tax co-located.
Currently, substandard short term leased accomodation is not conducive to carrying out the business of
revenue administration. Finally, the ability of the CBR to lease or rent accommodations of appropriate
quality is compromised but the inability of CBR to gain the necessary autonomy over managing its
infrastructure required to remedy these issues.

This subcomponent supports: the preparation of a comprehensive accommodation modernization plan in
line with the roll-out of the functional organization; the ownership of more buildings by CBR as part of the
accommodation reform process; opening up the possibility of entering into long-term leases for office space
where major renovations have been carried out; gaining assurances for the Public Works Department that
infrastructure will be routinely performed in a timely manner; granting sufficient authority to CBR so that
needed infrastructure for the roll-out of the LTU and MTU concept and modernize its office infrastructure.



7.       Program Management and Implementation

This component would finance a structure for implementing the project, including: a Project Management
Unit (PMU) which would provide overall coordination as well as take responsibly for managing the
incremental changes necessary to effect implementation of each component and related activities of the
Project. The PMU would also be responsible for reporting on Project implementation and manage all
disbursement, procurement and financial management activities under the project and according to Bank
Guidelines.

An integral part of the PMU responsibilities will be establishing the monitoring and evaluation component
of the proposed project. The PMU has established performance indicators detailed in the Project
Implementation Plan (PIP) to monitor impact of the project and measure its success. The key areas that
will be monitored include; the ratio of revenue collected to GDP, taxpayer satisfaction surveys, audit
enforcement, labor efficient processes, the use of IT and the improved organizational structure. In each of
these areas the PMT will prepare a baseline scenario with objective and subjective performance targets.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
N.A.


B. Check Environmental Classification: C (Not Required)

Comments:


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No

                                                        14
                                                                                                           ISDS


    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes     No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes     No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Its a tax administration reform project and there are no safeguard issues

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
Not applicable

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Not applicable

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Not applicable

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
This is a tax reform project and safeguard policies are not applicable.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
This project does not trigger any of the safeguard policies, however, keeping in view the social impact of
any of the project activities on lives of the people, stakeholder consultations have been ongoing. The
stakeholders include the following:
(i) Staff of CBR, (ii) Government and agencies and autonomous bodies, (iii) accounting firms and bodies,
(iv) tax lawyers, (v) trade associations, (vi) Federal and Provincial Chambers of Commerce, (vii) Private
Sector businesses, (viii) individual taxpayers, and (ix) civil society at large. A series of consultations were
held with these groups in different parts of the country to inform them about project design and its
objectives and recieve feedback. Regular consultations are also built-in as part of project design for
dissimenating information and assessing the impact.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

                                                      15
                                                                                                           ISDS


[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[X] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. There are no
safeguard issues.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                                  Date
Task Team Leader:                     Mudassir Khan                                         08-10-04
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Zia Aljalaly/Person/World Bank                        08-10-04
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                   Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Frederick Edmund Brusberg                                  08-31-04
Comments

                                         16
                                                              ISDS


Category C is endorsed.

Sector Manager/Director    Joseph Del Mar Pernia    08-25-04
Comments
This is cleared.

