                               Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

                                                                                                Report No: AC158
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/22/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: PAPUA NEW GUINEA                                       Project ID: P079140
Project: Smallholder Agriculture Development                    Task Team Leader: Philippe Fernand Boyer
Authorized to Appraise Date: September 22, 2005                 IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: March 21, 2006                                   IDA Amount ($m): 20.00
Managing Unit: EASRD                                            Sector: Crops (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)              Theme: Other rural development (P)
Status: Lending

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

The overall project development objective would be to promote rapid economic growth in the rural areas in
four oil palm growing provinces, by strengthening the smallholder oil palm sector through capitalizing on
existing infrastructure, and by establishing replicable mechanisms for community-driven development.

Oil palm is the country's leading agriculture sector foreign exchange earner, and has an unbroken record of
success since the original plantings almost 40 years ago. It is very well adapted to the soils and climate of
the areas of Papua New Guinea (PNG) in which it is grown and productive cultural techniques are well
established. In addition, the linkage with the palm oil mills of the private sector nucleus estates provides a
proven arrangement for the processing and marketing of the smallholder produce, as well as for the
recovery of credit from growers.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

The project does not attempt to address the issues that negatively affect the rural sector economy through
generic, nation-wide programs. Rather, it focuses on an important sub-sector that can promote substantial
socio-economic benefits to participating families and the rural economy in the project provinces. Within
this framework, it addresses many of the issues that are common constraints in the overall rural economy in
PNG. In doing so, it assumes realistic levels of fiscal, financial and institutional support and performance.
The project would consist of four components:

   1. Consolidation of Smallholder Oil Palm Development
   2. Road and Bridge Improvement and Maintenance
   3. Pilot Community-Driven Development
   4. Institutional Strengthening

Overall project size and hence size of the individual components would be determined based on the
available financing envelope.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

                                                        2
                                                                                                        ISDS




The five-year project would be implemented in the four oil palm growing provinces of Oro, West New
Britain, New Ireland and Milne Bay. Most of the project area is covered by degraded secondary forest and
grassland and is cultivated by smallholders and oil palm estates. The existence of conservation areas and
areas of cultural and social sensitivity in the proposed project area will be determined by the Environmental
Impact Assessment (EA) and the Social Impact Assessment (SA).
A preliminary review of social issues has been completed; the primary considerations are: (1) the nature of
land tenure and land disputes, (2) social aspects related to the existing Land Settlement Schemes (LSS),
and (3) issues related to the establishment of new village oil palm blocks and displacement of other food
crops. Gender issues will be reviewed during the SA. Based on the experience of the Oro Smallholder Oil
Palm Development Project the proposed project is expected to help promote women farmers.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments:

The proposed project is expected to have minimal potential for generating negative environmental impacts.


The project is designed to support the consolidation of existing smallholder oil palm schemes through
replanting aging oil palm blocks, and establishing new oil palm blocks alongside existing roads in areas
that are serviced by the mills. The project would not support the expansion of smallholder oil palm
production in new areas. The project would also upgrade existing access roads to established smallholder
oil palm blocks and would only construct a few new access roads, either through degraded environments or
through existing oil palm plantings, and as such should have no direct effect on existing intact natural
habitats.

C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                           Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                          Yes     No     TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                  Yes     No     TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                   Yes     No     TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     Yes     No     TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 Yes     No     TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes     No     TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes     No     TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes     No     TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes     No     TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes     No     TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

                                                       3
                                                                                                          ISDS


The identified environmental issues include potential project impacts on water quality (possible
contamination from mill effluents, pesticides, and fertilizers), soil erosion, natural habitats, and
conservation (specifically Queen Alexandra Birdwing Butterfly in Oro Province). Large scale impacts are
not expected from activities undertaken in the proposed project.

Preparation studies would determine whether limited involuntary resettlement might result from the
envisaged construction of a few access roads (component 2). In that case the involuntary resettlement
safeguard policy would be triggered (see II.D.3.i).

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.

Significant potential cumulative impacts are not expected from the project, but will be considered within
the EA.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

No potential adverse long term impacts are expected from the project. Nevertheless this aspect will be
considered within the EA and SA during project preparation.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

Not required

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
a) Re. Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01). To ensure the project's compliance with Bank
safeguard policies, an EA will be carried out during project preparation by consultants recruited by the
Borrower using Japan PHRD grant funds. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared to
address previously identified environmental issues (see II.D.1.), with respect to potential project impacts on
water quality, soil erosion, natural habitats, conservation, propose implementation measures, arrangements
and schedules and develop guidelines to mitigate those potential impacts.

Project investments will be confined to existing smallholder oil palm plantation areas and all investments
will be in the nature of rehabilitation and improvement. The total area for replanting aging palms and
establishing new oil palm blocks is modest in absolute and relative terms and is spread over a very large
geographical area. Adverse environmental impact potential is limited and, to the extent that there might be
adverse impacts, they will be of limited scope and the mitigation measures are well known and understood.
To adequately address environmental aspects under the project, an environmental officer would be
appointed to the Oil Palm Industry Corporation (OPIC). He/she would be responsible for training of OPIC
staff in environmental management and ensuring that all environmental guidelines dictated by the
environmental management plan are implemented. As the Department of Environment and Conservation
(DEC) generally does not receive operational funding through the government's budget process, provision
would have to be made through the OPIC budget for the environmental officer to assist DEC officers with
cost of travel to the oil palm schemes to enable them to undertake their independent monitoring role.

b) Re. Natural Habitats (OP/BP/GP 4.04). The project will prepare extensive environmental guidelines
in the Project Implementation Manual, based on the results of the EA, as well as on the experience of the
previous project. The environmental screening mechanism will ensure that the project will not affect,
degrade or convert proposed or declared protected areas and critical natural habitats. The major habitat

                                                         4
                                                                                                           ISDS


issue in the project relates to the Queen Alexandra Birdwing Butterfly (QABB) in Oro Province.
Protection of this species was a particular focus of the previous project (Oro Smallholder Oil Palm
Development Project). One of the site selection criteria will be that sites containing food vines, which are
fed on by the QABB, will not be included for development under the project.

c) Re. Pest Management (OP 4.09). The environmental analysis will evaluate the potential impact of
pesticide use.    Small amounts of some agricultural chemicals are used in oil palm production, and
herbicides may be applied for grass control in some areas. The EMP (see II.D.3a) will include an overall
Pest Management Plan and a specific Pesticide Management Plan based on experience gained during the
previous project. The EA will determine whether action will be required under this policy.

d) Re. Cultural Property (OPN 11.03 - being converted to OP 4.11). The project will not involve
construction works that will adversely affect sites having archeological, paleontological, historical,
religious, or unique natural values. No action is required under this policy.

e) Re. Forests (OP 4.36). The project will not finance activities that would involve significant conversion
or degradation of critical forest areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under the new policy
(see also II.D.3b). The Bank's forest policy promotes the active involvement of people living in and near
forest areas in all aspects of the management, conservation, and sustainable development of their natural
forests, which will be pursued during all project stages. The policy's main objectives (to assist borrowers to
harness the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable manner, integrate forests effectively into
sustainable economic development, and protect the vital local and global environmental services and values
of forests) are being integrated into the project design. Following the policy's requirements for plantations,
the project will give preference to siting such projects on unforested sites or lands already converted
(excluding any lands that have been converted in anticipation of the project). The project will be designed
to prevent and mitigate potential threats to natural habitats. In accordance with OP/BP 4.01,
Environmental Assessment, the EA will address the potential impact of the project on forests and/or the
rights and welfare of local communities.

f) Re. Safety of Dams (OP 4.37). The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of any dams
as defined under this policy. No action is required under this policy.

g) Re. International Waterways (OP 7.50).               There are no known project components involving
international waterways as defined under the policy. No action is required under this policy.

h) Re. Disputed Areas (OP 7.60). The project is not located in any known disputed areas as defined
under the policy. No action is required under this policy.

i) Re. Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The project will be designed to avoid negative impact on
local peoples livelihood. The project will prepare extensive social guidelines in the Project Implementation
Manual, based on the results of the SA, as well as on the experience of the Oro Smallholder Oil Palm
Development Project. If during preparation, it would be determined that limited involuntary resettlement
might result from the envisaged construction of a few access roads, a policy framework for resettlement
would be prepared before appraisal.

j) Re. Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20 - being converted to OP 4.10). Since all the people influenced by
this project are indigenous, the project itself is identified as an Indigenous Peoples project and will serve as
the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan. No action is required under this policy.

                                                      5
                                                                                                           ISDS




k) Re. Public Disclosure (BP 17.50). The task team will follow the Bank's disclosure policy (effective
January 1, 2002) which states that the environment and social documents are to be individually disclosed
locally and in the InfoShop prior to departure of the appraisal mission.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The key stakeholders for the proposed project would be the smallholders, growers associations, all project
implementing entities such as OPIC, and palm oil companies (mills), concerned Government departments
and local Governments, Non-Governmental Organizations, Community Based Organizations, church
groups, women associations, and other related entities.

Consultations with stakeholders began during the pre-identification and identification missions. Further
consultations will be undertaken with all stakeholders during project preparation. These consultations will
be in the form of workshops, face-to-face interviews, Participatory Rural Apprailsals, and/or focus group
interviews. The objective of these consultations will be to ensure that all the views of the key stakeholders
are taken into account for not only project design purposes, but also to determine roles and responsibilities
during the implementation and monitoring of the proposed project.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               4/14/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           5/3/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            5/3/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable

                                                     6
                                                                                                    ISDS


Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                     Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              4/14/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          5/3/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           5/3/2004

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Philippe Fernand Boyer                             07/14/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Robert Crooks                                      07/14/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Lars C. Lund                                       07/15/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Glenn S. Morgan                                         07/15/2003
Sector Manager/Director               Mark D. Wilson                                     07/15/2003

