                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                    APPRAISAL STAGE

 I. Basic Information
 Date preparedlupdated: 11/03/2005                                      Report No.: AC1895

 1. Basic Proiect Data
1             "
 Country: Peru                                  ( Project ID: PO90116
 Project Name: Peru Rural Electrification
 Task Team Leader: Susan V. Bogach
 GEF Focal Area: C-Climate change               I Global Supplemental ID: PO90110
 Estimated Appraisal Date: October 24,            Estimated Board Date: January 17,2006
 2005
 Managing Unit: LCSFE                             Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                  Loan
 Sector: Power (95%);Micro- and SME finance (5%)
 Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (P)
 IBRD Amount (US$m.):             50.00
 IDA Amount (US$m.):               0.00
 GEF Amount (US$m.):              10.00
 PCF Amount (US$m.):               0.00
 Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 50.00
                                                                            50.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
&                                                                     Re eater [I
 Is this ~roiect~rocessedunder OP 8.50 (Emer~encvRecoverv)             Yes 11       No T X ~

 2. Project Objectives
 The objective of the proposed Project would be to increase access to efficient and
 sustainable electricity services in rural areas of Peru. The proposed Project would
 achieve this by: (a) investment in sub-projects to supply electricity services to about
 160,000currently unserved rural households, businesses and public facilities, such as
 schools and health clinics (serving about 800,000 people), using both conventional grid
 extension and renewable energy sources; (b) demonstration of key elements of a
 framework for electricity provision in rural areas of Peru that would attract investment
 from private and public sector electricity providers as well as national, regional and local
 governments; and (c) implementation of a pilot program to increase productive uses of
 electricity that would increase opportunities for income generation in rural areas.

  The key performance indicator would be the number of new electricity connections in
 rural areas.

  The project's global environmental objective is to achieve reduction of greenhouse gas
 emissions through use of renewable energy in rural areas for provision of electricity. The
 key global performance indicator is avoided carbon dioxide emissions. Total estimated

emission reductions from facilities installed during the project's life are estimated at 3.63
million metric tons of C02, over the lifetime of the systems. The long term national
impact of this Project is expected to be much larger than this number, as broad replication
is expected to occur through the establishment of a national legal and regulatory
framework for rural electrification that will use a similar approach to that of the Project.

3. Project Description
The proposed Project has five main components: (a) investment by private and state-
owned enterprises to provide new electricity connections for about 160,000rural
households, businesses and public facilities, using both conventional grid electricity or
renewable energy systems that would serve dispersed or remote populations; (b) technical
assistance to create capacity for the new approach for rural electrification (projects
proposed by service providers in coordination with local communities and governments),
and particular promotion of renewable energy; (c) a pilot program to promote productive
uses; (d) a renewable energy finance facility to provide bridging finance for grid-
connected renewable energy generating facilities; and (e) project management. Each of
these components is described below:

 Investment in Provision of Electricity Service for about 160,000newly connected rural
households, businesses, and health centers, schools and community centers (serving
about 800,000 people). The Project would provide targeted capital cost subsidies to
public and private electricity serviceproviders investing in rural electrification sub-
projects. Rural electrification sub-projects are defined as projects to provide service to
new customers in rural areas outside of existing concession areas. Subsidies would make
investments in electrification sub-projects financially viable and would leverage
complementary financing from the electricity distribution companies, regional and local
governments. Sub-projects would compete for the subsidies. Service providers would
propose sub-projects to the fund. The sub-projects would be selected using criteria such
as minimum capital cost subsidy per connection and maximum economic benefit.
Eligible sub-projects would include: (a) projects to increase connections outside the
existing concession areas; and, (b) projects to provide isolated communities with service
through mini-grids (diesel, small-hydro or wind systems), or through individual
household systems (solar). It is estimated that about 25,000 of the rural connections to be
financed under the program would be made to systems using renewable energy (about
15%of total), mainly small hydro micro-grids or solar photovoltaic household systems,
or solar photovoltaic/diesel hybrid grid systems. (Estimated cost US$115.45 million:
US$44.5 million IBRD, no GEF).

 Technical Assistance for Bottom-up Provision of Rural Electrification. Technical
assistance would be provided to support the implementation of the proposed rural
electrification approach including: (a) development of the institutional framework and
regulations for rural provision of electricity service, on- and off- grid; (b) capacity
building for demand-driven and decentralized identification, planning and development
of projects; (c) promotion of private sector investment in rural electrification; and (d)
renewable energy promotion. (Estimated cost US$4.15 million of which US$0.75 million
IBRD and US$2.5 million GEF.)

 Pilot Program for Productive Uses of Electricity. This component would include a
promotional/marketing campaign to encourage existing users of diesel equipment in
newly electrified areas to switch to electrical equipment (e.g. diesel to electric motors or
pumps), as well as business development assistance in rural areas to encourage
development of more economic activities that would result in purchase and use of new
electrical equipment. Both activities would increase electricity use in targeted areas,
which would in turn increase the financial viability of rural electrification projects. Areas
targeted would be those that are shown to have substantial potential for increased
economic activity and electricity use. They could be either areas to be electrified by the
project, areas newly electrified by the project, or areas that already have had electricity
service for some years. (Estimated cost US$3.95 million of which US$2.0 million IBRD
and US$1.5 million GEF.)

 Renewable Energy Financing Facility. This project component would address the
barriers to investment in renewable energy power generation by using GEF funds to
leverage private and commercial debt financing for grid-connected renewable electricity
generating plants that would sell power to the interconnected grid, especially those plants
using small hydro. Through a financial institution, the project would provide bridge-
financing for small hydro generating plants that supply electricity to the grid during the
period of construction and initial operation, after which the loan would be refinanced by
commercial banks. (This facility would not finance connections or distribution systems.)
(Estimated cost US$15.0 million, of which US$5.0 million GEF.)

 Project Management: This component would include support for overall management
of the proposed Project, including a Project Manager; an administrative unit with staff to
handle reporting, procurement and financial management; a technical unit that would
evaluate sub-project applications and oversee the functioning of the technical assistance,
finance facility and the productive uses components; and a monitoring and evaluation
unit. It is expected that the actual administration of the subsidy and the renewable energy
finance facility would be carried out by qualified bank(s) using trust-fund arrangements
("fideicomisos"). (Estimated cost is US$6.4 million of which US$2.75 million is IBRD
and US$I million is GEF.)

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and
social characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to
any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially
sensitive areas.)

 This is a National Project with specific locations for projects to be determined during
project preparation. Such locations will include rural areas of Peru currently without
electricity service in the highlands as well as in the Upper Amazon (Selva Alta).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Roberto Gabriel Aiello (ENVCF)
   Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO)


6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                  Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OPiBP 4.01)                             X

Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                          X      I

Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                     X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                      X
Involuntary Resettlement (OPJBP4.12)                              X
Safety of Dams (OPiBP 4.37)                                       X
Projects on International Waterways (OPiBP 7.50)                              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPiBP 7.60)                                       X

11. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Screening Framework for Rural Electrification Sub-projects and Small
Hydropower Facilities. An environmental screening framework and specific
environmental guidelines have been completed. It includes the potential environmental
impacts for both the construction and operation phases of rural electrification facilities, as
well as the mitigation plans. Chance find procedures for cultural property have been
included in the environmental framework to be considered during the construction phase.

 Although not likely, project interventions could include small dams (<1Om), thus
triggering the Safety of Dams safeguard policy OP 4.37. Hence, the environmental
framework also includes specific provisions to comply with policy OP 4.37, i.e. the
design and construction of a new dam has to be supervised by experienced and competent
professionals and requires the adoption of certain dam safety measures for the design, bid
tendering, construction, operation, and maintenance of the dam and associated works.

 Resettlement Policy Framework for Rural Electrification Sub-projects and Small
Hydropower Facilities. A policy framework for involuntary resettlement has been
completed. It describes the process, the principles and the criteria to be used for the
preparation of resettlement plans and land acquisition. Given the nature of the proposed
civil works, it is very unlikely that the project will trigger the policy in regard to physical
relocation of affected population. It is more likely though that the policy will be
triggered due to land acquisition, rights of way and water usage.

 Policy Framework for Indigenous People's Management Plans for Rural Electrification
Sub-projects and Small Hydropower Facilities. It should be noted that OP 4.20 applies to
this Project (rather than OP 4.10 in Section C.) A policy framework for Indigenous

People's Management Plans has been completed. This framework includes an assessment
of the current needs for electrification for the IP of the highlands and the upper selva
regions in Peru. It also provides information and outcomes of the preliminary
consultation carried out in two towns, one in the highlands and the other in the upper
selva. The feedback received has been incorporated in the framework and provides
insights on the kind of productive uses of electricity for these populations. The
framework also depicts the process and the principles that should guide the preparation of
IPDPs if needed.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Environmental impacts of the Peru Rural Electrification Project are expected to be
minimal given the type of planned interventions under this project, which has the
potential to be very positive environmentally due to the reduction of C02 emissions. The
project includes provisions to ensure that potential impacts, including induced and
cumulative impacts, are assessed and mitigated in accordance with the Bank's safeguard
policies. Since the project will be supporting investments through a dedicated subsidy
fund, an environmental screening criterialguidelines and management procedures have
been prepared as part of the project's environmental management framework. This
framework will be used for screening all subprojects. The project's EA work has also
addressed the institutional environmental management responsibilities and capacities, and
has set forth enhancement provisions as needed to ensure that participating institutions
have the capacity to address any environmental impacts associated with the project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower in collaboration with the project preparation team (including consultants)
has prepared the appropriate Action Plantsafeguard Framework documents. The
recommended and agreed follow-up activities as stated in the Project Operational Manual
would be implemented during the project life. At each supervision mission stage and
mid-term review stage the process would be reevaluated and necessary adjustments will
also be made as appropriate to the prevalent conditions.

 The safeguard documents include:

 a. Environmental Management Framework (EMF), including chance find procedures
and small dams safety management plan
 b. Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
 c. Indigenous People Development Framework (IPDF)

 The project management unit will prepare the Operational Manual that describes in
detail the approach to implementation of the above mentioned frameworks. The project

implementation team is expected to have the capacity to screen subprojects in line with
the safeguard policies of the Bank. In addition, the safeguards budget make provisions to
use the services of safeguard specialistslthematic specialists as consultants to the project.
When needed, the project would draw on additional local and international expertise for
each of the technical components.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Safeguard Frameworks mentioned above have been disclosed on MEM's website and
at,theWB'sInfoshop in Washington DC before appraisal. Consultation workshops would
be carried out locally in the areas of influence of each subproject on an individual basis.

 The main stakeholders were consulted as a part of the process of the preparation of the
Environmental Screening Frameworks. Additional consultations (rural communities) are
planned during the implementation of the project, as a part of the preparation of EMPs.
The Frameworks are available at the offices of the Project Management Unit (PMU) and
in World Bank's Infoshop. Future EAs and EMPs will similarly be made available to the
public.

 The IPDF has been submitted to a preliminary consultation. One consultation was held
in the highland city of Huancavelica, on July 20th with participants representing peasant
communities, producers associations and local authorities. A second consultation was
held in the central upper selva, in the town of Pichanaki on July 24th with participants
representing indigenous communities, indigenous organizations and members of the
electrification district committee. These consultations have provided useful feedback
regarding the kind of productive activities that these communities would like to develop
when having access to electricity.

 The Environmental Screening IPDF and the RPF Frameworks have been disclosed in-
country in the web site of MEM and in the Infoshop.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental AssessmentlAuditlManagement Planlother:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       1011812005
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                   1011912005
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    1012012005
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action PlanlFrameworWPolicy Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    1012012005
Indigenous Peoples PlanlPlanning Framework:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       1011812005

    Date of "in-country" disclosure
    Date of submission to InfoShov
Safety of Dams:
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                    10/18/2005
    Date of "in-country" disclosure                                1009/2005
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                 1 012012005
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property andlor the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to befilled in when the
ISDS isfinalized by theproject decision meeting)

OPIBPIGP 4.01 Environment Assessment
                   -
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including ENIP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA       No
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
creditlloan?
OPN 11.03 Cultural Property
              -
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the creditlloan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OPIBP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples
               -
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in             No
consultation with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan?         No
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   No
and approved by the ~ e ~ i o hSocial Development Unit? -
                                 a l
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as            No
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve       No
*plan     I policy framework I policy process?
OPIBP4.37 Safety of Dams
               -
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           No
Have the TORSas well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts       No
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements No
been made for public awareness and training?
BP 17.50- Public Disclosure
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes

Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?



D. Approvals




                                 Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis

