Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/11/2005 
Report No.:  AC1413
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Peru 
Project ID:  P078813 
Project Name:  Regional Transport Infrastructure Decentralization 
Task Team Leader:  Aurelio Menendez 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 18, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  LCSFT 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (50%);General public administration sector (30%);General 
transportation sector (20%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Rural services and infrastructure (S);Other trade and 
integration (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
50.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
100.00 
 
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
50.00
150.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project aims at ensuring a sustainable and successful transfer of expertise 
to the newly-created regional governments to efficiently manage the regional road 
network. To do so, it will build on the technical and methodological experience gained in 
implementing rural road management (First and Second Rural Roads Projects) and 
transferring it to the municipal levels. The project will also strengthen the 
decentralization process and increase its impact on public sector management and on 
local development. As demonstrated at the municipal level by the Second Rural Roads 
Project, the road sector is a good starting point to operationalize the decentralization 
process and empower local governments. In a second stage, the experience gained in the 
road sector can be fruitfully applied by local governments to other infrastructure sectors 
(e.g., within a comprehensive rural infrastructure strategy as it is proposed in the CAS). 
In a similar fashion, the proposed project could prepare the ground for increased 
involvement of regional governments in other infrastructure sectors as envisioned in the 
decentralization agenda of the Government of Peru. Finally, this project builds 
extensively on the decentralization reforms implemented under the Programmatic 
Decentralization and Competitiveness Structural Adjustment Loan 
Page  2
3. Project Description 
The project will include five components, each moving at a different pace depending on 
the participating region. 
 
Component 1: Participatory regional road planning (estimated cost US$9.8 million of 
which US$4.9 million would be financed by the Bank Loan).
 This component will 
finance the preparation of participatory regional road plans-aligned with the existing 
regional development plans-and elaborate a diagnosis of the sector in a particular region, 
analyze the supply and demand for transport services and infrastructure, and prioritize 
and evaluate road investment options, towards identifying the sub-project priorities that 
could be funded under the project. A prioritizing methodology,  including a combination 
of both economic potential and poverty level criteria, has been prepared as part of project 
preparation, with due attention to environmental and social issues. The preparation of 
these plans will be handled by the planning units of the regional governments, with the 
technical assistance of consultants. Provias Departamental will facilitate the process (eg. 
organize coordination event) and monitor the preparation of the plans. Ultimately, plans 
have to be formally approved by the regional council or by competent commission of the 
regional government. Some participatory regional road plans have been initiated and - in 
certain cases - finalized, as part of project preparation. This component will help finalize 
these plans in every eligible region, by financing the related costs (organization of 
participatory planning, training of the planning units, dissemination and coordination 
costs, updating or revision of certain plans). It will also finance the various feasibility and 
technical studies for the road segments prioritized through participatory planning. As part 
of project preparation, a significant number of these plans have been either completed (6 
of them as of March 2005) or should be completed by August 2005 (at least 7 additional 
ones). The component will finance the completion of all the plans and the updating of, at 
least, the first ones (plans are expected to be revised every 4 to 5 years). 
 
Component 2: Road upgrading (estimated cost US$149.7 million of which US$37.43 
million would be financed by the Bank Loan).
 The objective of this component is to 
rehabilitate about 2,200 km of regional roads prioritized through participatory planning 
(under component 1) and to perform the periodic maintenance of 2,706 km of regional 
roads rehabilitated by Provias Rural and transferred to regional governments. Although 
only about a third of the secondary network would be upgraded as a result of this 
component, the ultimate development impact is expected to be high since the road 
segments to be upgraded would be selected according to their relevance for regional 
development. Regional governments would contract private enterprises to perform the 
rehabilitation works and engineering consultants to carry out the relevant supervision, 
with the technical support and oversight of the PVD. The related upgrading tasks will 
contribute to skilled and unskilled employment generation in the regions. None of the 
works to be undertaken under this component will require resettlement or imply major 
impacts to the natural environment. As part of project preparation, 8 road segments (532 
km) have been identified and feasibility and technical studies have been prepared. The 
rehabilitation of these 8 roads as well as some periodic maintenance activities will 
therefore be able to start shortly after the expected date of Board approval. 
Page  3
Component 3: Road maintenance (estimated cost US$19 million of which US$0.85 
million would be financed by the Bank Loan).
 
This component would finance the 
routine maintenance - and the related supervision - of the 4,900 km of regional roads 
rehabilitated (or having received periodic maintenance) under the previous component. In 
addition, it would finance specific road maintenance interventions (annual mechanized 
maintenance also called 
perfiles 
in Spanish) performed once a year right after the rainy 
season. Building on the successful experience of the Rural Roads projects I and II, 
maintenance would be performed by mechanisms similar to the micro-enterprise model. 
The 
perfiles 
could be performed under force-account but the amount to be reimbursed by 
the project would be fixed per kilometer and subject to a maximum per region [to be 
defined at appraisal]. These activities are expected to generate unskilled employment 
opportunities, that could benefit to the rural poor. Particular attention will be paid to 
ensuring the sustainability of the model (i.e., that sufficient funding is dedicated by 
regional governments to maintenance and that micro-enterprises are adequately 
contracted to perform such maintenance).  These activities will follow environmentally 
sensitive approaches, following current practices in Peru and other Latin American 
countries. This component will benefit from the experience of the 2,706 km of roads 
transferred by Provias Rural (all of them are currently maintained by micro-enterprises). 
 
Component 4: Institutional strengthening (estimated cost US$17.5 million of which 
US$6.825 million would be financed by the Bank Loan).
 This component-to be 
managed centrally by PVD-is aiming at providing the technical assistance needed to 
upgrade regional governments’ institutional capacity and will be built upon 
comprehensive institutional assessments performed during project preparation (as part of 
project preparation, comprehensive institutional assessments have been prepared in 8 
“fast track” regions.). Activities under this component include: (a) the rationalization of 
the current institutional framework and in particular the restructuring (possibly merging) 
of the RRDs (formerly with the Ministry of Transportation and Communication) and the 
RIMUs, newly-created as part of the organizational structure of the regional 
governments; (b) supporting a transition from direct administration of road 
maintenance/rehabilitation to contracting it to the private sector; (c) training in safeguards 
management; (d) clarification and assignment of regulatory responsibilities (for instance 
those related to the regulation of transport services and to road safety); (e) actions for the 
restructuring of the PVD;  and (f) monitoring, auditing and evaluation. Resources (up to a 
total of US$200,000) have been allocated as well for possible studies related to the 
management of the regional road network in the context of national transport policies and 
programs, complementing other existing resources that focus on overall transport policy 
formulation.  Eligible expenditures for this component will include technical assistance, 
studies and evaluations, as well as training, dissemination and coordination costs. 
 
Component 5 : Project administration (estimated cost US$4 million to be financed 
exclusively from national counterpart funds).
 The costs related to project administration 
by PVD would fall under this component. 
 
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project investments will be located in 21 of the 24 Peruvian regions (departamentos). 
The departamentos of Ucayali, Madre de Dios and Lambayeque have no or little regional 
roads, and would therefore not be eligible to the project?s investment components (but 
they would be eligible to the other components). The investments in those regions will be 
identified through participatory regional road plans, and outside of environmentally 
protected areas and site of high cultural or social significance as specified in the 
environmental assessment report and the Project Operational Manual.  The investments 
consist of rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of existing regional roads. After the 
execution of these investments, adequate routine maintenance will be performed to 
ensure sustainability 
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Juan D. Quintero (LCSEN) 
Mr Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSEO) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project does not foresee any major environmental or social issues due to the small 
nature and simple technical characteristics of the interventions.  
 
The project will only finance rehabilitation or maintenance activities for existing 
regional road segments. No significant environmental impact is expected that could 
threaten, in a direct or indirect manner, the natural environment in the project?s areas of 
intervention. Therefore, the project has been categorized as ?category B? according to the 
Bank Operational Procedure [OP 4.01]. This categorization is justified by the fact that the 
project?s activities are not expected to have major environmental impact and that relatred 
prevention, mitigation or compensation measures can be easily identified and 
implemented with an adequate environmental management system in place during the 
Page  5
various phases of the project cycle. The most significant impact actually happened in the 
past, when these roads were built.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The implementation of the project should lead ultimately to improve the living conditions 
of the population of the selected regions.  The participatory regional road plans are 
aligned with the development strategies of the regions and specific productive activities 
are expected to be carried forward with the execution of the infrastructure investments.  
These productive activities however are, in line with project interventions, of a localized 
nature and normally involve ongoing endeavors that require enhanced infrastructure 
conditions for improving their commercial competitiveness.  In sum, the longer term 
impacts will be beneficial to the local population without creating any noticeable impacts 
on existing natural environments.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project might trigger the policies OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) and OD 4.20 
(Indigenous Peoples). Following policy requirements, the borrower has prepared two 
frameworks, one for Involuntary Resettlement and another one for Indigenous Peoples 
development Plans. Specific plans cannot be prepared before appraisal because of the 
nature of this project which is to support decentralization at the national level and to 
transfer responsibilities to the regional governments, and it is not known at appraisal 
whether the works for rehabilitation would entail resettlement or would affect indigenous 
peoples lands. Besides these policy requirements, the borrower is preparing two detailed 
methodological guidelines to address resettlement and indigenous people?s issues. The 
guidelines will be used as inputs for the capacity building component of the project and 
to strengthen regional skills regarding these subjects.  
 
During project preparation, five major environmental issues were considered, in 
agreement with the Bank Quality Assurance Team (QAT): (a) review of the Bank?s 
safeguards policies that are applicable to the project; (b) preparation of a conceptual 
framework for the project?s environmental management; c) environmental assessment of 
the first 8 road segments to be rehabilitated during the first year of operation; and e) 
compliance with the national legislation.  
 
An evaluation of the existing institutional capacity to deal with environmental matters of 
each of the actors involved has been prepared. Based on this diagnostic, an institutional 
strengthening plan has been prepared, which identifies actors, requirements and resources 
available for environmental management. Taking into account the fact that regional 
governments are going to assume the largest responsibility for project implementation, 
particular attention has been paid to the strengthening of their capacity. Within their 
Page  6
current organization, regional governments include an environmental unit but most of 
them have a very low capacity or are not operational. For that reason, the largest part of 
the institutional strengthening plan is targeted toward regional governments.  
 
Taking into account the results obtained and the various measures and activities that 
have been performed during project preparation, it can be concluded that the project has 
properly addressed the environmental requirements and that it complies with the Bank 
environmental safeguards policies.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Consultation and disclosure with the regional governments has taken place during a 
seminar organized with the participation of 10 regional governments (presidents of the 
regional council and/or general managers). In addition, in the pilot development of 
Participatory Regional Road Plans in 13 Peruvian regions. 6 of these plans are now 
finalized and 7 additional ones have been well-advanced as part of project preparation. 
All relevant stakeholder groups from communities, municipalities, private sector, civil 
society and regional government have participated in the elaboration of these plans 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/12/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/19/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/18/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/19/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/19/2005 
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/15/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/19/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/19/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  8
D. Approvals 
