                                                                                                       41973




fund these investments, as a result of insufficient public investment capacity and a worldwide decline in
private infrastructure finance. In addition, to improve quality of service, a significant improvement in
management is required.

Therefore, the GOP plans, whenever possible, to implement and fund future infrastructure investments via
Public-Private Partnerships (PPPs) combining the benefits of private sector management and funding with
public sector contributions. ProInversih, the Peruvian private investmentpromotion agency, has identified
a first phase of about 15 projects requiring over $1.5 billion of investments in the transport, energy, water
and sanitation and telecommunication sectors over the next three years that could be developed under PPP
arrangements. However, as most of these projects are of a regional, rural or local nature, they are not
financially viable on their own and require some direct public contribution - contrarily to the first wave of
infrastructure concessions of the 1990s.

The Guarantee Facility project (the Project) aims at maximizing the attractiveness of Peru's future
infrastructure projects to private investors so as to make them suitable for PPP development, maximize
private sector funding and minimize the required public contributions. This will be achieved by providing
IBRD Partial Risk Guarantees (PRGs) to protect private project debt against various risks, including
political risks and backstopping government obligations under the projects.

The PRGs will reduce the riskiness of Peru's projects for private investors -even when the projects are not
financially viable on their own-, which will attract more private investments and increase competition
among potential bidders. The lower degree of risk of Peru's projects will also enhance their credit ratings,
which will reduce the cost of project debt. Lower cost of debt will reduce government contributions and
ultimately translate into lower tariffs for consumers. Consequently,the guarantees will create welfare gains
for the Peruvian population. In addition, the higher ratings of project debt will allow local capital market
participants, such as Peru's pension funds, to invest in better-rated project bond issues on the local capital
market. Therefore, the PRGs will also help develop Peru's capital markets.

The Project will therefore combine the economic benefits of increasing the probability of success of
infrastructure PPPs and lowering future tariffs, with the financial benefits of developing local capital
markets, thus contributing to Peru's economic development and poverty reduction. The World Bank's
guarantees will thus act as catalyst to attract vital private sector investments in infrastructure and will thus
help address Peru's critical infrastructure sector issues.

    infrastructure projects identified so far by ProInversi6n as potentially eligible to the Guarantee Facility
   all of a local or regional nature. They are spread out in all regions of Peru, outside of the capital city of




* By supporting theproposedproject, the Bank does not intend toprejudice thefinal determination of the
parties' claims on the disputed areas

'describestepsto be taken to obtain necessary data.
 1I.D.la. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
 describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

 Safeguards likely to be triggered
 While all the infrastructure projects participating to the Guarantee Facility are not known yet, it is
 anticipated, based on the current pipeline of projects, that five Bank safeguard policies are likely to be
 triggered: those on (i) environmental assessment, (ii) natural habitats, (iii) involuntary resettlements, (iv)
 indigenous people, and (vi) cultural property.

 The fust project likely to participate to the Guarantee Facility involves the rehabilitation of nine regional
 airports across Peru. This project, if it participates to the Guarantee Facility, will trigger the Environmental
 Assessment and the Involuntary Resettlement safeguards.

 ProInversion has defined with the Bank an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
 with detailed procedures to ensure compliance with the five Bank safeguards listed above, as well as with
 any other Bank safeguard (in case a new infrastructure project applies to the Guarantee Facility which
 triggers another Bank safeguard than these five). To complement the ESMF, ProInversi6n has prepared a
 Resettlement Framework and an Indigenous Peoples Framework in line with the Bank's safeguards.

 Environmental assessment
 It is anticipated that all projects in the pipeline will require an environmental and social assessment (EA).
 For the first project likely to request a guarantee from the Guarantee Facility (the group of 9 regional
 airports mentioned above), an EA is being conducted in the form of an Environmental Audit. It is likely
 that future EA will be commissioned by the PIU to consultants.

 Natural habitats
 It is possible that the final design of some of the roads and/or gas pipelines in the project pipeline (or some
 new project) come close to natural habitat or protected areas, in which case the policy would be triggered.
 The ESMF includes detailed guidelines to comply with the Bank's Natural Habitat policy should it be
 triggered. At this stage however, no project in the pipeline triggers the policy.

 Involuntary resettlements
 The airport projects, and some of the road projects in the pipeline, may cause some limited resettlements.
 A Resettlement Framework defining the key principles on which to base resettlement plans for these
 projects has been developed as a complement to the ESMF. It has been discussed and agreed with
 ProInversion and all sector ministry units in charge of social issues. It is in accordance with the related
 Bank safeguard policy. Simplified resettlement plans are being developed for four of the nine regional
 airports that are likely to participate to the Guarantee Facility.

 Indigenouspeople
 It is possible that some projects in the pipeline create (positive) impacts on indigenous populations. In
 such cases, an Indigenous Peoples Framework which complements the ESMF indicates that Indigenous
 Peoples Development Plans will have to be developed in accordance with Bank guidelines.

 Cultural Property
 To ensure compliance with this policy, the ESMF requires that EAs screen for cultural property in the
 project area, and if necessary, include measures for addressing such property in accordance with OPN
 11.03. The ESMF also requires that "chance find" procedures be included in construction guidelines.

 1I.D.lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
 due to multiple project component.-N/A

Resettlement Framework which all projects soliciting participation to the Guarantee Facility will have to
follow should they lead to involuntaryresettlements. The resettlement framework is in line with the related
Bank safeguard policy. The ESMF also contains an IndigenousPeoples Framework.

The ESMF, the Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples frameworks have been designed and agreed with
ProInversi6n1s staff and management, and have been presented to all other sector agencies in charge of




and on ProInversibn's website on January 28, 2005. A workshop to discuss these documents, as well as
ProInversi6n's communication and disclosure policy, is being organized that will take place in Lima during
the first week of March. Representatives of stakeholders from all regions of Peru will be invited, including
from Indigenous Peoples organizations.


and communication requirements in line with the Bank's standards.           Depending on each project'
environmental and social risk category, one or several consultations with stakeholders will have to tak




Date of "in-country" disclosure                      01/28/2005
Date of submission to InfoShop                       01/27/2005

Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                              N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                               N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                  N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                              N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                               N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
N/A
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                                             Sophie Sirtaine             Date: 01/3112005
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:                             Alonso Zarzar                Date: 02/02/2005
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:                             Name                         Date:
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:                             Name                       /rgate;
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards t=aprdinator                              Jean Roger Mercier '
Comments
Sector Manager                                                Susan Coldmark
                          u
Comments
N/A Not Available
By supporting the proposedproject, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on
the disputed areas (this disclaimer appears only for projects triggering OP/BP 8.60)


