                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA                   SHE]ET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                 Report No.: AC916


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 30, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Peru                                   Project ID: P079165
Project Name: PE Sierra Rural                   Task Team Leader: Ethel Sennhauser
Development Project
Estimated APpraisal Date: January 2005          Estimated Board Date: May 2005
Managing. Unit: LCSER                           Lending Instrument: Specific,Investment
                                                Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and        Theme: Decentralization (P);Other
forestry sector (50%);Sub-national              environment and natural resources
government administration (50%)                 management (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Maria   Elena Castro, George Ledec,
Elizabeth Dasso
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):
IBRD: 25
Other financing amounts by source:, 10 (TBD)                                      ($m)


B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]
The principal objective of the project is to improve   opportunities for economic development to
rural producers of the Sierra. To achieve this, the projectwill: (i) stimulate strategic alliances and
local economic development; (ii) empower and         build the capacity of rural producers,        and
support productive investments; (iii) strengthen     the regional and local'institutional setting to
improve. the delivery of private/public productive     related services to the poor and promote
decentralization.

   Principal outcome for the primary target       group
    *  .Reduce people living under poverty line   within sub-project areas;
   *    Increase income of rural producers;
   *    Social inclusion of the rural Sierra population, with a higher number of households with
        improved access to productive assets;
   *    Strengthen the insl,itutions of regional and    local governments and community based
        organizations to improve the quantity and quality  of service provision

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]

                      !




                      l




                      11

                      ll
                      I




                     -




                      i;
                      I'
                      l




.    .    ..    f

Following a rural space approach,   the project will operate in 3 geographical  areas selected during
project preparation according to   their productive potential and poverty   status. In these areas, the
project will promote the efficient     use of resources through the     support to rural productive
activities which will have potential  to be converted into revenues for  poor farmers. Although the
final design will be determined during   project preparation, possible project  components to assist
with this are:

    1. Local Economic Development        component: support to the local economic        and financial
    development process and the promotion     of strategic productive alliances. It would include:
    (a) establishment of demand driven    productive alliances: information   sharing among
        beneficiaries (including communication    strategy), mobilization and screening    of interests
        from potential participants, pre-investment  and feasibility assistance, and evaluation   of
        proposals.
    (b) support to participatory local     economic and financial development         planning: local
        economic development plans ("alliance       plans") would be developed to respond        to the
        compromise undertaken in a productive       alliance by all parties involved.    The "alliance
        plan" would describe the investments    and activities required to be done   (i) by the supply
        side (groups of producers) and local      govermments to ensure a continuous         and good
        quality supply of products, and       (ii) by the demand side to ensure           that quality
        requirements are understood, and       fair revenues are provided to       producers.      This
        subcomponent would also provide        the necessary technical assistance     and services to
        prepare alliance plans.

   2. Producer organizations component:          a community driven development         component to
   promote local empowerment and productive.         investments but for farmers participating       in
   productive alliances. It would include:
   (a) Producer groups and capacity building:     development of self-selected and self-      managed
        grass-root organizations ("producer   groups") and the capacity building of     their members
        in technical, managerial and leadership     areas, as well as building skills     within their
        organizations to access information  and services, negotiate with service    providers and be
        a recognized player within a productive     alliance. The subcomponent would        encourage
        development of networks of producer      organizations which are able to sustain      and take
        independent initiatives after theproject is over.
   (b) Productive assets and services:   support to services, goods and productive   infrastructure to
        rural producers for the implementation    of "alliance plans". The activities   to be included
        would depend on the geographical      areas to be supported, but might     likely include on-
        farm infrastructure (irrigation, storage     facilities, community centers for         product
        processing, water harvesting structures,  etc), soil conservation measures (terracing,    land
        leveling, watershed treatments),   goods (equipment, machinery, vet supplies,       seeds and
        other vegetative material, agriculture  inputs, etc), and services and technical    assistance
        (in market and marketing, IT, surveys,    laboratory tests, insurance, and    other technical
        productive services). The subcomponent     would be implemented by the producer        groups,
        and will be subject to cost sharing arrangements. An additional output is    the creation of a
       financing mechanism to support    the productive investments made by     producer groups.

-----------------

     3.   Institutional Development       and Strengthening       of local government     agencies and
     entities to promote decentralization,  establish local data banks, and reorientation  to work on a
     service oriented modality   while encouraging the     promotion of strategic   alliances and local
     economic development     plans. The component      will also provide technical   assistance to the
     private sector to take up proposals which enable    them to increase. value  added from existing
     products or develop  new enterprises and joint   ventures.

     4. Project Management:       This component would       aim to clarify responsibilities   between
     different agencies and    levels of government      and increase their   capacity in supporting
     productive investments,   and in delivering services   to the rural population. It would include:
     (a) capacity building and organizational support    to establish a project coordinating group at
     the center and regional   level,   (b) monitoring and    learning (including   establishment of a
     niana-enient information    system to support communications        between the participants     of
     productive alliances, service providers and    project authorities), and (c) provision of   goods,
     equipment and incremental   operational costs for  the project coordination  unit.


 Proposed components      and indicative costs

                    Component                          Indicative Costs      Bank Financing
                                                         (US$ million)        (US$ million)
 1. Local Economic Development                                  8.0                  5.0
2. Producer Organizations                                      8.0-                 15.0
4. Institutional development  and strengthening                5.0                  3.5
5. Project Management                                          3.0                   1.5
Total Cost                                                     35.0                 25.0
* may include, but  are not limited to: agricultural niche products, handicrafts  / small industries,
tourism, 'cam6lidos', dairy,  forestry, livestock.

    Possible partnershipsand     co-rinancing
    A considerable number    of multi-, bi-lateral and national agencies and  NGOs are carrying      out
    similar projects in  the Sierra with many      years of experience.   Project preparation    would
    evaluate the impact   and sustainability of these agencies' activities  and explore entering    into
    partnerships with some    of them, scaling up    their programs through    co-financing and /     or
    contracting and / or implementing    agreements.


D. Project location (if  known)

The project would concentrate    on comparative advantages      of the selected regions  or territories.
Pre-selected regions  include Ayacucho, Cajamarca,     and Puno, although this   will be confirmed in
future preparation.    The criteria to select. the regions was based,     in one hand by the      rural
productive potential  and the incidence of poverty    in the regions and, in  the other hand an auto
competitive selection    of groups of producers      that fulfilled criteria  of minimum level       of
organization, potentiality,vulnerability and poverty;   that would be part of  the operation rules for
productive alliances.

      '-bi




       .  .




         .,




     I   .'



     l    l


         ll



     l



         i!
         :



         ll




         ,.




      , :i




          .


         ,.




      i :


       1. '




       Iii
       ',!,

         ,.:

        *




       | !l




       i '



       ':,




       1.1
       1"
       I .,




        ,.,



         .,




         .';
         .,




        1.,
        l

        1;




        ;,1
        !




l

l

E. Borrower's Institutional Ca'pacity for     Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

The overall institutional capacity  to address safeguard policies will be    better assessed during
preparation. Provisions have however      been made to (i) hire a coordinator    for the Preparation
Unit who will manage the PHRD funds,     (ii) ensure that the environmental and   social assessments
to be undertaken during project     preparation assess this institutional    capacity and develop
measures to enhance it as needed,      and (iii) initiating the capacity    building of the whole
preparation team, during the preparation      mission including meetings, discussions        and the
delivery of material with Best Practiceexamples and all the Bank's safeguards.


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT              MIGHT APPI.Y

              Safeguard Policy
              If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
     [x]      Environmental Assessment (QP/BP 4.01)
              Limited environmental assessment     since it is an environmental category B
              project. However, an EA will be done     as part of project preparation to identifythe
              project's potential environmental impacts,   to develop appropriate mitigation
              measures for negative impacts, and    to recommend enhancement measures       for
              positive impacts. These mitigation   and enhancement measures will be
              summarized in an Environmental Management         Framework (EMF) that will
              include screening criteria and environmental    procedures, including institutional
              responsibilities and monitoring plans.  The EA will also evaluate whether    other
              "environmental" safeguards are triggered,    and develop appropriate procedures, if
              necessary.
     []       Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

    {[x]      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
              A participatory Integrated Pest Management      Strategy will be incorporated in the
              EA.
     []I      Involuntary Resettlement (QOP/P 4.12)

    [x]       Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
              A participatory IPDP will be prepared during     preparation to ensure inclusion on
              indigenous populations, and the incorporation    of benefits that are compatible with
              their cultures. Disclosure of the IPDP  will be completed prior to appraisal.
    [x ]     Forests (OP/hP 4.36)
              A screening to see if this policy istriggered will be done as part ofthe EA.
    [ ]      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

    [ ]       CulturalProperty (draft OP 4.11 -      OPN 11.03)

                          I




                          =




                          t
                          I




                          -


                          -




           :    -    -

;    ::

        []           Proiects in Disputed Areas                  PIEBP/GP 7.60)*

        [3]          Proiects on International Waterwags                    (P/[BPIGP       7.50)




 Environmental Assessment Category:
 [I A [X] B [] C [] FI                 [ ] TBD (to be determined)

 If TBD, explain determinants             of classification and give steps         that will be taken to deternine           that
 EA category (mandatory):

 III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION                            PLAN

 A. Target date for the Quality            Enhancement Review (QER),               at which time the PAD-stage             ISDS
      would be prepared. January 2005.

 B. For simple projects that will            not require a QER, the target date           for preparing the PAD-stage
     ISDS

 C. Time frame for launching and               completing the safeguard-related            studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing1               should be specified -in the PAD-stage            ISDS.

 IV. APPROVALS


   Signedandsubmittedby:
   Task Team Leader:                               Ethel Sennhauser                                            July 2004
  Approved by:
   Regional Safeguards                             Juan David Quintero                                         July 2004
   Coordinator:
     Comments
  Sector Manager:                                 Mark Cackler                                                 July 2004
     Comments




  By supportingthe proposedproject,    the Bank does notintend to prejudicethefinaldeterminationof    the parties'claimson the
disputedareas
I Remninder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related  documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a formand language that are accessible topotentially affected
persons.



K



 K

