Page  1
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) 
Section I 
–
Basic Information 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: June 21, 2004 
Report No.:AC891
A. Basic Project Data 
 
A.1. Project Statistics 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P079628 
Project: PH-2ND WOMEN'S HEALTH & 
SAFE MOTHERHOOD 
TTL: Teresa Ho 
Total project cost (by component): 
Appraisal Date: June 21, 2004 
Loan/Credit amount($m):  
IBRD: 30 
Board Date: December 16, 2004 
  
Other financing amounts by source: 
 
($m.) 
Managing Unit: EASHD 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment 
Loan 
 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency 
recovery? 
Yes?
[
]
No?
[
]
Environmental Category: B 
Safeguard Classification: S2 
A.2. Project Objectives 
 
Two objectives are proposed for the project:  
 
1)   To assist disadvantaged women of reproductive age to gain sustainable 
access to high quality and cost-effective reproductive health (RH) services and 
to enable them to safely attain their desired spacing and number of children  
 
2)  To assist in the development and implementation of systems within the 
framework of the Health Sector Reform Agenda (HSRA) that are critical for 
financing and delivery of reproductive health services. 
 
A.3. Project Description 
 
Development Objectives: 
 
1.  
 
To   increase the access of disadvantaged women of reproductive age in selected 
project sites to acceptable, high quality and cost-effective reproductive health  services 
and enable them to safely attain their desired spacing and number of children. 
 
2.  To assist in the development and implementation of sustainable and replicable systems 
within the framework of the Health Sector Reform Agenda for financing and delivery of 
reproductive health services. 
 
Key Performance Indicators
Page  2
1.  75% of deliveries by the poor in BEMOCs and CEMOCs financed through 
PhilHealth SP 
2.  25% of deliveries by the poor in BEMOCs and CEMOCs financed through DOH-
LGU performance grant 
3.  100% of RHUs have not experienced stock out pills, injectables and IUDs for the 
past six months 
4.  80% births delivered by skilled attendant (health professional), either in a facility 
or
at home. 
5.  Increase by 100% births delivered in health facility 
6.  Reduce the unmet needs for FP services by 10 percentage points 
 
Project Components: 
 
Component A.  Local Delivery of the Integrated WHSM Service Package 
This component would support local governments in mobilizing networks of public and private providers 
to undertake activities and deliver services  in the integrated Women's Health and Safe Motherhood service 
package (WHSM-SP), with focus on maternal care, family planning and STI/HIV control services.  The 
Project will give priority attention to assuring that disadvantaged women obtain their fair share in access to 
and use of the WHSM-SP.   
 
The component would be implemented in six project sites over a period of six years, 
starting in the first year of the Project with a first batch of three sites (Sorosogn Province, 
Surigao del Sur Province and Iloilo City) to be followed in the third year of the Project by 
a
second batch of sites (still to be identified).  Project sites were/will be selected using 
three sets of criteria: (a) need, as measured by maternal mortality, infant mortality and 
contraceptive prevalence rates; (b) population size, limited to provinces or cities with 
populations between 200,000 and 800,000, deemed to represent the appropriate scale for 
implementation of a full and integrated WHSM-SP; and (c) interest and willingness of 
LGU leadership to participate in the project.   
 
In each project site
,
the Project would undertake an interrelated set of interventions, including:  
·
Critical Capacities to Provide Quality WHSM Services
.
The Project will help LGUs 
in the project sites establish the capacity to deliver the integrated WHSM-SP through 
the establishment and operation of a network of WHSM teams consisting of a 
Women’s Health Team (WHT) in every barangay and an appropriate number of Basic 
and Comprehensive Emergency Obstetric Care (BEmOC, CemOC) and NCV/BTL 
teams, appropriately dispersed throughout the project site.  The full maternal care, 
family planning and STI/HIV service packages will be provided to the general 
population in all project sites.  In addition, on a pilot scale and in selected sites only, 
the DOH will engage the services of NGOs with relevant experience to help LGUs 
develop and implement cost-effective and sustainable approaches for reaching three 
groups at especially high risk – freelance sex workers, OFWs, and young adults. 
·
Reliable and Sustainable Support Systems for WHSM Service Delivery
.
The Project 
would facilitate establishment and operation of systems for  
(a)
drug and contraceptive security
,
by 
(i) applying market segmentation in the 
Page  3
financing and distribution of contraceptives; (ii) establishing efficient 
province/city-wide procurement, logistics and management systems; (iii) 
supporting the expansion of existing social marketing initiatives for providing 
contraceptives; 
(b) safe blood supply
,
by re-enforcing the network of Blood Service Facilities (BSF) 
at different levels of the system to meet anticipated needs for safe blood for 
obstetric (and other) emergencies  
(c) behavior change interventions
,
including a combination of: (i) performance-based 
and other financial incentives for stakeholders; (ii) advocacy and communication 
to influence stakeholder behavior and increase information among stakeholders; 
and (iii) improvements in services to respond to non-financial barriers that affect 
behavior; and  
(d) sustainable financing of local WHSM services and commodities
,
by applying the 
two principles of (i) diversification of funding sources, with focus on PhilHealth 
and LGUs as growing sources, and (ii) market segmentation, for objective 
application of user charges to non-poor clients.   
 
Component B:  National Capacity to Sustain WHSM Services
This component would support national-scale policy frameworks and knowledge 
management mechanisms that would create an operating environment conducive to 
LGUs managing and sustaining local delivery of the WHSM-SP and facilitate replication 
of the integrated WHSM service model throughout the country.  It consists of three sub-
components: 
 
Sub-component B.1. Operational and Regulatory Guidelines for the Provision and Use of 
WHSM Services
.
This subcomponent will support the research-based formulation, 
transparent official adoption, thorough field dissemination, and enforcement of technical 
guidelines that will be critical to the provision and use of WHSM services.  
 
Sub-component B.2.  Network of Training Providers for the Integrated WHSMP-SP
.
This subcomponent 
will support the development of a network of training providers
 
accredited to provide efficiently designed 
courses on (i) the appropriate delivery of the integrated WHSMP-SP for each category of WHSM worker 
and (ii) team work and collaboration for each type of WHSM team. 
 
Sub-component B.3  Monitoring, Evaluation, Research and Dissemination
.
This 
subcomponent will provide the following types of information for project management 
and impact evaluation: (a) regular assessment of inputs and processes related to the 
Project Development Objective and sub-components; (b) annual reporting of service 
delivery performance; (c)  changes in key result indicators at mid-term and end of project 
as measured against baseline status and comparison groups (later for selected sites only); 
(d) operations research and special studies that evaluate the effectiveness of innovative 
activities for use in replication and scaling-up; and (e) dissemination of results to support 
evidence based decision-making processes.  The collection and analysis of data generated 
by these different mechanisms will be embedded within WHSM Project management 
functions, with emphasis on developing evidence-based decision making capacity.  In 
particular the service delivery performance reporting will utilize rout
inely collected 
Page  4
statistics derived from the DOH information system. 
 
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis: 
 
Iloilo City and the Provinces of Sorsogon and Surigao del Sur serve as the first batch of 
project sites.  The second batch of project sites has yet to be identified. 
 
Selected health facilities in these pilot sites will be rehabilitated or upgraded.  There is a 
possibility that land acquisition will be needed in a few cases.  In these cases, 
the Bank’s 
Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP4.12) will be triggered.     
 
The Province of Sorsogon is the home of around 53,000 IPs belonging to the agta-cimaron-tabagnon 
cultural-minority group.  On the other hand, some 170,000 manobo/mandayas have been recorded in 
Surigao del Sur Province.  IPs belonging to the atisulod-bukidnon ethnic groups (estimated at 57,000) 
reside in certain portions of Iloilo Province.  Of the 36 municipalities/cities in the three project sites, 
indigenous peoples were noted in 12 municipalities. Six of these municipalities are situated in Sorsogon 
(Bulusan, Donsol, Irosin, Matnog, Pilar and Prieto Diaz), while the other six are in Surigao del Sur (Bislig, 
Carmen, Cagwait, Lanuza, Lingig and San Miguel). 
 
The Social Assessment conducted as part of the preparatory activities covered two areas 
within the project sites with indigenous peoples:  Prieto Diaz in Sorsogon where the 
Agta-Cimaron-Tabangons reside and Lanuza in Surigao del Sur where the Mamanwas 
and manobos reside. 
 
Prieto Diaz has an estimated population of 19,352.  It has 23 barangays with 3,751 households.  The 
Agta/Tabangnons number 356 (191 males and 165 females) and they comprise 63 households.  Barangay 
San Rafael, where the IP community is located, has a land area of 335 hectares, half of which is devoted to 
agriculture.  The major occupation is farming and this allows each family to generate an average monthly 
income of P2, 500.  Health status in the community is poor, as is education  (intermediate level on the 
average).  Access to health services of women IPs in the barangay is limited to prenatal services.  
Childbirth support is very dependent on the support of traditional birth attendant in the community, referred 
locally as “hilot” or “parabulong”. Birth control is rarely practiced among couples and people generally 
rely more on herbal plants than commercial medicines. 
 
The Manobos and Mamanwas of Lanuza, Surigao del Sur, on the other hand, reside in 
barangay Pakuan.  It mostly consists of 312 hectares of mo
untainous and wooden terrain.  
The community has no electricity and no safe water supply.  It also has no access roads, 
school or health centers.  Modern means of communication are non-existent and this has 
allowed the community to preserve their customs and colorful traditions.  Women in the 
barangay are dependent on the traditional birth attendant in the community for both 
prenatal and childbirth support. 
 
No major adverse social impact to the Indigenous Peoples is anticipated from the various project 
interventions. Instead, the project can enhance services delivered to the Ips.  The central challenge to the 
project is how effectively it can reach and benefit the vulnerable and high risk groups it has targeted, 
among which are the indigenous peoples of the area.  A draft Indigenous People’s Development Plan 
(IPDP) was prepared by DOH to guide the preparation of specific IPDPs in the two project sites (Sorsogon 
and Surigao del Sur) where IPs are known to reside. 
Page  5
B. Check Environmental Category 
A
[
], B [X ], C [X], FI [ ] 
 
Comments: 
The rehabilitation, construction and operation of health care facilities to 
support the local delivery of the WHSM service package is not expected to adversely 
affect the environment. Most of the civil works activities will involve rehabilitation and 
upgrading of existing health facilities, with a limited number of new construction..  
Wastes generated from operating the facilities are expected to not significantly affect 
the environment if managed, treated and   disposed of properly. To this end, the project 
is classified as environment Category B because of its short-term, manageable and 
easily mitigable environmental impacts. 
 
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered 
 
Yes No 
 
Environmental Assessment
(OP
/BP
/GP
4.01) 
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Natural Habitats
(OP
/BP
4.04) 
[ ] 
[X ] 
 
Pest Management
(OP 4.09) 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - OPN 
11.03
-) 
[
]
[
X]  
Involuntary Resettlement
(OP
/BP
4.12) 
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Indigenous Peoples
(OD 4.20
)
[X ] 
[ ] 
 
Forests
(OP
/BP
4.36) 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Safety of Dams
(OP
/BP
4.37) 
[ ] 
[ X] 
 
Projects in Disputed Areas
(OP
/BP
/GP
7.60)
*
[
]
[
X]  
Projects on International Waterways
(OP
/BP
/GP 7.50) 
[
]
[
X]  
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' 
claims on the disputed areas
 
Page  6
Section II 
–
Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management  
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. 
 
The environmental assessment (EA) study commissioned by the DOH as 
part of project preparation identified two environmental issues that need to 
be
addressed by the project. These are the short-term impacts (
e.g
.,
noise 
and dust generation) from civil works activities and the potential impacts 
from waste generation and disposal. The anticipated impacts, however, are 
not
expected to adversely affect the environment. Most of the civil works 
activities will involve rehabilitation and upgrading of existing health 
facilities, with a limited number of new construction. Wastes generated from 
operating the facilities are expected to not significantly affect the 
environment if managed, treated and  disposed of properly. 
 
Very limited land acquisition/involuntary resettlement issues are anticipated 
from the project, since most civil works involve the rehabilitation/upgrading 
of
existing facilities. In year 1, all subprojects are rehabilitation of existing 
health facilities, except for one subproject in Sorsogon which may involve 
the construction of a district hospital in a privately-owned site, which the 
landowner is offering to donate. However,  no decision has been made 
whether to put the facility in this new site or in the present site of the 
hospital. 
 
Project sites for the subsequent years are yet to be determined. To guide the 
project in dealing with possible land acquisition/resettlement impacts from 
future subprojects,  a Resettlement Policy Framework shall be prepared. 
 
No adverse negative impact on the indigenous communities in the project 
sites is foreseen. The expected impact and objective of the proposed 
upgrading of facilities and  expanded/improved reach of services is the 
improved access of vulnerable women (including indigenous people) 
residing within the catchment/service area of such facilities.   
 
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area. 
 
Environmental impacts from the project are manageable and easily mitigable and 
cumulative impacts are not expected. Impacts from civil works activities are 
expected to be short-term, highly reversible and last up to the construction phase 
only. Wastes generated during the operation of the completed facilities will be 
properly handled, treated and disposed of following the measures and project 
guidelines on health care waste management. On the other hand,  improved access 
of indigenous people to more effective maternal care and education is expected to 
result to a sustained and long term improvement in their health.  
Page  7
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant) 
 
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
A. Environmental 
Assessment 
 
For construction impacts, all contracts will include clauses for proper 
construction site management and strict adherence to appropriate noise 
and dust standards, disposal of solid wastes, installation of sanitary 
facilities for workers and the observance of occupational health and safety 
standards. For health care wastes, the facility proponent/operator will be 
required to prepare and implement health care waste management plan as 
part of the screening and approval processes of the project. The project 
will support establishment of systems for waste storage, disposal of 
general wastes, installation of onsite capability for treatment and 
containment, infectious waste sterilization and treatment capability, and 
materials acquisition management in project facilities. The capacity of the 
operators on health care waste management will be built up and/or 
strengthened through continuous trainings by the DOH in collaboration 
with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the 
primary environmental agency in the country. 
 
B. Involuntary 
Resettlement 
 
Land acquisition and resettlement measures, if unavoidable, shall be the 
responsibility of the participating LGU. A Resettlement Policy Framework 
has been prepared for the project. This shall be made an integral part of the 
Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) between DOH and the participating 
LGUs to ensure commitment of the LGUs to the guidelines in the 
framework. Environment and social safeguards appraisal and monitoring 
shall be among the functions to be undertaken by the WHSMP PMO under 
the Unified Project Management Division (UPMD)  of the DOH.      
 
C.  Indigenous People 
 
DOH prepared a draft IPDP to guide the preparation of specific IPDPs for the two project 
sites with known IP population (Sorsogon and Surigao del Sur). This draft has been 
reviewed and cleared by the EASES Safeguards Committee during the Safeguards Review 
in June 16, 2004.   
 
DOH is set to organize planning sessions in July 2004 with IP communities, the provincial 
LGUs and NCIP offices in these two areas to develop a more detailed action plan that 
would help improve the access of IPs to the various project intervent
ions in a manner that is 
Page  8
compatible with their cultural practices and beliefs.  A Memorandum of Agreement (MOA) 
shall be entered into between DOH and NCIP to formalize the agreed roles of each agency 
in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the IPDPs. 
 
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
The proposed project design is the product of three days of consultations 
with representatives of DOH units, PHIC, public and private provider 
institutions, donor institutions and other stakeholder groups held during the 
project identification mission  in August 2002.  During the actual 
preparation of the project, consultative meetings were made among 
providers of maternal care  and adolescent reproductive health services and 
LGU officials.  Focus group discussions were conducted with adolescents, 
women of reproductive age group and traditional birth attendants enriched 
the development of  the proposed service delivery models. These intensive 
consultations will continue throughout project preparation and 
implementation.   
 
The EA study was conducted in a consultative and participatory manner, 
where inputs from the DOH, participating local government units (LGUs), 
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) and other 
stakeholders were sought. The results were disclosed locally through a series 
of
consultation-workshops with the central and regional officials and staff of 
the DOH, the DENR, participating LGUs, service providers and civil 
society. 
 
In the case of indigenous peoples,  the project preparation team coordinated with 
the Regional Offices of the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) 
for the conduct of informal discussions and interviews with some indigenous 
people in Sorsogon and Surigao del Sur in order to obtain initial insights on the 
practices and views of indigenous people on matters related to maternal health. 
Subsequent discussions/consultations are being planned with key IP leaders and 
NCIP to firm up the draft IPDP for the project and clarify the institutional 
partnership with NCIP. Once finalized, the IPDPs for Sorsogon and Surigao del 
Sur will be disseminated to the different IP communities in the municipalities in 
these provinces through the NCIP Provincial Offices and Service Centers for 
disclosure.    
Page  9
F. Disclosure Requirements  Date 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/07/04…     or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
05/26-28/04   or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/21/04        or Not Applicable 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the 
Executive Directors 
…/…/…      or Not Applicable 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/07/04…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
06/15/04      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/21/04      or Not Applicable 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/07/04…      or Not Applicable 
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
06/15/04      or Not Applicable 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/21/04      or Not Applicable 
Pest Management Plan:  
 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or 
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or 
Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or 
Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:  
  
Date of receipt by the Bank 
…/…/…      or 
Not Applicable
Date of “in-country” disclosure 
…/…/…      or 
Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop 
…/…/…      or 
Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain 
why. 
 
Section III 
–
Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level 
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:
 
Yes
No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
 
 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the 
EA report? 
 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats: 
Yes
No
Would the project result in any significant conversion  or degradation 
of critical natural habitats? 
 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of 
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation 
measures acceptable to the Bank? 
 
OP 4.09 - Pest Management: 
Yes
No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
 
 
Is a separate PMP required? 
 
 
If yes,  are PMP requirements included in project design? 
 
 
Page  10
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property: 
Yes
No
Does the EA include adequate measures? 
 
 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources? 
 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples: 
Yes
No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and 
approve the plan? 
 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been 
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement: 
Yes
No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process 
been prepared? 
 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and 
approve the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
 
OP/BP 4.36 
–
Forests: 
Yes
No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and 
constraints been carried out? 
 
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome 
these constraints? 
 
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it 
include provisions for certification system? 
 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams: 
Yes
No
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
 
 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of 
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
 
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training? 
 
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways: 
Yes
No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? 
 
 
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification 
requirement, then has this been cleared with the Legal Department, 
and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent? 
 
What are the reasons for the exception? 
 
 
Please explain: 
 
 
Has the RVP approved such an exception? 
 
 
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
:
Yes
No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international 
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the 
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared 
with the Legal Department and sent to the RVP? 
 
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the 
OP? 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure: 
Yes
No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World 
 
 
Page  11
Bank's Infoshop? 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place 
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to 
project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies: 
Yes
No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of the safeguard 
measures? 
 
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost? 
 
 
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project 
implementation? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
Signed and submitted by:
 Name
Date
Task Team Leader: 
Teresa Ho 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 
1: 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 
2: 
 
Project Safeguards Specialist 
3: 
 
Approved by:
 Name
Date
Regional Safeguards 
Coordinator: 
 
Comments: 
Sector Manager: 
 
 
Comments: 
