Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1739 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09/22/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P089082 
Project Name: PH-GEF-Manila Third Sewerage Project 
Task Team Leader: Luiz Claudio Martins Tava 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: February 28, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASUR 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: Sanitation (50%);Sewerage (50%) 
Theme: Environmental policies and institutions (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
5.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
84.46
84.46 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
2a. Proposed project development objective(s)  
 
The development objectives of the Manila Third Sewerage Project are to: (a) contribute to 
increase in the coverage and effectiveness of sewerage service delivery in participating areas of 
Metro Manila through an integrated approach involving septage and sewage management, and 
heightened consumer awareness of water pollution problems and their solutions; and (b) 
establish the financial and technical viability of new approaches for sewage management in MM.  
 
2b. Proposed project global environment objective(s)  
 
The global environment objective of the proposed project is to contribute to reduction in 
transboundary pollution in the East Asia Large Marine Ecosystems caused by pollution in 
Manila Bay.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Page  2
Component 1: Integrated management system for Laguna Lake-Manila-Bay-Pasig River 
watershed area ($ 2.0 million).  
 
Presently, a number of agencies have regulatory authority and operational responsibility within 
the Manila Bay watershed area, including: MWSS; the Department of Works and Highways 
(DPWH); the Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission (PRRC); the Laguna Lake Development 
Authority (LLDA); the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA); the DENR; and, 
LGUs. Currently, each authority has its own strategy, action plan, administration, management 
responsibilities, and priorities for sustainable development and environmental management.  
 
The proposed component is aimed at formalizing an institutional and operational linkage within 
the watershed area among all the players mentioned above. With DENR taking the lead as the 
primary environmental regulator, the project will establish a partnership mechanism that will 
coordinate management of the Laguna Lake-Manila-Bay-Pasig River watershed area. 
Specifically, convergence will be forged in the following strategic areas: (i) policy, regulatory 
and investments programming; (ii) development and implementation of water quality strategies 
including the establishment of allowable discharge loads to contributing rivers consistent with 
the DENR and ASEAN freshwater and marine water quality standards; (iii) attainment of water 
quality improvement and environmental sustainability; (iv) institutionalization of mechanisms 
for increased private sector and stakeholder co-management; and (v) capacity-building and 
knowledge sharing.  
 
Component 2: Water quality standards and investment program for watershed area ($2 million).  
 
This component is aimed at defining maximum effluent discharges and water quality for the 
rivers and tributaries within MM. The component will assess medium and long-term allowable 
pollution loads that would bring the Laguna Lake-Manila-Bay-Pasig River watershed area into 
compliance with the national Clean Water Act standards. Appropriate functional uses and water 
quality standards will be established, taking into consideration ecological and socio-economic 
factors. The agreed standards would provide the basis for the development of a coordinated and 
integrated pollution control investment program in the watershed.  
 
Component 3: Public and private sector investments in priority sewerage and sanitation projects 
(
$
1
million).  
 
This component will address pollution problems in the Pasig River, Manila Bay and the Laguna 
Lake by enhancing the septage management component under MTSP through pilot activities at 
selected sites.  This component includes: i) upgrading of a sewage treatment plant (pilot) to a 
combined septage/sewage treatment plant; ii) review and identification of independent providers 
of septage removal and transportation, and determination of sources of financing for upgrading 
the trucks to a minimum acceptable standard; iii) provision of technical assistance to private 
small-scale septage operators and training to improve current practices in hauling septage; iv) 
provision of assistance to the MWSS-Regulatory Office in expanding the current scope of the 
Public Assessment on Water Services (PAWS) to cover sewerage and sanitation services; and v) 
organization of knowledge dissemination workshops for watershed agencies.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Metro Manila and Laguna Lake Area   
 
Page  3
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
DENR is the primary agency mandated to manage the country's environment and is the 
regulatory arm of the government in ensuring that development projects in the country do not 
create significant environmental impacts. Through the Administrative Order No. 2003-30 (DAO 
2003-30) of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the national 
regulatory framework requires the MWCI and MWSI to obtain an Environmental Compliance 
Certificate (ECC) prior to the start of construction activities. The National Environmental 
policies are consistent with the Safeguard policies of the World Bank.  
 
The project will be executed by DENR with advisory support from the 
UNDP/GEF/IMO/PEMSEA. DENR will establish a subset of its Unified Project Management 
Office with qualified staff to provide overall management, coordination and monitoring of the 
project Overall policy guidance and advisory support for facilitating implementation of the 
project will be provided by a Coordinating Committee (CC) headed by DENR, and comprising 
of implementing institutions and core Government agencies, including PEMSEA, Department of 
Finance (DOF), the National Water Resources Board (NWRB), the National Economic 
Development Agency (NEDA), the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), and 
the Department of Health (DOH) as advisors.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah (EASEN) 
Ms Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Activities under the GEF project will be carried out at subprojects that are under MWSS and 
MTSP. These subprojects have approved EIA, EMP and ECC from DENR. There may be 
changes to the activities which may involve some minor civil works and septage removal by 
additional trucks related to improvements suggested by the GEF projects. Revisions to the 
existing EIA will be made and new ECC obtained, if this is necessary to meet GOP and WB 
requirements. No major physical construction nor expansion to new areas are envisaged under 
the project.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
Page  4
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  N/A 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  12/30/2005 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The specific studies and their timing  should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. This will 
be provided in the Main GEF proposal.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
09/22/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
09/22/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
09/22/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
