Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1612 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07/12/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Philippines 
Project ID: P088926 
Project Name: Participatory Irrigation Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Mei Xie 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 20, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: August 15, 2006 
Managing Unit: EASRD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (100%) 
Theme: Water resource management (P);Administrative and civil service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
8.00
8.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
While contributing to the broad government?s goals of rural poverty alleviation, increased 
agricultural productivity, and enhanced food security, the APL/project has two specific 
development objectives: (a) improve O&M and routine rehabilitation of irrigation systems; and 
(b) improve the operational efficiency of existing NISs and narrow the gap between their service 
area and the actual irrigated area.  The objectives would be achieved through sector restructuring, 
principally, through rationalization of NIA to improve its financial situation and delivery of 
irrigation services, IMT to water users in NISs, establishment of funds for the management of 
NISs and CISs, reform of the cost recovery system, and investments in NIS improvement and 
modernization.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Around US$30 million of loan amount for each APL phase has been tentatively agreed with 
GOP.  This excludes funding for incentive packages, which are yet to be worked out and may be 
included in the Public Expenditure Rationalization Loan (PERL), which the Bank is preparing 
with GOP and would include the separation packages for all participating agencies.  APL1, 
which would be implemented for four years, would have two components: (i) establish 
Page  2
sustainable financial and institutional mechanisms for improved O&M and routine rehabilitation, 
and (ii) rehabilitate and modernize irrigation systems but linking to the progress in Component 1.  
 
Component 1: Irrigation Sector Restructuring  
 
(a) NIA Rationalization and Efficiency Improvement.  This sub-component would be critical 
for meeting the project?s first objective as its successful implementation would help generate the 
needed surplus of NIA?s income over expenditures.The strategy would be to implement a phased 
reduction of NIA staffing, concurrently with IMT (subcomponent (b), and improvement of NISs 
(Component 2).  The number of staff reduction would be known after the NIA rationalization 
plan is completed.  The new role of NIA would be to withdraw from direct management of all 
NISs to management of head-works and main canals of large NISs, and enhance its technical 
back-stopping and institutional support functions to farmers.  Guidelines would be established 
for medium-term public investment planning of NIA so as to increase the effectiveness of public 
expenditures.  A performance-based system and computerized MIS would be established at NIA, 
linking to expansion of actual irrigated area and efficient water delivery service, as opposed to 
the current fee-collection based only incentive.  
 
(b) Implementation of IMT.  APL1 would provide institutional and financial support for 
implementing IMT on close to one-third of the NIS.  This would consist of complete 
management (or maybe asset) transfer in smaller NIS and management transfer of secondary 
canals in large NISs.  A M&E system to monitor transferred systems would be set up.  To 
improve the prospects of sustainability of IMT, the project would set up a financial mechanism 
as in (c).  
 
(c) Establishment of NIMF and Mandatory Reserves.  A National Irrigation System 
Management Fund (NIMF) would be set up once NIA rationalization is underway.  The Fund 
would capture savings generated through NIA expenditure reductions.  The Fund would be for 
routine rehabilitation and emergency repairs of NISs.  In parallel with the NIMF, a policy of 
mandatory reserve build-up by the IAs from their own ISF income would be followed to ensure 
availability of funds to IAs for emergency repairs of their lateral/system. A Reform of Cost 
Recovery program would include initiation of lending and loan recovery under NIMF for post-
IMT physical rehabilitation works, expansion of volumetric pricing for irrigation water, and 
implementation of system-specific rental or ISF payments.  
 
(d) Establishment of CIDF.  A Communal Irrigation Development Fund (CIDF) would be set 
up as an autonomous entity governed by Presidential Decree 552, with amortization and equity 
payments from the CISs flowing into the Fund.  CIDF would provide a sustainable long-term 
funding mechanism for rehabilitation and emergency repair of CISs.  Donor and GOP funds for 
CISs are also envisaged to be channeled through the Fund in the future.  Management of the 
Fund will be vested on a Fund Management Office, which would consist of representatives from 
major stakeholders such as LGUs, IAs, NIA and DA. Institutional strengthening would be 
provided to improve the oversight capacity of the LGUs and the management capacity of the 
IAs.  
 
Component 2: Participatory Improvement and Modernization of NISs.  This sub-component 
(the bulk of investment costs) would include improvement of canal conveyance capacity; 
construction or improvement of structures for better water level and flow control, for 
measurement of water deliveries, and for improving equity in water distribution; drainage water 
re-use; benchmarking of system performance; and conjunctive use of surface and groundwater 
Page  3
where applicable.  About 10-12 NISs are envisaged for inclusion in APL1, as well as completion 
of improvements of 40 some NISs that were partially included in IOSP II and WRDP.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Major rehabilitation and improvement of NIS, likely in Regions 2 and 11.  Minor repair and 
improvements in various regions.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The National Irrigation Administration, which is the project?s implementing agency, has an 
Environmental Unit (EU) and has shown good implementation capacity as regards safeguard 
compliance to World Bank-funded projects, such as IOSP II and WRDP. These projects have 
undertaken safeguard capacity building for EU and NIA. With more involvement of IAs in NISs 
resulting from IMT, there may be a need to build the capacity of IAs to manage the systems in an 
environmentally and socially sustainable manner.  
 
On the regulatory side, the Borrower through its Department of Environment and Natural 
Resources (DENR), has the environmental policies, technical staff and independent 
environmental assessment (EA) review committee that look after the environmental and social 
issues and compliance of any project that is within the purview of the Philippine EA system.   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Jose Tiburcio Nicolas (EASSD) 
Mr Josefo Tuyor (EASEN) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
The project supports rehabilitation, improvement and modernization of existing NISs, which 
will result to the improvement in efficiency in water resource management and the sustainability 
of the NIS. As such, positive environmental impacts are expected from the project.  The task 
team confirmed that all the 12 sites have been identified and pre-feasibility studies are available. 
Update of the studies is underway.   No major new physical construction nor expansion to new 
areas are envisaged under the project. Since the investments are essentially rehabilitation of 
existing schemes, the impacts are understsood and manageable.  Per the recommendation of the 
initial safeguards review meeting, the Task Team will prepare a brief environmental analysis, 
instead of a full-blown EIA, and take stock of safeguard performance and issues of previous 
similar Bank operations with NIA.  It will prepare practical environmental guidelines, including 
screening mechanisms for the 10-12 NIS that are to be included for rehabilitation and 
improvements; assess the training needs of IAs as regard safeguard; and evaluate the impact of 
rationalization on the NIA?s environmental unit.  
 
The task team confirmed that none of the 12 project schemes identified in the APL will 
significantly convert or degrade any protected areas, known natural habitats, or established or 
proposed critical natural habitats as defined under the policy.  The environmental screening will 
ensure that natural habitats will not be significantly affected by the project.  
 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
The project intends to prepare a social assessment, the TOR for which has been drafted by 
NIA and reviewed by the Task Team.  The assessment will include an identification/assessment 
of possible ROW-related issues (see below for details), impact on indigenous peoples (see below 
for details) and their ancestral domains, and gender analysis. For the NIA staff separation 
package, it is important to have a communication plan and full consultation with staff in a 
transparent manner, following the thrust of the GOP EO366 regarding agency rationalization.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 
X
The project will not procure any pesticides but there is a possibility that improved irrigation 
systems can lead to an increase in the use of pesticides by farmers.  NIA has confirmed that all 
the systems have IPM under the GOP program, which will mitigate the possibility of increased 
pesticide impact.  The environmental analysis should include a description of issues associated 
with pesticides and agriculture chemicals in the project area.   
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 
X
Initial assessment done by NIA indicated that only 1 of the 12 proposed NIS may be included 
in the project and may be inhabited by indigenous peoples.  This initial assessment needs to be 
confirmed by NIA with the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP), which may 
require the conduct of a field based investigation (FBI), as stipulated in the Indigenous People?s 
Rights Act of the country.  Under the same law, development subprojects that are found to be 
situated in ancestral domains are required to undergo the Free and Prior Informed Consent 
(FPIC) process.  The conduct of this validation activity has been integrated into the TOR for the 
SA. The team is going to use the SA to determine whether that particular site has enough IP for 
preparing a separate IPDP.   
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
As per the experience in two similar Bank funded projects (WRDP and IOSP-II) in the 
irrigation sector of the Philippines, the Project is not expected to have major land acquisition or 
any displacement of people.  The impact of land acquisition (right of way ?ROW) is expected to 
be scattered and few.  Some donation of land may be expected.  The safeguards meeting agreed 
that the task team will take a framework approach, and by looking at the post resettlement impact 
of the WRDP project, the team can consolidate findings of which can be used as guideline for 
this project.  No resettlement action plan is needed during preparation stage.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  02/28/2006 
 
Page  5
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
Upon completion of WRDP completion report (by Dec. 2005), lessons drawn from this 
project regarding safeguards mgt will be incorporated into the environmental/social analysis 
of PIDP.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Mei Xie 
06/15/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Rahul Raturi 
 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  6
