Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/20/2005 
Report No.:  32443
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Philippines 
Project ID:  P079661 
Project Name:  Manila Third Sewerage Project 
Task Team Leader:  Luiz Claudio Martins Tava 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: June 21, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASUR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Sewerage (50%);Sanitation (50%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Access to urban services 
and housing (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
64.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
20.13
20.13 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objectives of MTSP are twofold:  
 
(a) 
to increase the coverage and effectiveness of sewerage service delivery in 
participating areas of Metro Manila through an integrated approach involving septage 
management, sewage management, and heightened consumer awareness of water 
pollution problems and their solutions; and  
 
(b) 
 to establish the viability of new approaches for wastewater management in Metro 
Manila.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: The Sewage Management component will involve construction of various 
sewage treatment plants (STP), interceptor sewers, pumping stations, repair of existing 
drainage and upgrading of communal septic tanks to provide secondary treatment.  The 
component will benefit a population of about 1.0 million.  Proposed locations are as 
follows:  
 
?
Taguig Sewerage System includes the construction of four STPs (Hagonoy, 
Taguig, Tapayan and Labasan), which will use existing flood retention ponds as 
Page  2
secondary clarifiers during the dry season.  Treated effluent will discharge in Laguna de 
Bay.  
 
?
Riverbanks Sewerage System includes the construction of three STPs (Poblacion, 
Capitolyo, and Ilaya).  The Capitolyo and Ilaya STPs will be underground, and the 
Poblacion STP will be on a platform above a flood retention pond.  Treated effluent will 
discharge in the Pasig River.  
 
?
Quezon City-Marikina Sewerage System includes an underground STP along the 
Marikina River.  The service area includes residential barangays and sub-divisions in 
Quezon City and two low-income sub-divisions in Marikina City.  Treated effluent would 
discharge to the Marikina River.  
 
?
Quezon City Sanitation Upgrading includes the modification of two communal 
septic tanks in Quezon City to modern STPs. Their service areas will be extended to 
include parts of adjacent catchments.  Rehabilitation of existing separate sewerage and 
extension of the service area of the existing STPs are also included.The treated effluent 
would discharge in local drainage canals.  
 
?
Sanitation for Low-income Communities includes the construction of two STPs 
serving Pinagsama, Taguig and East Bank, Taytay (along the Manggahan Floodway).  
The plants would serve low-income communities with poor or non-existent sanitation 
facilities. Treated effluent would discharge to the Pinagsama Creek and the Manggahan 
Floodway, respectively.  
 
The STPs constructed under this component will use recognized biological treatment 
processes, including SBR  and oxidation ditches. Generated sludge would be hauled to 
the septage treatment plants for dewatering.  
 
Component 2: The Septage Management component will involve provision of vehicles 
for pumping-out septage  from septic tanks (fecal tankers), septage treatment plants and 
safe disposal. The component would benefit a population of about 2.3 million. The 
component will include the following:  
 
?
Provision of (a) about seventy fecal tankers from 5 to 10 m3 capacities provided 
with vacuum pumping; and (b) specialized equipment for transport and application of 
dewatered septage on soil;  
 
?
Construction of septage treatment plant (SPTP) with a capacity of about 800 m3/d 
of raw septage, located in Taguig Industrial Complex and serving mainly the cities of 
Mandaluyong, Pasig, Makati and Taguig; and construction of a septage treatment plant 
(SPTP) with a capacity of about 600 m3/d of raw septage, located in San Mateo and 
serving mainly Quezon and Marikina Cities and San Juan.  
 
Component 3: Technical Assistance: The Technical Assistance component would 
enhance the proposed project investments through (a) a public information campaign on 
the environmental benefits of and best practices for proper disposal of sewage; and (b) 
preparation of follow-on programs for sewage and sanitation improvements.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The MTSP covers the Eastern Concession zone of Metro Manila, covering primarily the 
7
cities of Mandaluyong, Makati (Partly), Quezon (Partly), Pasig, San Juan, Pateros and 
Page  3
Taguig.  The population within the MWCI concession area (East zone) is predicted to 
increase from 5.3 million persons in 2004 to 8.2 million in 2021.  There are no 
indications that the population growth will subside even after this period of sustained 
growth.  
 
Land uses vary in areas where the Project components are to be situated.  Facilities for 
the Riverbanks Sewerage Systems, the Quezon City-Marikina Sewerage System, the 
Quezon City Sanitation Upgrading and Sanitation of Low Income Communities are 
situated within low-income residential areas.  The South (Taguig) Septage Treatment 
Facility is situated within the waste treatment area in a controlled industrial zone, while 
the North (San Mateo) Septage Treatment Facility is located in a predominantly rural 
town where a wide area is still used for farming, poultry, piggery and quarrying.  At the 
Taguig Sewerage System subcomponent, land use is predominantly agricultural and 
shoreland. The lahar disposal sites situated north of Metro Manila are in sugarcane farms 
and idle agricultural lands.  
 
The Project Region lies on the southern portion of the Luzon Central Plain.  The 
regional landscape exhibits contrasting relief from the gently sloping to rugged terrain of 
the uplands to a central valley plain.  The valley is drained by the Marikina River, which 
flows southwards to join the Pasig River.  The Pasig River empties into Manila Bay and 
drains the Laguna Lake.  
 
The Pasig River System is a complex network of waterways that includes Marikina, San 
Juan, Esteros, and canals, which have the following characteristics:  
 
?
It is the main outlet of the Laguna Lake with a total surface area of 850 km2 and a 
drainage area of 2,750 km2. Waters coming from the Laguna Lake meanders through 27 
kilometers of relatively flat coastal and highly urbanized plains of Metro Manila. 
Populations of around 10 million discharge their wastes into the Pasig River.  
 
?
There are over 300 industrial firms along the banks of the Pasig River system, 
about one-half have been found to be polluting the water in varying degrees. River 
pollution is further aggravated by oil spills, from about 300 gasoline stations, several oil 
depots, and barges, tanks and boats docking in the area.  
 
?
Marikina River, with its headwaters in the Sierra Madre mountains, joins the 
Pasig River 19 kilometers upstream of Manila Bay, with an estimated catchments at the 
junction of 515 km2  
 
?
San Juan River, which drains most parts of Quezon City and San Juan, unites with 
the Pasig River about 9 kilometers upstream and has a catchments area of about 86 km2. 
The San Juan River is the most polluted major water body in the Pasig River system.  
 
?
The Pasig River is tidal, and the freshwater base flow varies substantially 
according to season. High flows of as much as 275 m3/sec usually occur between the 
rainy season of June to October, while low flows of about 12 m3/s occur between April 
and May. Even smaller base flows are possible during which periods the water quality 
deteriorates even further. Also during the low flow season, the Pasig River reverses its 
flow direction  due to the high tides at Manila Bay, and polluted waters can return into 
Laguna Lake.  
 
Page  4
Recent statistics show domestic wastewater as the main contributor (70%) to the 
pollution loading into the Pasig and Marikina Rivers, the two main rivers in the 
metropolis, and the Laguna Lake. Due to this pollution, there is insufficient oxygen 
within the waterways to support aquatic life. Fecal Coliform levels exceed the standards 
of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) by several orders of 
magnitude most of the year. In terms of health impact, the 2003 Philippine Environment 
Monitor states that 31% of all illness in 2003 is water related, accounting for nearly 5 
million of the reported illnesses. Moreover, it is estimated that 17 billion pesos is lost 
annually in the Philippine economy due to degradation of the marine environment.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares (EASUR) 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
Mr Teck Ghee Lim (EASSD) 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah (EASEN) 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (EASES) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The Pasig River System is a complex network of waterways that includes Marikina, San 
Juan, Esteros, and canals, which have the following characteristics:  
 
?
It is the main outlet of the Laguna Lake with a total surface area of 850 km2 and a 
drainage area of 2,750 km2. Waters coming from the Laguna Lake meanders through 27 
kilometers of relatively flat coastal and highly urbanized plains of Metro Manila. 
Populations of around 10 million discharge their wastes into the Pasig River.  
 
?
There are over 300 industrial firms along the banks of the Pasig River system, 
about one-half have been found to be polluting the water in varying degrees. River 
pollution is further aggravated by oil spills, from about 300 gasoline stations, several oil 
depots, and barges, tanks and boats docking in the area.  
Page  5
?
Marikina River, with its headwaters in the Sierra Madre mountains, joins the 
Pasig River 19 kilometers upstream of Manila Bay, with an estimated catchments at the 
junction of 515 km2  
 
?
San Juan River, which drains most parts of Quezon City and San Juan, unites with 
the Pasig River about 9 kilometers upstream and has a catchments area of about 86 km2. 
The San Juan River is the most polluted major water body in the Pasig River system.  
 
?
The Pasig River is tidal, and the freshwater base flow varies substantially 
according to season. High flows of as much as 275 m3/sec usually occur between the 
rainy season of June to October, while low flows of about 12 m3/s occur between April 
and May. Even smaller base flows are possible during which periods the water quality 
deteriorates even further. Also during the low flow season, the Pasig River reverses its 
flow direction  due to the high tides at Manila Bay, and polluted waters can return into 
Laguna Lake.  
 
Recent statistics show domestic wastewater as the main contributor (70%) to the 
pollution loading into the Pasig and Marikina Rivers, the two main rivers in the 
metropolis, and the Laguna Lake. Due to this pollution, there is insufficient oxygen 
within the waterways to support aquatic life. Fecal Coliform levels exceed the standards 
of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) by several orders of 
magnitude most of the year. In terms of health impact, the 2003 Philippine Environment 
Monitor states that 31% of all illness in 2003 is water related, accounting for nearly 5 
million of the reported illnesses. Moreover, it is estimated that 17 billion pesos is lost 
annually in the Philippine economy due to degradation of the marine environment.  
 
Sub-components  
Potential Impacts and Risks 
Mitigation Measures  
 
Septage Management  
 
Septage Treatment Plants 
Land acquisition and resettlement of 11 households.  
 
Minor Regular construction impacts  
 
Risks related to Sludge disposal  
 
Public health hazards  
 
Pollution of soils, groundwater and surface water 
RAP preparation, implementation 
and monitoring.  
 
Consultations, Appropriate construction methods and supervision.  
 
Strict guidelines for site selection and handling/application procedures.  
 
Extensive monitoring program.  
 
Sewage Management  
 
Taguig Sewerage Systems 
Social and environmental safeguards in the DPWH linked 
flood control project.  
 
Standard Construction impacts 
Due diligence of applied safeguard compliance and 
land acquisition practices.  
 
Appropriate construction methods, monitoring  and supervision  
 
Riverbanks Sewerage Systems 
Standard Construction impacts 
Consultations, 
Appropriate construction methods, monitoring and supervision  
 
Sanitation for Low Income Communities 
Standard Construction impacts
 
Consultations, Appropriate construction methods, monitoring and supervision  
Page  6
Quezon City-Marikina Sewerage System 
Standard Construction impacts
 
Consultations, Appropriate construction methods, monitoring and supervision  
 
Quezon City Sanitation Upgrading  Resettlement of 3 households  
 
Standard Construction impacts 
Consultations, RAP preparation, implementation 
and monitoring  
 
Appropriate construction methods, and supervision  
 
Summary status of land acquisition/resettlement for various MTSP Components  
 
MTSP sub-Component 
Estimated Service Population Status of Acquisition
 Required 
 
 
land  (m2)  
 
Riverbanks Sewerage Systems 
 
? 
Mandaluyong Riverbank WwTP: 
MOA to be signed in February 2005  
 
?
Makati Riverbank WwTP:  Discussions with City Council of  Makati City 
ongoing.  MOA to be signed within first quarter of 2005.  
 
?
Pasig Riverbank WwTP:  The City Government has issued resolution supporting 
the proposed use of the PNR property as WwTP; MOA with PNR Mgmt. to be signed by 
February 2005  
2,700  
 
Quezon City-Marikina Sewerage System 
 
? 
Camp Atienza?s 
administration has agreed in principle on the use of a portion of their property (2x2 sqm) 
as site for a lift station. The Marikina Office of the Mayor and council has agreed in 
principle on the construction of  the facility in its property.  MWCI working to formalize 
the agreement  by first quarter of 2005.  
5,000+  
 
Taguig Sewerage Systems 
 
? 
LLDA committed to assist in allocating 
public lakeshore land for this component.  
 
28,000  
 
Quezon City Sanitation Upgrading   
? 
NHA has agreed in principle on the 
use of its property along Road 5 (800 sqm).  MWCI working to finalize MOA by 
February 2005.  Three households occupying the property will need to be relocated.  A 
resettlement action plan for this has been prepared.  
 
?
Discussion with NHA ongoing for  the use of its property along East Avenue 
(3,000 sqm) for the East Avenue WwTP 
3,800  
 
Sanitation for Low Income Communities 
 
? 
Manggahan (East Bank) and 
Pinagsama: the LGU of Taguig is reviewing Draft MOA. Site in Taytay has not been 
finalized. Negotiation with landowners in the Taytay site will be finalized before end of 
2005.   5,000+  
 
Sewage Management Total:  1.0 million  
 
Septage Treatment Plants  
2.3 million  
 
?
North STP (San Mateo): Sale of  a 1.5 hectare San Mateo property for the North 
STP has been finalized.  Abbreviated RAP for the 11 squatter/rent-free households has 
been prepared.  
 
?
South STP (Taguig Industrial Complex): Formal agreement of FTI Management 
obtained January 17, 2005; MOA to be executed by end of February 2005 15,000  
Page  7
Total  3.3 million?   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
To complement the EIA with a more strategic assessment of wastewater management in 
Metro Manila, a Regional Environmental Assessment (REA) was done to study the 
cumulative impacts of development options for sewerage and septage management. The 
REA focused on wastewater management, sludge and septage management and regional 
planning integration.  
 
The REA supports the decentralized MTSP approach, considering the given existing 
constraints (e.g,. concession agreements, land availability and social acceptability). Its 
findings also show that the existing wastewater, environment and health management 
legislation is too complex, overlapping, and unclear?not just in terms of basic laws, but 
also in terms of the devolution status. A number of obligations have been devolved from 
one agency to another, and in some cases, to the LGU, but without a clear mandate or 
operational guidelines. As a result, the government?s capacity and institutional 
framework to manage and improve sanitation and sewerage in the region is very weak. 
This is aggravated by a lack of public awareness on health and socio-economic impacts 
of poor sewage and sludge management.  
 
The REA recommends, among others, a Regional Management System aimed to 
strengthen the institutional and management capability of the government and its 
concessionaires in implementing the sanitation and sewerage strategy for Metro Manila.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The strategy to address sanitation and sewerage in Metro Manila was generally defined in 
a
2000
master plan that laid out the original sewerage targets in the 1997 Concession 
Agreements and envisaged a highly centralized sewerage system and the phasing out of 
septic tanks and sanitation services throughout Metro Manila. However, after 
privatization, it became clear that public willingness to pay for such a large and 
expensive separate sewerage system did not exist. Major barriers to the successful 
implementation of the master plan included the lack of land availability for the proposed 
treatment facilities, and the little tolerance by the public and local governments of the 
immense disruption that would be caused during the implementation process.  
 
To manage these setbacks, an updated 2003 master plan was used to draw up the 2003 
rate rebasing and it was agreed upon by the govt.  and the concessionaires. This ushered 
in a decentralized approach using combined sewerage that led to the downscaling of the 
sewerage targets while increasing the targets for the provision of sanitation services.  
 
However, these same targets did not take into consideration how the maximum 
environmental benefit would be achieved from the limited available investment.  While 
not ideal from the environmental perspective, there is merit, at least in the initial stages, 
of implementing projects throughout the city to raise awareness and build a constituency 
Page  8
for the sector. Thus there is a need in the 2008 rate rebasing to closely align the 
concession targets with the environmental goals.  
 
In light of this, the components of the MTSP  were identified by MWCI with regard to 
the environmental and socio-economic impacts, technical constraints, and limits set by 
the Concession Agreement between MWSS and MWCI. Upon identification of the 
individual sub-project location by MWCI in coordination with the MWSS, a Feasibility 
Study (FS) was conducted to determine the viability and to optimize the efficiency of the 
MTSP components in terms of costs, coverage and beneficial impacts.  
 
The project adopts an incremental decentralized approach to improving sewerage and 
sanitation services.  This approach recognizes that a traditional conventional sewerage 
network leading to a small number of centralized STPs cannot be completed 
immediately, mainly due to land limitations and its associated high cost, and the social 
impacts.  The incremental decentralized approach adopts sewerage and sanitation projects 
based on the communities? population distribution, existing infrastructure, and the 
willingness to have and effectively fund the system.  
 
Conceptualization of the MTSP components took into account the limitations and 
lessons learned from implementing past projects on sewerage and sanitation.  The lessons 
learned and the following limitations ruled the selection of the project area and the nature 
of the project to be executed.  
 
Land availability: Recognizing land as a major limitation in project implementation, 
MWCI closely investigated land availability in the areas where the MWSS set new 
sewerage targets.  The elected representatives of the LGUs, as administrators of cities and 
municipalities, played a large role in identifying possible sites for sewerage facilities.  
Possible linkages with existing and future projects of different agencies such as the 
National Housing Authority, the Department of Public Works and Highways, the LLDA 
and the PRRC were also explored.  
 
Applicable concepts: The previous master plans pointed to the use of combined 
sewerage systems as the means to expand sewer coverage at the least cost and minimum 
disruption. This was heavily considered in conceptualizing the MTSP. Also, programs to 
address the sanitation requirements of low-income groups and the portion of the 
population without access to basic sanitation facilities were explored.  
 
Social acceptability: Technically and financially feasible projects do not get 
implemented if they are socially unacceptable. Hence, social indicators will be obtained 
prior to implementation of projects conceived for MTSP.  
 
Health and Environmental Impacts: The MTSP was initially formulated to arrest direct 
discharges of untreated wastewater to water bodies. Hence, an immediate response was 
the survey of drainage outfalls to the Pasig and Marikina Rivers.  However, the results of 
a
survey conducted in late 2003, on some MTSP project areas, show that the design of the 
components should consider prioritizing human benefits over environmental benefits.  
 
Page  9
Financial and Economic considerations: MTSP-affected communities are in the low- to 
middle-income brackets. The impact of sewer charges on the communities was taken into 
consideration in the final decision-making of the list of project components, especially 
for the Sanitation for Low-Income Communities component. The list has been narrowed 
down from the more than twenty communities originally considered, to two, due to the 
willingness and capability to pay for water and sewer charges.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Clearances: Through Administrative Order No. 2003-30 (DAO 2003-30) of the 
Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the Philippine national 
regulatory framework requires the MWCI to obtain an Environmental Compliance 
Certificate (ECC) prior to the commencement of construction activities.  Philippines 
reporting requirements (the ?Environmental Impact Statement?) are, to a large extent, 
compatible with the World Bank Safeguards. The Environmental Compliance Certificate 
(ECC), was issued by the DENR on April 12, 2005 under the name of MWCI.  As such, 
the MWCI is primarily responsible for securing proper implementation of the ECC, EMP 
and RAPs (if applicable). All reports to be submitted to the DENR, which are related to 
MTSP, shall be prepared and directly forwarded by MWCI to DENR, and a copy 
furnished to LBP.  
 
Local capacity for safeguard compliance was strengthened and a firm commitment and 
ownership by MWCI was implemented during the project preparation. MWCI will 
further obtain all necessary clearances from the regional DENR regarding the lahar 
disposal. As stated as a condition in the (draft) ECC: ?Sludge generated by the project 
will be disposed of properly in identified lahar laden areas of Central Luzon as mentioned 
in the Environmental Impact Statement. A detailed disposal plan shall be submitted to 
EMB Central or Region 3 Office for approval, prior to any disposal activities.?  
 
Implementation arrangements: The Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), as the borrower 
of the loan from the World Bank, shall be responsible for ensuring the completeness and 
accuracy of all MTSP environmental reports to be submitted to the World Bank. The 
LBP, through its environmental/social unit, will perform an oversight function to ensure 
that environmental loan covenants are complied with, and that the EMP is properly 
incorporated into the contracts used by the MWCI to implement the project.  
 
MWCI and facilitators responsible for the supervision will provide supervision reports 
for the identified indicators for monitoring as required by regulatory bodies. Additionally, 
the proponents will provide supervision for projects with major environmental and social 
issues or for those projects where unanticipated issues arise. MWCI/LBP will provide 
project-affected groups and the general public with a means of filing complaints on 
environmental issues (including noise and other nuisances). The project proponent should 
respond to the complaint and provide records of complaints and responses to the fund 
manager as part of the supervision reports.  
 
Page  10
Monitoring, auditing and reporting: Monitoring, auditing and reporting procedures 
related to the EA implementation, covering both biophysical and social parameters, are 
described in the EMP guidelines and in the ECC-issued by the DENR for the project.  A 
sludge management plan, based on the Lahar and biodsolids studies, will be implemented 
and monitored. More specific resettlement-related monitoring is provided in the Land 
Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework and in the Resettlement 
Action Plans that have been prepared for specific components. Monitoring arrangements 
include:  
 
?
Internal monitoring: To ensure that the proper implementation of the EMiP and 
EMoP is being observed during the pre-construction, construction and operation of each 
project, MWC?s site managers, wastewater project development team, plant managers 
and Pollution Control Officer (PCO) of each site will be responsible for the 
implementation.  
 
?
External monitoring: An external auditor will be hired to serve as a third party 
monitoring unit during the project implementation.  The auditor will check MWCI?s 
compliance with the EMiP and EMoP.  During the operations of the treatment plants, 
monitoring agencies such as the MWSS-Regulatory Office, DENR, and LLDA will 
monitor the effluent quality in terms of compliance with DENR standards.  
 
Reports to be submitted in relation to the MTSP components include:  
 
?
Pollution Control Officer?s Report ? contains details on maintenance activities, 
results of all analyses, average flow, power consumption, water consumption, generator 
usage.  The PCO Report is to be submitted to the DENR or the LLDA on a quarterly 
basis.  
 
?
Report to the MWSS-Regulatory Office ? monthly report from the MWCI Central 
Laboratory on water and wastewater quality analyses based on all parameters.  
 
?
Quarterly compliance report to the ECC to be submitted to the DENR-EMB and 
the Land Bank copy furnished to the World Bank (this is SOP for DENR which the client 
has to comply).  
 
As part of the monitoring/impact assessment to be done at the end of the project, the 
proponents will evaluate the effectiveness and implementation of the EMP. The 
evaluation will be attached to the final report of the project, and lessons learned will be 
incorporated into the EMP and EA process for future projects, as appropriate.  
 
Implementing capacity.  Both LBP and MWCI have experience in the preparation and 
implementation of similar World Bank projects. Through the implementation of the 
ongoing WDDP, the LBP has developed effective working procedures for on-lending 
activities. Also the MWCI has experience with World Bank procedures, as this project is 
a
follow-up to the ongoing MSSP.   
 
Page  11
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key-stakeholders: The key main stakeholders for the MTSP are an estimated 3.3 million 
service population to be covered by the different MTSP Components.  Key stakeholders 
from this overall group are the homeowners? groups, barangay leaders/councils, local 
government units and NGOs in these areas.  The 14 rent-free/squatter households who 
stand to lose their houses as a result of the project, as well as, the volunteer farmers and 
adjacent farm owners/communities in the lahar septage disposal sites also have a stake to 
the project.  Efforts were made during the project preparation to consult these 
stakeholders either as part of the EIA process, RAP preparation, or firming up of usufruct 
agreements for project sites.  
 
Consultation Process: The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for the Project was 
conducted to comply with the requirements of the Department of Environment and 
Natural Resources (DENR) in accordance with DENR Administrative Order (DAO) No. 
2003-30. The EIA process, which requires extensive consultations, is started with scoping 
meetings with the EMB-NCR, EMB, EIA Review Committee (EIARC) representatives 
and various stakeholders from both the local and national levels. Meetings were held and 
scoping workshops were conducted to elicit issues and concerns from the stakeholders, 
including Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and Local Government Units (LGUs). 
Subsequently, surveys and interviews, public consultations for concerned barangays and 
communities, and focus group discussions with local government officials (Barangay and 
municipal level) were conducted on all project sites. The findings, issues and concerns 
were later incorporated in the scope of the EIS. Proceedings were documented and 
included in the Scoping Report submitted to the EMB on 13 January 2004 (see separate 
volume referenced as Public Consultations Annex of this EIS).  
 
In addition to these EA-related consultations, a series of project 
presentations/discussions were held with the city/municipal councils of concerned 
LGUs/agencies by MWCI with the objective of firming up the usufruct agreements for 
the various sites for the riverbanks WwTPs, sanitation for low-income communities and 
upgrade of existing sanitation facilities.  These consultations with the LGUs will continue 
until the agreements have been finalized and become executory.  
 
Consultations with the 14 affected households have been initiated as part of the RAP 
preparation, and will continue until the RAP has been fully implemented and evaluated.  
 
Disclosure: All environmental documents prepared by MWCI were publicly disclosed 
on February 11, 2005, at the InfoShop in Washington and at the Project Information 
Center (PIC) of the World Bank Philippine Office. At that time, two sets of reports were 
also sent to every City in the Concession zone; Metro Manila and concerned 
municipalities in the Lahar areas, with a request to make one set available to the public in 
the public library, and with notices posted in prominent places. These documents have 
likewise been submitted to and reviewed by the Regional Safeguards Committee.  
 
Page  12
The documents were posted in LBP and MWCI public library, and advertisement in the 
newspapers was posted on February 16, 2005, informing of the availability of the 
documents for public consultation. LBP also put a copy of the newspaper advertisement 
on the public board of its branches in the project area, to increase the coverage of the 
disclosure.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/11/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/11/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
05/20/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/11/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/11/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
Yes 
Page  13
groups and local NGOs? 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares 
03/18/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Jitendra J. Shah 
03/21/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Lars C. Lund 
03/21/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Teck Ghee Lim 
03/21/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
03/21/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Keshav Varma 
03/21/2005 
Comments:   
