Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/23/2005 
Report No.:  AC1528
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Poland 
Project ID:  P065270 
Project Name:  Post-Accession Rural Support 
Task Team Leader:  Mark R. Lundell 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 21, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Other social services (60%);Compulsory pension and unemployment insurance 
(20%);Sub-national government administration (20%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Rural policies and institutions (P);Other social protection 
and risk management (P);Participation and civic engagement (S);Administrative and civil 
service reform (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
83.60 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
2.35
2.35 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The PARSP has the following development objectives: (i) to improve social cohesion and 
reduce social exclusion in rural underdeveloped gminas through enhancing the capacity 
of local governments to identify, plan, and execute social protection strategies through a 
Social Inclusion Fund (SIF); and, (ii) to improve the efficiency of the KRUS Agency by 
strengthening its administrative and analytic capacity and enabling better management of 
decision processes during its reform process. Medium-term objectives include:  
 
a) quickly building rural gmina capacity in handling SIF-financed activities so that these 
rural gminas will be prepared to absorb similar social inclusion-focused programs which 
could become available under the 2007-2013 National Development Plan; and,  
 
b)
developing a targeted instrument (the SIF) for rural gminas to mitigate the potentially 
negative impact of future KRUS premia increases on rural families   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: The Agricultural Social Insurance Fund (KRUS) Administrative Reform 
component will provide support to refine KRUS policies that would allow to increase 
Page  2
sustainability of the KRUS system and to improve efficiency.  This involves support for 
the introduction of the recent KRUS informatics and communications technology (ICT) 
strategy through software and equipment investments for the functionality requirement 
for management support (KRUS internal operations) and for systems consolidation of the 
over 540 databases currently operative.  The overall size of the component is 18.05 
million Euro.  
 
Component 2: The Social Inclusion component targets social inclusion in rural 
underdeveloped gminas through the provision of techncial assistance, training, and social 
services. The technical assistance is focused on developing techniques for social 
assessments, social inclusion strategies and action plans, and social service standards.  
The Social Inclusion Fund (SIF) would be available to underdeveloped rural gminas to 
purchase: (i) high priority social services for youth, adults, disabled, and the aged, as 
identified via local assessments; and, (ii) staff training and technical assistance services 
from certified training providers. The proposed size of the component is 43.95 million 
Euro, based on providing about 500 gminas access to the SIF.  
 
Component 3: National Awareness. Given the incorporation under the PARSP's Social 
Inclusion component of activities focused on the improvement of social service delivery, 
this third PARSP component is relatively small and more narrowly focused on increasing 
public awareness of the importance of social inclusion and capacity building for 
improved delivery of social inclusion activities at regional and local levels.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The final scope of the PARSP is limited to ICT investments, technical assistance and 
workshops for elaboration of social inclusion strategies, and social inclusion services.  
Under the SIF, the costs eligible for reimbursement to providers of social inclusion 
services include: personnel costs and administrative fees, rent and utilities, consumable 
materials, transportation costs of personnel and clients, non-durable goods, and 
depreciation of capital equipment purchased and used directly in delivery of services.    
 
(Since the original scope of the PARSP included co-financing of small and medium-
sized infrastructure rehabilitation sub-projects, the task team reviewed the adequacy of 
country environmental assessment requirements relevant to small civil works 
investments, including the mechanisms and responsibilities for environmental screening 
and review of EA results. This report is on file.  Under the final scope of the PARSP, 
infrastructure rehabilitation is not included.)  
 
Given the final scope of activities under the PARSP, the final EA Category is C, and no 
EA procedures are deemed necessary. There are also no other safeguard policies 
triggered by the PARSP.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Inesis Kiskis (ECSSD) 
Mr Jan Pakulski (ECSSD) 
Page  3
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not Applicable   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not Applicable   
Page  4
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Mark R. Lundell 
04/28/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Inesis Kiskis 
04/27/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jan Pakulski 
04/30/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Juergen Voegele 
05/23/2005 
Comments:   
