Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1389 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04/20/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P089078 
Project Name: District Heating Restructuring Project 
Task Team Leader: Kari J. Nyman 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 28, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: March 30, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSIE 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: District heating and energy efficiency services (100%) 
Theme: Access to urban services and housing (P);Pollution management and 
environmental health (P);Municipal governance and institution building (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
75.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
50.00
50.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The objective of the project is to support the implementation of Romania's national district 
heating strategy and help Romania secure continued and much improved heating services in 
selected cities in a financially, fiscally and socially sustainable way.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The project would support the Government's district heating strategy with the following 
measures:  
 
1. Install heat meters and heat cost allocators, to enable the heat suppliers and consumers to 
measure the actual heat consumption and enable consumption-based billing;  
 
2.
Install thermostatic radiator valves (TRVs) to enable heat consumers to control room 
temperature and the amount of heat they consume;  
 
3.
Rehabilitate heat distribution systems (including the replacement of group substations with 
individual substations) and possibly a few entire district heating systems (heat production 
facilities including combined heat and power generation and/or heat distribution networks);  
Page  2
4. Implementation of alternative heating solutions to low-income households that have lost their 
heating service upon the closure of centralized DH systems;  
 
5.
Introduce two-part heat tariffs that allow consumption-based billing of consumers and at the 
same time provide basic financial stability to heat suppliers; and  
 
6.
Technical assistance for (a) strategy implementation; (b) project preparation and 
implementation; (c) institutional development and management support to DH utilities; (d) 
public awareness campaigns about DH aimed at consumers and home owners' associations' and 
(e) development and introduction of two-part heat tariffs.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
District heating accounts for about 2/3 of all heating in Romania's urban areas and covers about 2 
million households. Bucharest accounts for about 1/3 of the total DH service. A total of 36 cities 
(Bucharest and another 35 cities) account for over 90% of the total DH service. The 
Government's core DH program attempts to cover as many as possible from these 36 cities, in 
order to maximize its national impact and help create conditions for follow-up investment.  The 
proposed Bank project would cover about 12-16 of them.    
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Borrower, with the assistance of consultants engaged to assist with project preparation as 
appropriate, have the capacity to prepare environmental impact assessments and environmental 
management plans on district heating projects. An Environmental Assessment (EA) Framework 
would be prepared to guide the Borrower and its consultants.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
DH subprojects are expected to fall under environmental categories B (renovation projects) 
or C (metering/cost allocators and heat control installations).   Category A projects (heat 
production facilities) are not expected.  Environmental assessments would be prepared for 
category A projects and environmetnal management plans would be prepared for category B 
projects. An Environmental Assessment (EA) Framework would be prepared to guide the client 
in the preparation of site-specific reports.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
F
-
Financial Intermediary Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
Page  3
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  10/26/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
An Environmental Assessment (EA) Framework would be prepared and disclosed prior to 
appraisal.  Environmental management plans (EMPs) would be prepared in accordance with 
the EA framework for all category A projects (if any) and some of the category B projects 
(targeting those with relatively greater impact) prior to appraisal.  Appraisal of APL1 is 
currently envisioned by the end of 2005.   
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Kari J. Nyman 
04/13/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
04/14/2005 
Comments:  I concur 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hinderikus Busz 
04/13/2005 
Comments:   
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  4
