Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC659 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 4, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P088165 
Project Name: KNOWLEDGE ECON 
Task Team Leader:  
Gregory Jedrzejczak (ECSPF) 
Toby Linden (ECSHD) 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: June 29, 2004 
Managing Unit: ECSPF 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General finance sector (100%) 
Theme: Education for the knowledge 
economy (P);Other financial and private 
sector development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: TBD 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): IBRD: 50 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 0($m) 
 
 
B.  Project Objectives  
 
The overall objective of the proposed project is to help Romania to accelerate its progress toward 
building a knowledge-based society and economy. The expected outcomes of the project will be 
directly linked to the goals of e-Europe+. They include: (i) expanded access to Information and 
Communication Technologies; (ii) improved digital literacy; and (iii) use of the Internet and e-
services. The impact would be higher competitiveness, technically-skilled labor force, and 
modern ICT infrastructure. 
 
C.  Project Description  
 
The project will have four components presented below. 
 
Component 1:  Expanded Access to Information and Communication Technologies (USD 
20-30 million)
 
 
A. ICT access for businesses and disadvantaged communities through telecenters  
In disadvantaged communities it will establish publicly accessible telecenters. The project will 
take advantage of successful models throughout Europe and best practices in reaching 
disadvantaged communities, including by attracting private investment. The size, location, and 
Page  2
 
 
type of the telecenters will vary and depend on the demand from the community. Telecenters will 
serve as “knowledge-centers”, providing information, services and benefits to all citizens. For 
small businesses they will serve as a gateway to innovation and accessing knowledge and 
markets.  Preferably, telecenters will be established in existing public and communal 
establishments, including  rural schools. 
 
B. ICT access for students through basic elementary and lower schools 
The project will establish school-based e-centers and provide computers and other ICT 
equipment in basic and lower secondary education schools. The project will help schools with 
convenient access for teachers and pupils to the Internet and multimedia. A variety of schools 
will be selected to participate (rural/urban, rich/poor, etc) in order to provide a basis on which to 
plan for the fiscally affordable and sustainable expansion of computer centers to schools across 
the country.  The project will procure equipment and goods; minor works for rehabilitation and 
securing of existing school facilities to host e-centers; and consultant services to facilitate the 
development of proposals from communities.  
 
Component 2:  Improved Digital Literacy (USD 8-10 million)
 
 
A. Digital Literacy for students and teachers through IT content in schools 
This sub-component will aim to enhance the delivery of education through the integration of ICT 
into the classroom. In particular, it will help students gain ICT and multimedia skills and 
improve their overall skills and knowledge by the time they leave school, thereby laying the 
groundwork for more competitive Romanian economy. An emphasis will be on adapting teacher 
curricula and offering incentives to teachers to use and apply new technologies for developing 
innovative, teaching methods in basic and lower secondary education schools. Specific activities 
will include: 
 
• 
Provision of learning materials. 
The project will provide financial incentives to procure  
privately provided services to design and prepare learning materials. A panel could be 
established to identify good quality materials, which are relevant to the curriculum, and 
identify gaps in provision. Schools will choose materials the most appropriate for their 
needs.  
 
• 
Training for staff of e-centers, teachers and principals. 
The e-center staff will need 
training on managing the center, creating demand for their services; information sources 
to help respond to requests; how to empower clients to be independent seekers and users 
of information (including developing digital literacy skills); monitoring number of users 
and their demands; and, financial planning.  Teachers will be trained on basic digital 
literacy and integration of ICT into teaching in the classroom. Principals will be trained 
on how to plan the access to computers of teachers and students, how to pay the recurrent 
costs, how to develop agreements about community use, etc. Training manuals/teacher 
guides will be developed as well. 
 
• 
Establishment of support networks for teachers, schools, principals and e-center staff. 
The support networks will provide advice and support to the staff of e-centers, both on 
technical questions when the equipment appears to malfunction and on substantive 
Page  3
 
 
questions in responses to client demand.  As they practice their new skills and 
knowledge, schools will have both technical questions and pedagogical questions (where 
can they find information, and what technological resources there are available on a given 
topic, etc.). Support networks will be financed from public resources and clear guidelines 
are needed for the providers, who, however,  preferably would  be  private firms selected 
at competitive basis. 
 
B. Digital literacy for communities and businesses 
The project will enhance the digital literacy of communities and businesses through increased 
access to ICT and e-services. The key vehicle for delivery of these services will be the 
establishment of telecenters under component 1A. Initially, the project will focus primarily on 
disadvantaged areas, including rural areas where there are significantly different challenges; later 
to extend access to these services throughout Romania. The approach will build on the current 
model used in Romania which was developed by the USAID and aims to increase the chances of 
financial sustainability. The experience of the USAID project, which is consistent with 
international experience, is that demand for services needs to be stimulated and that the types of 
services demanded are quite varied (e.g., families sending emails to relatives overseas, artisans 
looking for buyers, young people familiarizing themselves with computers, etc).   
 
Component 3:  Development and promotion of government e-services 
 
(USD 2 million)
 
 
The main objective of the component is to enhance the integration of ICT into a daily interaction 
of the society and the government and to increase the transparency by introducing automated 
systems of e-services. The government has initiated an impressive number of innovative ICT 
programs and pilot projects, however,  they remain a largely untapped resource due to limited 
access and skills of users. 
 
The project will include a government-to-businesses e-services that could encompass a wide 
range of activities, such as simplification of business administration procedures, promotion of 
business development support services. To ensure the value and long-term sustainability of e-
services, it is essential that all services be geared toward the demand of clients and businesses. 
Further, the project will engage entrepreneurs to identify target areas for ICT-enhanced business 
development services, such as e-commerce, e-marketing, start-up support, access to finance, etc.   
 
The Government has launched a number of initiatives to facilitate community access to ICT 
services (e.g. e-voting, drivers license registration, internet access, etc.). This component will 
focus on providing the government with the resources and expertise required to put into 
operation the full program of activities which have been piloted, as well as address accessibility 
concerns in low income and rural communities. 
 
The public awareness campaign will be needed to promote the numerous government-to-
community services. Many community members are not fully aware of the availability of 
resources that could facilitate their business development and increase knowledge sharing and 
information access.  
 
Page  4
 
 
Component 4: 
 
Promotion of e-commerce and innovation support for SMEs 
 
(USD 5-8 million)
 
 
This component will have three integrated objectives: (i) to scale-up
 selected successful 
innovation support activities launched under various public and donors’ initiatives, in particular 
in terms of the identification of potentially innovative SMEs and the provision of technical and 
financial support to them at the regional level; (ii) to pilot decentralized approaches
 in providing 
innovation support services to SMEs, involving private and public actors (e.g. chambers of 
commerce and/or industry, universities, NGOs, municipalities, etc); and (iii) to seek ways to 
increase collaboration between research establishments and enterprise
 through innovation chains. 
 
This component will support the implementation of privately provided services that enable 
working with clients in the core service areas such as: feasibility studies, structuring a business, 
market research and market planning, financing, strategic planning, innovation 
commercialization, management issues, etc. 
 
The component will provide opportunities for the Romanian  private sector (including firms 
established by universities and research institutes)  to develop expertise in this field and 
competitively offer their own business support services. The market for these services is likely to 
grow as more businesses integrate ICT services into their everyday activities, and can therefore 
emerge into a viable knowledge-intensive industry. 
 
Project will aim through financial support to stimulate demand for the use of business 
development support services at an affordable price at the outset, particularly when SMEs may 
not understand the value of such services or are unable to locate appropriate services. 
 
In addition, the Project would finance an innovation audit to evaluate the National Innovation 
System to be supported under follow-up operations. 
 
D.  Project location  
 
The project will be implemented at national and regional levels. The team envisages to select two 
or three regions within Romania  to launch and pilot project activities in view of future scaling 
up. Regions to be included have not been identified yet. 
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
To be discussed at PCN review. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[ ] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
Page  5
 
 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [ ] B   [X] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD  
 
Note
: “C” is proposed by Project Team as there are no civil works or rehabilitation of any 
buildings but only communication and IT connectivity. The project aims to create knowledge 
society through increased ICT access and digital literacy. There is no private land/building 
expropriation for the establishment of the telecenters and they will be located in existing space 
such as public, communal or school buildings. 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
 
March 29, 2004  
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  6
 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Gregory Jedrzejczak (ECSPF) 
Date 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Ronald Hoffer 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
 Khaled Sherif 
Date 
Comments 
 
