Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC561
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01/13/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. 1. Project Statistics
Country: ROMANIA                                  Project ID: P075163
Global Supplemental ID: P081950
Project: HAZARD RISK MITIGATION AND               Task Team Leader: Christoph Pusch
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PROJECT
Authorized to Appraise Date: January 8, 2004     IBRD Amount (Sm): 150.00
Bank Approval: May 20, 2004                       IDA Amount ($m):
Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 7.00
Managing Unit: ECSSD                              Sector: Flood protection (80%); Mining and other
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  extractive (20%)
Status: Lending                                   Theme: Natural disaster management (P); Pollution
management and environmental health (P); Other
urban development (S); Water resource management
(S); Rural services and infrastructure (S)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The overall objective of the project is to assist the Govemment of Romania in reducing the environmental,
social, financial and economic vulnerability to natural disasters and catastrophic mining accidental spills of
pollutants through: (i) strengthening the institutional and technical capacity for disaster management and
emergency response; (ii) implementing risk reduction measures for floods, landslides and earthquakes; (iii)
improving the safety of water-retention dams; and (iv) improving the management and safety of tailings
dams and waste dumps facilities.
Global Objective
The project global environmental objective is to demonstrate and provide for replication for the reduction of
catastrophic accidental spills of transboundary pollution loads from mine operations flowing into the
Danube and Black Sea basins. In support of this objective, the project through a proposed GEF co-financed
component will assist in piloting and replication of hazards prevention and remediation activities for
improving the management and safety of tailings dams and waste dumps facilities; and in catalyzing
transboundary cooperation on integrated water resources management of the Tisza Basin. The successful
implementation of the GEF co-financed component will serve as a model for replication for reducing
mining accident risks to human and aquatic ecosystem health throughout Romania and other parts of the
Tisza and Danube basins.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The project will consisted of the following components and activities:
Component A: Strengthening of Disaster Management Capacity ($8.9 million)
The objective of this component is to enhance the capacity of the Romanian authorities to better prepare
for, respond to and recover from natural or man-made disasters through activities that increase the planning



2
ISDS
and training efforts of all levels of government, modernize information technology and communications
systems, promote public awareness and preparedness, and complete technical feasibility work and
institutional framework for launching of the Romanian Catastrophe Insurance Program. The component
consists of the following sub-components:
*      Upgrading emergency communications at the national, regional and local level
*      Development of disaster management information system
*      Development of a Vrancea earthquake scenario
*      Public awareness and education program
*      Preparation of Catastrophe Insurance Program
Component B: Earthquake Risk Reduction ($70.12 million)
The objective of this sub-component is to assist the Government in reducing the seismic vulnerability of
priority technical and social infrastructure through the retrofitting of key structures and institutional
strengthening. The component consists of the following sub-components:
Strengthening of high priority buildings and life-lines
*      Design and supervision
*      Power and water systems risk assessment
*      Building code review and study on code enforcement
*      Professional training in cost-effective retrofitting methods
Component C: Flood and Landslide Risk Reduction ($100.05 million)
The objectives of the component are the following: a) to reduce flood risk and vulnerability in the critical
areas in Romania which severely curtail development, b) to improve safety of large and small dams so that
these structures can function as designed, and c) to map and model the risk of landslides in Romania in
order to reduce losses and provide for better land planning tools. The component consists of the following
sub-components:
Flood protection infrastructure
Danube River Bank Protection
Large Dams Safety
Small Dams Safety
Landslides maps and monitoring
Component D: Risk Reduction of Mining Accidents in Tisza Basin ($14.37 million)
The development objective of this component is to reduce the risk of water and soil contamination and loss
of human and aquatic life from catastrophic mining accidental spills of pollutants. The global
environmental objective is to demonstrate and provide for replication for the reduction of catastrophic
accidental spills of transboundary pollution loads from mine operations flowing into the Danube and Black
Sea basins. The component consists of the following sub-components:
*      Establishment of a Baseline and an Environmental Monitoring System
Hazard Prevention and Remediation Interventions
Engineering and Environmental Guidelines for Tailings and Waste Facilities
Regional mine spill disaster response system



3
ISDS
Promoting Transboundary Cooperation on Integrated Water Resources Management for the
Tisza Basin
Component E: Project Management ($9.45 million)
The component will finance the costs of creation and maintenance of the Project Management Units and the
to be established in the respective ministries responsible for the related components.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Activities included in the Component A (Strengthening and Upgrading the Emergency Response Capacity) will
be implemented country wide.
The activities of the Earthquake Risk Reduction (Component B) will be concentrated in the Vrancea
subduction zone which forms an ellipse stretching from the north east to the south west of Romanian territory,
including Bucharest.
The Flood and Landslide Risk Reduction (Component C) will provide support to rehabilitation and upgrading
of flood protection works in areas with high flood vulnerability. It will focus on the flood defenses of intemal
rivers, such as: : Tarna, Tamava, Cibin, Prut, Balint, Teleorman, Valsan, Slanic, and Babadag. The
component will also finance rehabilitation of existing flood protection structures along Danube River, in three
sections where the flood vulnerability is very high and the existing dykes are endangered by the aggressiveness
of the river. The selected sections are located on the downstream sector of Danube River; three of them are
part of overall embankment of Borcea Island, on Borcea Branch. As part of the component, eight large dams
which are regarded as unsafe will be rehabilitated so that their safety and operation is restored. These are:
Dridu, Varsolt, Berdu, Poiana Uzului, Maneciu, Lesu, Valea de Pesti, and Siriu. In addition to the large
dams, there are several small dams that have been identified as critical and in need of immediate rehabilitation
to ensure their safety. These included in the project are: Bozovici, Sanmihaiul, Catamarasti, Buftea, and
Pucioasa.
Risk Reduction of Mining Accidents in Tisza Basin (Component C) hazard prevention and remediation
interventions will be implemented in pilot areas in the Tisza River basin. During the preparatory phase,
two sites have been identified as high-priority sites for which immediate remedial works are required during
the first phase of project implementation: (i) tailings dams and waste facilities associated with the Rosia
Poieni mine; and (ii) tailings dams facilities associated with the Baia Borsa mine.
The project will not support activities in close proximity to protected areas, critical natural habitats, or
culturally and socially sensitive areas.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The envisaged investments are limited to modernizing communication and information systems
(component A), to retrofitting of existing critical public facilities (component B), rehabilitation and upgrading
of the flood protection infrastructure, including investments in improving dam safety (component C), the
hazards prevention and remediation works and other non-structural measures to improve the management and
safety of mine tailings dams and waste dams (component D). No additional structures of significant size are
envisaged under the project.



4
ISDS
Overall, the environmental impact of the project will be positive by reducing Romania's vulnerability to
floods, earthquakes, and by addressing environmental degradation from mining activities, which all cause
substantial damages to the natural and built environment.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on W for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 0 Yes 0 No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes 0 No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           0 Yes 0 No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes 0 No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     0 Yes 0 No
Section 11 - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant qtestions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Environmental Assessment
The Environmental Assessment in accordance with requirements pertinent to the category B projects was
conducted by the Borrower and reviewed by the Bank team. The Romanian counterparts also prepared the
Environmental Management Plan for the project which is under the Bank review.
Cultural Property
Under the project component B (Earthquake Risk Reduction), some of the facilities identified for seismic
retrofitting are classified by the Romanian authorities as historical monuments. The project will assist the
GOR in preservation of these cultural heritage structures which at the same time have essential public
functions (e.g., city halls, universities, etc). Works will be carried out according to governnent guidelines
for historical and cultural preservation.
Proiects in International Waters
The project will, among other activities, support improvement of flood protection schemes in Romania,
some of which are located at international waterways. Therefore, Bank's safeguard policy concerning
Projects on International Waterways O.P. 7.50 applies.
Safety of Dams
The component C (Flood and Landslide Risk Reduction) will provide an assistance to rehabilitation of eight
large and five small dams, and the component D (Risk Reduction of Mining Accidents in Tisza Basin) will
support on a pilot basis for remediation works at the mine tailings dams and waste dams.



5
ISDS
Involuntary Resettlement
No land acquisition, involuntary physical displacement or relocation of people and their properties will be
necessary in order to implement the investments planned under the project.
The project will not involve conversion of natural habitats.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No substantial cumulative impacts are envisaged.
II.D. Ic Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
One of the key long term impacts of the project will be a decreased vulnerability of the population at risk to
natural disasters and water pollution accidents from mining activities, which will be achieved via
strengthening of the institutional and technical capacity for disaster management and emergency response;
risk reduction measures for floods, and earthquakes; improved safety of selected dams; preparation of a
framework for the national disaster insurance system; and mitigation of environmental impacts of
accidental spills and release of hazardous materials in the Danube River and Black Sea Basins.
In particular, the impact of the project can be categorized as follows:
*   Improved earthquake, flood, and landslide protection, reducing potential damage of public and private
buildings, as well as agricultural land,
*   Reduced risk of dam breakage,
*   Increased production of electricity from the rehabilitated dams,
*   Improvement of water supply, the quantity and quality of drinking water, industrial water use and for
irrigation,
*   Increased attractiveness of the project areas to business, including tourism,
*   Subsequent employment opportunities,
*   Reduced the Danube River bank erosion causing damage to agricultural land;
*   Assurance of operation of public facilities located in the seismically vulnerable areas;
*   Reduced risk of water pollution from mining operations in Tisza basin.
The Social Assessment carried out during the preparation concluded that it is not anticipated that the
project will have any adverse social impact. There will be no need for resettlement, nor private land
acquisition. During the implementation phase, social monitoring and consultation will be an integral part
of review of the ongoing activities.
II.D.2. In light of I, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
N/A
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Environmental Assessment
The EMP was prepared for project components B, C and D. In case of the component B (Earthquake Risk
Reduction), a pool of buildings that meet the agreed criteria was established during the project preparation.
In the implementation phase, the final selection will be made, followed by the design and actual retrofitting.
Although the exact buildings to be strengthened will not be identified until the implementation, the range of
potential environmental impacts was identified and mitigation and monitoring plan has been developed
based on potential impacts of the planned interventions. The EMP includes the Environmental Guidelines



6
ISDS
for activities under components B and D, which will be part of the Project Implementation Plan (PIP)
The detailed environmental assessment and public consultations for all investments under the component C
(Flood and Landslide Risk Reduction) were carried out. The proposed investments consist mostly of
rehabilitation of the existing flood defense schemes and dams, and will have no negative impact on the
environment. The assessment concluded that none of investments are located in the environmentally
sensitive or protected areas. Also, no protected species that could be possibly affected by the investments
were identified. All minor impacts that are limited to the period of construction works, were identified and
the measures to mitigate them were elaborated in the EMP.
In regard to the GEF-funded component D (Risk Reduction of Mining Accidents in Tisza Basin), the
concrete measures and interventions to reduce risk of release of the contaminants from the tailing and waste
facilities will be known once the designs are ready. During the project preparation the framework EMP
was developed by the Romanian counterparts, which takes into account possible environmental impacts, the
mitigation measures and monitoring activities. The more specific environmental and social assessment will
be carried out through the GEF PDF-B grant or during the implementation phase.
The Loan and GEF grant agreements will include covenants calling for the implementation of the prepared
Environmental Management Plans for the components B, C, and D. The Bank will monitor the adherence to
the EMP as part of its supervision activities.
Cultural Property
The EMP prepared by the Ministry of Transport, Construction and Tourism (MTCT) for the component B
includes provisions for preservation of the all architectural and cultural qualities of these structures along
with a system for monitoring the retrofitting works to ensure compliance with Romanian laws on the
preservation of cultural property.
The Romanian regulations are very clear on the required actions and will be enforced throughout the
lifetime of the project. This includes a system of permits provided by the Ministry of Culture and Creeds
(MCC) and ensuring that designs and works are subject to the expert review and supervision by certified
specialists in the field of historical buildings preservation. A Law #422 of 2001 govems the protection of
historic monuments, setting forth institutional roles and responsibilities. The Ministry's Directorate of
Historic Monuments must approve all technical documentation for buildings that are officially listed, and
can call specialists as members of a Consultative Board, as needed. Designers, contractors and site
supervision engineers working on an investment project that involves an historic monument must be
pre-certified and listed by the MCC. 125 designers are listed in Romania for this purpose. For the project,
MCC and MTCT have appointed a working group to enable timely review and discussion of project
investments in order to avoid bureaucratic delays in the approval process. Moreover, during the
implementation stage, the already existing technical designs will be reviewed by consultants and modem
methodologies and technologies that preserve cultural features of the facilities will be used for
strengthening.
Projects in Intemational Waters
Based on the technical assessment carried out by the Bank team's consultant, none of the project activities
would adversely change the quality and quantity of river water flows in the riparian countries and all of
them fall within the exemption to the notification requirement under paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50. The
bilateral agreements, however, with Ukraine, as well as with Serbia and Montenegro contain provisions
requiring notifications. Although a formal bilateral agreement has not been signed yet between Romania
and Moldova, a practice of mutual notification about planned works on hydraulic structures located on the



7
ISDS
transboundary waters is established. Therefore, the Romanian Government sent on November 13, 2003 the
relevant notifications to the Government of Moldova, the Government of Ukraine, and the Government of
Serbia and Montenegro with the information on the three investment planned under the project, and
requested their clearance. The approach is consistent with paragraph 5 of the OP 7.50.
Safety of Dams
The system for safety of dams established in Romania is in detail described in the "Dam Safety Assessment
Report" available in the project files. The table below summarizes main findings of that report.
Dam Safety Safeguard       Romanian System             Compliance with Bank
Requirement                                            Safeguards
Appointment of POEfor      National Dam Safety         Satisfactory. Adequate laws,
design and construction    Commission (CONSIB) is the  regulations and standards are
quality assurance          consulting arm of the      in place. The qualifications of
government and uses         national members for the panel
considerable number of highly  are adequate. At appraisal, the
skilled dam experts, on behalf  team will review their CVs to
of the Govenmment for all dam  make certain that they were not
design, construction and    involved in the design or
rehabilitation to ensure safety  construction of the dams
by the use of design,      included in the Project
construction and impoundment  (independence condition).Two
perrmits.                  international experts will be
recruited to strengthen the
panel with particualr reference
to tailings dams and risk
analysis.
Monitoring Instrumentation  Monitoring instrumentation is  Satisfactory. The design
part of design             part of the design of all dams.  requirements, standards and
norms are adequate.
Preparation of EPP         EPPs are prepared as required by The standards and norms for
the law and have to be approved preparation of the EPP are
by Government.              adequately defined in the
regulations.
The EPPs for the dam
investments will be reviewed by
the Bank team to ensure
compliance with OP4.37.
Preparation of O&M plan   O&M plans and EPPs are       The O&M plans for each dam
before completion of project prepared and approved by  investment will be reviewed
Government.                 during the appraisal.
Dam safety surveillance and  The Romanian legislation  Satisfactory for water dams.
inspections after dam is  requires three levels of    The surveillance system is
completed                 surveillance system.        satisfactory for water dams. It
will be further enhanced based on
the findings of the failure mode
and effect analysis. Surveillance



8
ISDS
system must be upgraded in the
case of tailings dams.
Surveillance needs substantial
improvement in the case of
tailings dams.
Implementation of 0 & M    Romanian law requires       Satisfactory. Implementation
and EPP                   implementation of EPP and    of the O&M and EPP will be
O&M plans.                  incorporated in the loan and
GEF grant agreements.
A dam safety specialist (with proven international experience) will be recruited, under terms of reference
satisfactory to the World Bank, to act as independent expert over the five-year implementation period. A
second international specialist will be recruited to assist during the initial 2 years of project implementation.
These experts will provide an independent and high level technical evaluation of the proposed measures to
reduce the risk of dam failures during project implementation. They will undertake review of the hazards
prevention and remediation activities twice a year, participate in failure modes and effects analysis
workshops, participate in the development of the risk assessment methodology, and identify implementation
issues and develop recommendations for the consideration of the Government. It is envisaged that the long
term specialist will focus on the safety of tailings facilities and mine waste dumps. The short term specialist
will provide incremental input, as needed, on the failure modes and effects analysis related to water dams.
The contribution of the short term specialist is mainly aimed at capacity building of national staff by
exposing them to international practice. Such capacity is very much needed in Romania given the large
number of existing dams (246 large dams and 1,400 small ones).
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
There have been series of meetings and workshops carried out with key institutional stakeholders,
including, central and local offices of the relevant ministries (MAFWE, Apele Romane, SNIF, MTCT,
MOI, MOH, MOC, MOE, local municipalities). These stakeholders were consulted and their views were
incorporated into the selection of priority investments.
The public consultations meetings for the flood protection and dam safety investments were conducted in
May-June 2003. Prior to the meetings, the draft EMP and the more specific technical information on the
investments in Romanian language were disclosed at publicly accessible places, such as libraries, city halls,
etc., and people living in the project areas, as well as NGOs were invited to the meetings through the local
radio announcements and press advertizements. The minutes of all meetings were prepared and attached to
the EMP. The planned investments did not raise any objections nor controversies. In fact, the projects are
keenly awaited by the population living under the risk of floods.
The consultations for the seismic retrofitting investments will be conducted in the implementation phase,
when the facilities are finally selected out of the prioritized pool of public buildings. The consultation
process will be initiated once designs are ready and the concrete methods of given retrofitting works are
known. At that stage, the environmental permits will be required for the investments by the Romanian
regulations.
For the pilot prevention and remediation intervention program under the component D (Risk Reduction of
Mining Accidents in Tisza Basin), once the technical measures are known, the feasibility studies and



9
ISDS
detailed designs will be completed, and subsequently, the public consultation meetings will take place, and
will be monitored by the PMU. In accordance with the Romanian legal requirements, the environmental
permits will also have to be obtained at that time.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. - No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.



10
ISDS
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11/25/2003    11/25/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             12/18/2003    12/16/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              12/2/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:              Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Signed and submitted by       Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Christoph Pusch                             12/17/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Bemard Baratz/Person/World Bank        12/28/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  Stan Peabody/Person/World Bank         01/05/2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:  Alessandro Palmieri/Person/World Bank  12/17/2003
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Marjory-Anne Bromhead                    01/13/2004
Sector Manager                Marjory-Anne Bromhead                       01/13/2004



