Page  1
 
 
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC511 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  March 4, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Romania 
Project ID: P078971 
Project Name: HEALTH SECTOR 
REFORM II 
Task Team Leader: Silviu Calin Radulescu 
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 21, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: March 17, 2005 
Managing Unit: ECSHD 
Lending Instrument: Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector: Health (100%) 
Theme: Health system performance (P) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: D. Eckertz 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 20 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
FOREIGN MULTILATERAL INSTITUTIONS (UNIDENTIFIED) 
20 
 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 3 of PCN] 
 
The project will have the following objective:  
provide more accessible services, of increased quality and 
with improved health outcomes for those requiring maternity and newborn care, emergency medical care 
and rural primary health care.  
The principal beneficiary groups would be the users of services targeted 
for improvement by the project: pregnant women and newborn, rural populations, and those needing 
emergency services.  This objective is consistent with the overall program objectives defined at the 
beginning of APL phase 1.  
 
In addition to the obvious benefits of reducing maternal and infant mortality, general mortality in rural 
areas, and overall improvement of quality of care, this project would demonstrate the impact of the 
rationalization approach across a vertical program throughout Romania. This would support more 
extensive implementation of rationalization plans developed in Phase I. 
 
Proposed project performance indicators would include: 
1. 
Decreased perinatal mortality rate 
2. 
% of deliveries attended at appropriate level of care 
3. 
Increased occupancy and reduced length of stay in maternity services 
4. 
% of rural population reporting difficulties in access  
5. 
Increased utilization rate of primary care services in rural areas 
6. 
Reduced differences in utilization rate of primary and emergency care according to residence and 
income status 
7. 
Improved survival rates of major emergencies arriving alive at the hospital emergency department 
Page  2
 
 
8. 
Improved response times and dispatch effectiveness through x (number to be determined) 
dispatch centers linked to both the new 112 system and the related ambulance services 
 
C.  Project Description [from section 4 of PCN]
 
   
This investment project would be the second phase of an agreed program.  It is closely linked to the 
overall program objectives and builds on activities initiated in the first phase.  The project would be 
implemented over a three year period, and the responsible agency would be the Ministry of Health, who 
has established project implementation capacity.  This would be the third World Bank financed project 
managed by the same unit that has acquired significant experience, in particular on procurement and 
fiduciary procedures. This has resulted in selection of the unit to manage large projects supported by other 
financiers (e.g. GFATM grant). 
 
Needed investments exceed the indicative size of the Bank loan (US$20 million), but discussions have 
been initiated with EIB and EBRD regarding parallel and co-financing possibilities.   
 
The project components are as follows:
 
 
1. Health Policy Development and Monitoring of Health Sector Performance Component:
   will 
support the development of National Health Accounts, and improve the capacity of the Ministry of Health 
to monitor health sector performance, through regular surveys and other analytical techniques.  It will also 
provide continued technical assistance in the development and implementation of regional health care 
rationalization plans. 
 
2. Maternity and Neonatal Care Component
:  will fund facility rehabilitation for maternity and neonatal 
care units, as well as medical and other equipment necessary for high quality neonatal and maternity 
services. Technical assistance and training will be provided to ensure implementation of best international 
practices, building on already existing partnerships between the Government and WHO, UNICEF and 
UNFPA. 
 
3. Primary Health Care Component:
  will focus on medical services  in rural areas.  Access to PHC 
services in rural and remote areas, as well as the need to provide 24-hour emergency coverage in these 
areas are of particular concern to the MOH.  Using service plans developed in the Phase I, workable 
model(s) will be selected and scaled up to a substantial proportion of the rural population. The component 
will also support better coordination of health and social services. 
 
4. Emergency Care Services Component:
  would help develop and implement integrated automated 
ambulance dispatch capability and upgrade hospital emergency areas. Both interventions are essential to 
maximizing the impact of the investments that have been made to date, and the effectiveness of the 
emergency medical services system generally. 
 
5. Project management Component
:  would support the operation of the Project Management Unit, 
continuing the existing arrangements for management of the first phase project. 
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
  
[Guideline:  If the location is not yet identified, please indicate if there are alternative locations 
under consideration or how the location is to be determined during project preparation] 
 
Approximately 120 health facilities located throughout Romania.  
Page  3
 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
 
[Guideline: Based on past experience and other available information]
 
 
The Borrower has an appropriate legal framework and institutional capacity in place to elaborate an 
environmental management plan and supervise its implementation.  The Project Management Unit of the 
Ministry of Health, which has been established under the first Health Project currently under 
implementation, will lead project preparation and co-ordinate safeguard measures with other stakeholders.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[x] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[ ] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[ ] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[ ] A   [x] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
                                                
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS 
 
August 2004 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
The project envisages limited minor construction, such as remodeling, renovation and refitting of existing 
buildings, and the provision of equipment to health facilities. Safeguard issues relating to the planned 
rehabilitation of health facilities will be addressed in the context of project preparation studies and 
surveys of the health facilities to be included under the project as follows:  
 
(1)  The national environmental laws and regulations applicable to the project will be reviewed during the 
project design studies;  
 
(2) 
Environmental issues related to the construction works at the selected sites or, if the sites are not 
selected by Appraisal, the process for identifying these, will be established in the context of the 
forthcoming health facility survey. The survey, financed from the PHRD grant, will include an 
assessment of the environmental issues related to construction and rehabilitation of health 
facilities, and will identify the 
scope of mitigation measures to be included in the contract documents for 
the civil works. It will also review the current practices for handling, transportation and disposal of medical 
wastes at the selected facilities, and assess the nature and scope of required mitigation measures, such as for 
dust , noise, and construction waste including asbestos.  
 
(3) 
Establishment of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) with appropriate implementation 
arrangements will be established for addressing the safeguard issues.  The EMP will cover: 
 
• 
measures for mitigation of dust and noise during construction, and proper handling and 
disposal of any asbestos containing materials and other construction wastes;  
 
• 
devise procedures for improvements in the current practices for handling, transportation and 
disposal of medical wastes at the selected facilities, such as improving building rehabilitation 
designs, training health care workers, or provision of additional facilities and equipment; and 
 
• 
if the selected buildings are found to have historical value, procedures for the project to 
provide for addressing cultural property issues by including appropriate instructions (in 
accordance with Romanian regulations) in the bidding documents for the civil works. 
 
The EMP will be developed by project appraisal, planned for August 2004, and be discussed in public 
consultation with stakeholders.  
 
 
 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
                                                
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
Page  5
 
 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Silviu Calin Radulescu 
Date 3/4/04 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
 
