                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)

                                                                                             Report No: AC581
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02/09/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: RUSSIAN FEDERATION                                   Project ID: P068386
Project: Fire Management in High Biodiversity Value           Task Team Leader: Andrey V. Kushlin
Forests of Amur-Sikhote-Alin Ecoregion
Authorized to Appraise Date: June 15, 2004                    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: July 4, 2005                                   IDA Amount ($m):
                                                              Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 5.00
Managing Unit: Environmentally and Socially Sustainable Sector: Forestry (60%); Central government
Development Sector Unit                                       administration (20%); Sub-national government
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)            administration (20%)
Status: Lending                                               Theme: Natural disaster management (P);
                                                              Biodiversity (P)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):

         The objective of the proposed project is to improve fire
management in critical, non-economically accessible forested areas of
high biodiversity value in the Amur-Sikhote-Alin ecoregion in the
southern part of the Russian Far East. The project would support
programs for improved management, monitoring and prevention of fires,
and public awareness campaigns for fire prevention, in order to conserve
these environmentally vulnerable forest ecosystems, as well as analysis
and cross-country knowledge sharing of the dynamics of forest fires in
the Russian Far East. It would cover regular protected areas as well as
forests managed for protection purposes in Primorsky and Khabarovsk
Krays and Jewish Autonomous Oblast.

I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):

The project would support programs for improved management,
monitoring and prevention of fires, and public awareness and
participation campaign in fire management in the Amur-Sikhote-Alin
Ecoregion, through the following activities.

Components:

1. New Regulations for Fire Management in Protected Areas

Inclusion of existing protected areas and protection as elements in
the integrated forest fire management system through: (a)
classification and zoning of protected areas according to fire
occurrence and fire protection intensity; and (b) revisions in regional
regulations and methodologies pertaining to fire management in
protected areas, including planning of forest land structure and
functions, fire danger assessment and forecasting methods, rapid

                                                         2
                                                                             ISDS


assessment of fire dynamics from economic and ecological viewpoints
and prediction of economic losses, establishment of a regulatory
framework for community and enterprise resource mobilization to
fight forest fires.

2. Integrated Fire Management Planning

Improving federal and regional arrangements for integrated forest
fire management through: (a) zoning of forest lands by protection
intensity and normative costs of forest fire prevention and fighting; (b)
procedures for early warning based on anticipated weather events, and
of timely planning and distribution of funds; (c) procedures to raise
funds in catastrophic fire situations; and (d) procedures to reimburse
fire fighting costs, mobilized resources and workforce. Financial
management aspects of this component would be coordinated with
parallel work on forest policy and planning reforms at federal and
regional levels financed through the associated IBRD loan.

3. Public Awareness and Education

Increasing public awareness of forest fire ecology and educating the
local population in principles of fire management and prevention
through: (a) broad public awareness campaigns promoting project
objectives and implementation through affordable district newspapers
and local radio; (b) consultations with local stakeholders (district
administrations, environmental enforcement agencies, public
organizations, communities) to assess forest fire danger and its
causes, public opinion surveys; (c) promotion of voluntary community
forest patrols in high-priority territories; (d) continuous environmental
education with the main focus on schoolchildren, active collaboration
with children's ecological organizations; and (e) public promotion of
fire management principles through Public Service Announcements,
visual advertisements and posters, media and public organizations
campaigns. Public awareness campaigns under this component would
be developed and implemented using coordination and parallel
financing arrangements with the USAID-funded Forest Resources and
Technology (FOREST) Project.

4. Regional Forest Fire Coordination Centers

Strengthening institutional and management capacity of the fire
management service through: (a) strengthening the regional system of
Forest Fire Centers and territorial units which would be in charge of
management, administration, information, fire prevention and control
and other issues; (b) upgrading processing of space and ground fire
information, forest fire monitoring and forecasting, communication
and information support systems and quick-response fire
management.

5. Preventive Fire Management Systems near Protected Forests

Strengthening preventive fire management in the protected forest
areas through: (a) improved operation of ground-based fire prevention

                                                         3
                                                                                                          ISDS


and fighting, including systems of look-out stations in the
mountainous terrain, teledetection stations, pilot development of fire
breaks forest shelterbelts composed of fire resistant tree and shrub
species in the vicinity of protection forests; (b) appropriate computer
equipment for forest management and protected areas offices; and (c)
mandatory minimum sets of fire management tools for local forest
management units and protected areas. This bulk of the fire detection
and fire fighting equipment (the portion designated for Khabarovsk
Kray) under this component would be financed through the associated
IBRD loan.

6. Technologies for Professional and Community-Based Fire
Management

Improving professional and community-based fire prevention and
fighting technologies through: (a) intensification of ground patrolling
by professional and community-based mobile groups equipped with
fire fighting tools; and (b) application of differentiated techniques to
professional and community-based fire management based on area
accessibility, pyrological features, fire behavior forecasts, ecological
and economic implications of a fire, social and environmental value of
a forest exposed to fire; and the characteristics of forested areas
neighboring the protection forests. This bulk of the fire patrolling and
mobile fire fighting equipment (the portion designated for Khabarovsk
Kray) under this component would be financed through the associated
IBRD loan.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
Geographically, the project would focus on areas with high biodiversity value forests in the Khabarovsky,
Primorsky Krays and the Jewish Autonomous Oblast of the Russian Federation. This would include the
existing protected areas, forests managed for protection purposes, and the other qualifying forests. The
location for the specific activities will be determined during project preparation.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The Project will not have any negative environmental impacts. However, a partial environmental
assessment of the proposed Project activities is recommended to maximize positive impacts inside and nearby
high conservation value areas.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                      Policy                                          Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                         Yes     No
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                 Yes     No
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                  Yes     No
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                    Yes     No
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                Yes     No

                                                        4
                                                                                                          ISDS


    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  Yes  No
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         Yes  No
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                                             Yes  No
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes  No
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes  No



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The proposed project would strengthen conservation of critical natural habitats and would generate strong
positive environmental impacts. Project's social impact would also be positive. No negative impacts are
anticipated.

II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
No cumulative negative impacts are anticipated.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
The project would improve forest fire management practices, which would have a long term positive impact
on conservation of high biodiversity value forests and critical forest habitats. Through the relevant
participatory arrangements it would also strengthen public and community involvement in fire prevention,
which would help sustain income opportunities for the local people.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
Alternative site-specific approaches to forest fire management will be assessed in the course of the project
preparation.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
The project is rated as Environmental Assessment Category "B". An assessment of alternative approaches
to fire management would be undertaken during preparation and an environmental management and
monitoring plan would be prepared.

With regard to OP 4.04 and 4.36, the project would not support conversion of natural habitats; and it
would help to manage and protect fragile forest ecosystems. The Environmental Assessment and
Environmental Management Plan to be prepared under the Project Preparation Grant would develop
detailed provisions for the project's compliance with OP 4.01, OP 4.04 and OP 4.36.

With regard to OP 4.20, indigenous groups (including the Nanays, the Udeges, and the 'Old Believers') do
live nearby and frequently visit the proposed project areas; the project would help protect the products they
use in the forest. The Social Assessment and Stakeholder Participation Plan (including the Indigenous
Peoples Development Plan, or IPDP) that would be compiled during Project preparation would similarly
address project compliance with OD 4.20. Specifically, the IPDP would be based on the Social
Assessment and the focus would be to develop mechanisms to ensure that: (a) the indigenous peoples are
adequately involved in the project; (b) that public information and other outreach activities are designed to

                                                       5
                                                                                                           ISDS


reach them, specifically; and (c) that the IPDP be developed to be relatively invisible, so as not to create
conflict between indigenous peoples and others.

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders would participate in project planning, development and implementation through the
Project Supervisory Committee that has already been established in the region and includes representatives
of regional and federal authorities, forest and protected area managers, local administrations and
communities, research and non-governmental organizations. Individual project components would provide
for specific forms of stakeholder participation in implementation and monitoring (such as in the
community-based fire patrols to be supported by the project). A Social Assessment and Stakeholder
Participation Plan is to be prepared during project preparation phase, where specific forms of stakeholder
involvement would be detailed.

E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
          management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
          technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
          projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
          issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected           Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/31/2004          Not Available
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/30/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            6/30/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected           Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected           Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               5/31/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           6/30/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            6/30/2004

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected           Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop

                                                     6
                                                                                                       ISDS



Dam Safety Management Plan:                                               Expected         Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure
Date of submission to InfoShop
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why. Not applicable.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Andrey V. Kushlin                                  12/30/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Serguei Milenin                                    12/29/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Marjory-Anne Bromhead                                   01/16/2004
Sector Manager/Director               Marjory-Anne Bromhead                              01/16/2004

