Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1085 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 9, 2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P079414 
Project Name: Transport Sector 
Development Project 
Task Team Leader: Kingson Khan Apara 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 14, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 30, 2005 
Managing Unit: AFTTR 
Lending Instrument: Sector Investment and 
Maintenance Loan 
Sector: General transportation sector 
(100%) 
Theme: Trade facilitation and market 
access (P);Rural services and infrastructure 
(S);Public expenditure, financial 
management and procurement 
(S);Decentralization (S);Conflict 
prevention and post-conflict reconstruction 
(S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Yvette Laure Djachechi, Senior Social 
Development Specialist (ASPEN); Africa Eshogba Olojoba, Senior Environmental 
Specialist (ASPEN)  
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 45.0 
Other financing amounts by source: 
Road Maintenance Fund (RMF)   
($m) 
15 
B.  Project Objectives   
 
1. 
The objective of  the project is to help the Government implement a new policy to 
support sustainable road maintenance and improved institutional efficiency. 
 
C.  Project Description   
2. 
Meeting the numerous challenges in the transport sector requires wide-ranging reforms of 
the sector to correct the many structural and physical deficiencies observed by previous Bank-
supported projects and confirmed by other analytical work on the sector. It also requires 
additional financial commitments from internal and external sources to help rescue the crumbling 
national road network. The project is a reform-laden operation aimed at addressing some of the 
deficiencies of the transport system while bridging investment needs and promoting local 
employment through road improvement works. It would have the following four components:  
 
Component 1: Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance (US$ 45 million) 
Page  2
3. 
This component would absorb about 75% of project resources and would support the 
Government’s overarching objective of export development by strengthening national sections of 
the two international road corridors leading to the ports of Mombassa in Kenya and Dar-Es-
Salaam in Tanzania. It would also promote employment for local entrepreneurs and the rural 
poor by outsourcing road maintenance to them. The extent of works will be confirmed during 
preparation based on the outcome of feasibility studies currently financed by the Japanese PHRD 
grant. This component would comprise the following sub-components:  
 
4. 
(a) International Trunk Road Rehabilitation: 
This sub-component would finance 
rehabilitation works and the supervision of such works on highly damaged sections to be 
identified from one or more of the following international trunk links:  (i) the 88 km Kigali-
Ruhengeri road toward the DRC; (ii) the 80 km link on the Northern Corridor toward the 
Ugandan boarder; (iii) the 92 km portion from Kayonza to Rusumo on the Central Corridor to 
Tanzania; and the 154 km link toward Burundi and DRC from Butare to Cyangugu.
6
It would 
also finance the purchase of vehicles for the supervision of the works.   
 
5. 
(b) Feeder Road Rehabilitation: 
The sub-component would finance rehabilitation works 
and the supervision of such works on --- km of earth roads linking key agricultural production 
centers and factories in the vicinity of the trunk roads to be rehabilitated. These roads will be 
identified during project preparation and design studies for works on them conducted in the first 
year of the project. It would also finance the purchase of vehicles for the supervision of the 
works.   
 
6. 
(c) Routine Road Maintenance
:
The sub-component would finance routine maintenance 
works and the supervision of such works on --- km of the asphalted road network and –- km of 
earth roads. Its implementation would offer the opportunity to introduce new approaches 
including the use of  multi-year result-based contracts and labor-intensive methods, involving 
SMEs and local community associations. Details and conditions of involvement will be defined 
during project preparation based on consultations to be conducted with the help of local NGOs. It 
would also finance the purchase of road maintenance kits, motor cycles and bicycles for 
community associations and supervisors involved in labor-intensive road maintenance.  
 
Component 2: Institutional Development Support (US$ 11 million): 
 
7. 
This component would strengthen the management, monitoring and evaluation capacity 
of road institutions as a means of improving efficiency and accountability in the execution of 
programs and resource management. It would equally help increase sector responsiveness to the 
macroeconomic framework supported by the PRSP, the MTEF and NIS, by designing and 
implementing road investment and programming models to guide decisions in the sector. It 
would include the following sub-components: 
 
6
These roads have been chosen on the basis of a number of considerations, including (i) their strategic importance 
to the national economy; (ii) the age of the roads, the extent of damage, and risks of international traffic disruption 
recorded in recent road assessments sponsored by the European Union and confirmed during the identification 
mission; (iv) the Government’s priority needs as articulated in the PRSP and reaffirmed during the identification 
mission; and (v) the need to establish synergy with other development partners 
 
Page  3
8. 
(a) Road institutional reforms:
 
It would include
 
international and local technical 
assistance to (i) help complete the restructuring of the new road agency and the Road 
Maintenance Fund (RMF), including the preparation of appropriate legislation and operational 
procedures for the two agencies; and (ii) prepare and oversee the implementation of a strategic 
framework and an action plan to guide cost-effective road maintenance in the context of 
Rwanda’s ongoing decentralization process.   
 
9. 
(b) Sector Planning
:
This sub-component would finance international and local technical 
assistance to help build statistical databases, planning and M&E capacity within the new road 
agency and the new transport planning unit of MININFRA. In this regard, it would help (i) 
prepare Road Investment and Programming (RIP) models to serve as the basis for road 
development and financing decisions; (ii) conduct economic, environmental, financial, legal and 
technical analytical work in support of the RIP models; (iii) provide training to road agency staff 
in planning, monitoring and evaluation, including in the mastery of the RIP models and other 
planning tools.  It would also finance the purchase of computer hardware and software and  
vehicles for program planning, monitoring and implementation oversight; 
 
10. 
(c) Sector Management:
 This sub-component would finance international and local 
consultants to (i) prepare performance-based contracts for the new road agency, the RMF, the 
vehicle inspection center, and the airport management agency, as a means of promoting 
efficiency  and good governance in the sector; (ii) provide training to local entrepreneurs in bid 
preparation, contract management and work execution; (iii)  provide training to community 
associations in labor-intensive methods related to routine road maintenance; (iv) provide training 
to sector staff on road management and works supervision techniques; (iv) provide assistance to 
road agencies in environmental management, including advice on how best to collaborate with 
Rwanda Environmental Management Agency (REMA).    
 
11. 
(d) Road safety Management:
 This sub-component would complete and reinforce road 
safety dispositions started under the previous Bank-assisted project, including (i) the installation 
of weigh bridges on major trunks of the asphalted road network, (ii) the restructuring of the 
vehicle inspection center, (iii) the establishment of an accident database within the department of 
transport; and (iv) the management of traffic lights in the capital city of Kigali. It would also 
finance the purchase of road safety equipment. Details about this component will be clarified 
during project preparation in light with the regional EAC Trade and Transport Project being 
prepared concurrently with this project
7
.
Component 3: Project Implementation Support 
 
(US$ 4 million) 
12. 
The component would help reduce the deficit in human and financial absorption capacity 
recognized in the public administration of the transport sector, in order to ensure successful 
implementation of the project. Details of the component will be clarified during project 
preparation. It would include the following sub-components: 
 
7
As part of Rwanda’s integration in the sub-region, it is expected that the regional project would support all aspects 
of transport reforms including  key transport and road safety legislations, and accompanying structural reforms. 
Details will be clarified during the preparation of this project and the regional project.   
 
Page  4
13.
 
(a) Project Implementation Oversight.
.
This sub-component would finance (i) 
international and local technical assistance for project financial and technical audits; (ii) project 
management support; (iii) the training of staff involved in project implementation; (ii) the 
purchase of office equipment for agencies involved in project implementation.  
 
14. 
(b)
 
Project Management:
 This component would finance (i) local and international 
technical assistance to support project management, including the preparation of project baseline 
data and the Borrower’s contribution to the ICR; (ii) salaries of project management staff; (iii) 
operational costs relating to project implementation; and (iii) computer hardware and software 
for project management; and (v) vehicles for logistical support to project management.
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
15. 
Road works under the road component would be located on major highways across the 
country and the rest of the project would be within the central agencies in the capital city of 
Kigali 
 
Summary of Project Components and Sub-components 
Component Cost 
(US$m) 
Implementing Agency 
Road Component 
45 
Road Agency 
International Trunk Road Rehabilitation 
28 
 
Feeder Roads Rehabilitation 
  7 
 
Routine Road Maintenance 
10 
 
Institutional Development Support 
11 
MININFRA’s Planning 
Unit   
Sector Reforms 
1.5 
 
Sector Planning 
5 
 
Sector Management 
2 
 
Road Safety Management 
2.5 
 
Project Implementation Support 
4 
Project Unit 
Project Implementation Oversight 
2 
 
Project Management 
2 
 
Total Project Cost 
60 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
16. 
Environment and Social Regulatory Framework
:
There are few existing laws and 
decrees relating to environmental matters, such as the Ministerial Order No. 2 of 9/24/2001 
relating to the exploitation and management of wetlands in Rwanda. There are also laws on the 
organization of forests and on land protection, conservation and use. The key legislative 
framework is the proposed Environment Management and Protection Act (EMPA). This act 
though in draft, has been recently reviewed by parliament. It was supposed to have been signed 
by the president in June 2004. The act sets out the general legal framework for environmental 
protection and management in Rwanda. Article 69/Chapter 4 states that every project shall be 
subjected to prior EIA before granting it official approval. 
 
Page  5
17. 
There are no specific sectoral policies or guidelines on the environment with regards to 
the transport sector in the country and government ministries are not familiar with Bank’s 
safeguards policies. 
 
18. 
The Rwanda Environmental Protection Authority (REMA) is a recently created institution 
endowed with legal, financial autonomy and executive powers. The Director General has just 
been appointed and the recruitment for other staff positions has reached advanced stage. REMA 
will be responsible for the application of the EMPA law. 
 
19. 
On the social side, there is existing regulation on expropriation (enacted in 1996). 
Presently, a new law has almost been passed by Parliament. The land department of the ministry 
of environment is in charge of implementing expropriation and compensation matters in the 
country. 
20.
 
Sectoral Capacity to handle Safeguards issues
:
The capacity of the ministry of 
environment to handle safeguards matters is VERY weak. There are no capability to undertake 
EIA or any other environmental assessment instrument study. There is need for training and 
institutional strengthening in this ministry; especially in the areas of environmental assessments, 
environmental laws and policies, satellite remote sensing and geographic information systems 
(GIS). 
21. 
A new environmental unit will be established within MININFRA before project 
effectiveness as part of the institutional reforms targeted by this project. Its staff will receive 
targeted training early enough to meet the first project demands. In addition to overseeing the 
implementation of the ESMP for the project, the unit’s key role would be coordinating cross-
sectoral environmental and social issues and ensuring their incorporation in the environmental 
assessment process. The institutional capacity of the borrower will further be assessed during 
project preparation and ensuing measures included in the ESMP. 
The proposed environmental 
category is B.
 The category will be reviewed based on the actual scope of the project. 
 
22. 
An ESMP will be prepared by internationally recruited consultants before appraisal, 
based on environmental and social impact  assessments to be conducted as part of road design 
studies (see time table in III. C below). A new environmental unit will be established within 
MININFRA as part of the institutional reforms targeted by this project.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X ] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
This SGP is triggered because rehabilitation works could affect trees and 
vegetation aligning the roads to be rehabilitated. 
[
X] 
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[X ] 
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
Involuntary resettlement is not expected but this OP is triggered because 
Page  6
environmental and social safeguard studies are not yet completed. 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[
]
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
[
]
A
[X] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
23. 
The proposed activities are on road rehabilitation and maintenance. The project will not 
be financing the construction of new roads or the up-grading of roads. There will be little or no 
impact on erosion, stability of slopes or sedimentation/siltation of rivers. Instead, the 
rehabilitation of the roads will decrease the erosion rate along the roads compared to existing 
conditions.  
 
24. 
Rehabilitation/Maintenance works will not cause effects on the water resources and 
water quality along the road routes. Besides, along the roads visited, the perennial rivers, which 
can be used during project activities, are very few and far apart. 
 
25. 
The impact on natural vegetation associated with operating the quarry and borrow 
areas, and constructing detour and access road to the borrow material pits and quarry sites, will 
not be applicable here - - because there will be use of only existing borrow/quarry sites. 
 
26. 
There are important wildlife and wildlife habitat reported to exists in the project areas, 
but, the project components will not involve any encroachment into known and designated 
ecologically sensitive areas, parks and nature reserves; such as, the national park at Nyungwe 
(along Butare 
–
Cyangugu road) and Volcanoes national park at Ruhengeri. 
 
27. 
The potential impacts of the project activities upon cultural, religious and historical sites 
were assessed during the field trips and there are no sites to be directly impacted by road 
rehabilitation and/or maintenance works. 
 
28. 
There will be no temporary or permanent loss of agricultural or grazing lands. In 
addition, the project activities are not going to trigger involuntary resettlement - - by the taking 
of land. The roads ROWs were cleared and disturbed during construction of existing roads some 
20 – 30 years ago. Therefore, the project components will not involve resettlement/displacements 
of persons. However, existing resettlement policy in Rwanda will be reviewed to ensure that it 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  7
could accommodate compensations in the remote event that farmland around project sites was 
affected by road works.  
 
29. 
The indigenous people in one of the project areas are the Twas. The project activities will 
not have any impact on them. The road was built more than a decade ago. Thus, new 
rehabilitation/maintenance works, will not change their culture or their present socio-economic 
patterns 
 
30. 
Since the proposed roads have existed for years, the works will not have any radical 
impacts on women. Instead, rehabilitated/maintained roads with better shoulders and drainage 
and without dust will make it easier, more comfortable and safer for the rural people to use the 
roads as pedestrians and/or for local transportation of goods/products. All local people will 
benefit, most especially women, who are the main users of the roads as pedestrians. 
 
31. 
Social acceptability of the project will be very high. Both the people living by the road 
and those using the road for transportation/transitory traffic would see the roads to be 
rehabilitated and/or maintained to be vital and beneficial to their communities, local business 
and national economy.  
 
32. 
Field visits revealed that landslides/rockslides from the top of the hills will remain a 
potential problem as a result of the geo-technical nature of the areas through which the roads 
pass. Emphasis should be on timely post-project maintenance activities. 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared. 
April 2005 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS. 
N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The procurement process started in August 2004 and studies will commence in November 2004 
and be completed by July 2005.  
 
The project has been transferred to the sector unit for safeguard review and clearance.  The 
Task team and the Sector Manager accept the safeguard responsibility for this project from now 
onward. 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  8
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Kingson Khan Apara 
  Jan.  20, 2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Thomas E. Walton 
Feb. 22, 2005 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Alain Labeau  
Oct.  29, 2004 
Comments 
