Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1930 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11/28/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Rwanda 
Project ID: P098926 
Project Name: eRwanda Project 
Task Team Leader: Guenter Heidenhof 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 19, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: July 25, 2006 
Managing Unit: AFTPR 
Lending Instrument: Technical Assistance 
Loan 
Sector: General information and communications sector (50%);General public 
administration sector (50%) 
Theme: Other public sector governance (P);Public expenditure, financial management 
and procurement (S);Technology diffusion (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
10.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
30.00
30.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
Key objective of the project is to (i) improve the efficiency and effectiveness of government 
operations, and to (ii) enhance citizen's service delivery systems, in particular in rural areas. The 
project will support:  
 
.
Activities to modernize key government internal systems and processes, namely, a) 
improvement of the GoR public financial management system to provide timely and accurate 
information to support better government decision making; and b) extension of and improvement 
in the physical infrastructure to support effective delivery of such applications.  
 
.
Specific interventions to improve services for citizens and the private sector, namely a) 
support to primary health care and education services as well as in land registration services 
through business process reengineering and the use of modern technology, b) provision of access 
points (kiosks) distributed throughout Rwanda which will provide access to information and 
(potentially) to government services, and c) formation of public private partnerships (PPPs) to 
strengthen the private sector to complement public sector service delivery.  
Page  2
The intended outcomes of the project are an engaged citizenry with access to better services 
from improved government systems. Beneficiaries include the government (due to decreased 
costs for service delivery, better transparency), the private sector (which will have greater 
business opportunities), and citizens, particularly those living in rural areas and those 
underserved by current service delivery schemes or government information systems.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
The proposed project components include:  
 
1. 
Strengthening of government effectiveness.  
 
This component aims at complementing ongoing activities under other projects, in particular 
the Government's Multi Sector Capacity Building Program and its supporting donor 
interventions, notably the Bank's Public Sector Capacity Building Project. Activities to be 
financed under this component will be determined in collaboration with the government and 
would be selected from a menu of options which could include the modernization of key 
government internal systems and processes, namely, financial and procurement management, 
human resources and payroll, and the back end databases which support them. Investment will be 
based on a phased and prioritized strategy that would first perform business process 
reengineering to streamline existing processes, and pilot applications before rolling them out to 
the broader government machinery. The component will include institutional strengthening and 
capacity building.  
 
This component will also support development of a common IT architecture framework in 
accordance with the National ICT policy so that any new applications to be developed will be 
fully integrated with government standards. In order for government officials to select, design 
and implement ICT programs and participate in e-government activities, additional capacity 
building opportunities will be provided to them.  
 
2. 
Service delivery improvement for citizens and the private sector.  
 
This component intends to identify and modernize the most crucial service delivery 
applications. Investment will be based on a phased and prioritized strategy that would first 
perform business process reengineering to streamline the processes, pilot some applications to 
certain locations through the use of public access kiosks, then scale up the delivery of key e-
government services to additional locations. The pilot applications will be determined in 
collaboration with the relevant stakeholders and selected from a menu of options which could 
include the national ID card system, registration for life cycle events (birth, marriage, death 
certificates), business and property registration services, cadastre management, and social 
delivery services such as in health, education, agriculture, etc. This component will include 
institutional strengthening and capacity building at the national and sub-national levels.  
 
This component will also mobilize local communities to run the access points (kiosks) and to 
develop the content for the various stakeholder groups.  Business models for the kiosks (public, 
private or PPP) and the physical locations, equipping and staffing of them will be addressed 
under this component as well as change management interventions to ensure acceptance and 
usage of these access points by the target population. These kiosks will also serve as a platform 
Page  3
to make available information to the citizenry. Instructional videoclips in Kinyarwanda, French, 
and English could form the basis of local training and acceptance, and also provide a mechanism 
for the delivery of services to the illiterate (i.e., through icons instead of texted materials). 
Particular attention will be paid to those groups who do not have sufficient access to public 
services and information, namely women and youth groups, farmers and the uneducated rural 
poor.  
 
3. 
Strengthening of ICT infrastructure  
 
This component intends to complement ongoing reforms of the telecommunications and energy 
sectors to create an overall enabling environment and increase the reach of the network for better 
access to information/transaction capability for citizens and businesses. The component will 
focus both on the central utility functions and on the provision of connections for the 'last mile' to 
the kiosks. The component will (i) strengthen the legal, institutional and regulatory environment 
by (a) finalizing or developing relevant policies, regulations and procedures, (b) providing 
technical assistance to RURA to ensure an efficient, non discriminatory and open regulatory 
regime and management of the Universal Access Fund, (c) developing an open access regime for 
infrastructure sharing; and (ii) facilitate the implementation of a national infrastructure network 
in collaboration with regional infrastructure initiatives by (a) establishing a network database and 
GIS land record system to map networks and monitor roll out implementation plan and (b) 
facilitating the development of a national backbone network and cross border connectivity.  
 
4. 
Private sector development  
 
This component intends to strengthen the legal and regulatory framework for IT private sector 
development (PSD) and the establishment of public-private partnerships to improve the private 
sector's capacity to undertake the development of the applications, the strengthening of the 
infrastructure, and the running of the kiosks. To accomplish this, the project will build 
institutional capacity for PSD through active collaboration and strengthening of the Private 
Sector Federation and creation of a small business association to develop the IT private sector, as 
well as encourage foreign direct investment and venture capital funds to help entrepreneurs. The 
IT private sector will be given assistance so that they may qualify as vendors to participate in the 
multi-faceted project activities which will be generated by e-government, including extension of 
and provision of infrastructure, training, creation of applications and websites, running the 
kiosks, and knowledge sharing activities.  
 
5. 
Project Management  
 
This component will strengthen the institutional capacity within Rwanda to implement the 
project. Support will in particular be provided to RITA (Rwanda Information Technology 
Authority) which is charged with the technical implementation of the NICI plans and with 
eRwanda, and to HIDA which is charged with capacity building coordination within the Multi 
Sector Capacity Building Program. Both institutions need strengthening in terms of staff, 
technical assistance, logistics, and improved equipment to handle the management of the project.   
 
D.  Project location (if known) 
Kigali, Gitarama, Ruhengheri, Kibuye - Rwanda  
 
This is a national program that will focus on modernizing key government internal systems and 
processes, and improvement in related physical infrastructure.   
Page  4
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
N/A   
 
F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Thomas E. Walton (AFTSD) 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X  
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X  
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X  
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X  
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X  
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
C
-
Not Required 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  01/20/2006 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
No safeguard reporting instruments are required.  
 
The SMU agrees to accept the transfer of responsibility for the remaining required 
safeguards process.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Guenter Heidenhof 
11/23/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Thomas E. Walton 
11/28/2005 
Comments:  No SGP specialist required if project remains as defined in PCN and ISDS.  Later, should 
project involve land acquisition, construction, or potential environmental or social impacts, consult 
ASPEN. 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Helga W. Muller 
11/23/2005 
Comments:   
