                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Initial)

Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19/02/2004
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
Country: SENEGAL                                             Project ID: P086480
                                                             Global Supplemental ID: P058367
Project: Integrated Coastal and Marine Resource              Task Team Leader: Yves Andre Prevost
Management
Authorized to Appraise Date: April 15, 2004                  IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: June 24, 2004                                 IDA Amount ($m): 10.00
                                                             Global Supplemental Amount ($m): 5.00
Managing Unit: AFTS4                                         Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)           (100%)
Status: Lending                                              Theme: Other environment and natural resources
                                                             management (P); Biodiversity (S)

I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
  The development objective of the GIRMaC (Gestion intégrée des ressources marines et côtières) is to
  support efforts by the Government of the Senegal (GoS) and local communities to sustainably manage
  coastal and marine resources. Sustainable management includes responsible exploitation of resources
  combined with protection of the ecosystems and ecological processes critical for their replenishment.

  The objective is to be achieved through three components:

        i. Development of sustainable fisheries
       ii. Conservation of critical habitats and species
       iii. Program Management, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and communication


2. Global objective: (see Annex 1)

  The global objective of the Project is to secure the conservation and management of Senegal's coastal
  and marine ecosystems, which are globally significant and vital to the sustained livelihoods of coastal
  communities.

  Senegal includes over 700 km of coastline just South of the Sahara desert. Senegal's transitional
  position makes the country's biological diversity significant both regionally and globally. It represents
  the northern limit of distribution for a large number of tropical species of coastal and marine animals
  and plants. It also provides critical resting and wintering areas for several Palearctic migrant birds.

  The GEF would support efforts by the Department of National Parks to sustainably manage the
  network of protected areas along the coast using an ecosystem approach.


I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
  The project will comprise three components:

           1.  Development of sustainable fisheries
           2.  Conservation of critical habitats and species
           3.  Program Management, including monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and communication

                                                      2
                                                                                                        ISDS



  The estimated cost of the program is US$17 million, of which IDA would fund US$10 million, GEF
  would fund US$5 million, and the Government of Senegal would fund US$ 2 million.


Project Component 1: Development of Sustainable Fisheries (US$ 8.1 million)

  The prupose of this component is to increase the sustainability of fisheries through the use of area-based
  comanagement. The component would include 5 sub-components.


                   Table 5. Preliminary Project Costs of Component 1 (US$ 8.1 million)


                      Project Sub-component                   Investment Operational TA/Training
                                                                 Costs         Costs
          1.1 Area-Based Co-management
                * Saloum River Delta                              0.8           0.8          0.4
                * Cap Vert Peninsula                              0.4           0.4          0.2
                * Senegal River Delta                             0.7           0.6          0.2
          1.2 Fisheries Management Plans                          0.2           0.6          0.2
          1.3 Strengthening the Ministry of Fisheries             0.3           0.3          0.6
          1.4 Evaluation of Fish Resources                        1.0                        0.2
          1.5 Fisheries Management Fund                                                      0.2

         TOTAL                                                    3.4           2.7          2.0



Sub-Component 1.1: Area-based co-management of fisheries (US$4.5 million)

  The objective of the sub-component is for the majority of local fisheries to be managed through
  Territorial User Rights Fisheries (TURFs) by the end of the Project within three pilot areas: i) the
  Saloum Biosphere Reserve, ii) the area of the future Senegal River Delta Biosphere Reserve, and iii) the
  Cap Vert Peninsula. The TURFs in the Cap Vert peninsula would be linked to exiting protected areas.

  The TURFs may target a single species, or more often a group of species that are caught by similar
  vessels and gear. Most TURFs would cover a clearly delineated area. However, TURFs dealing with
  migrating species may extend over large areas and would require close cooperation between different
  fishing communities. Fish resources allocated to industrial fisheries would be managed according to a
  different rights-based management system. Fish captures by industrial vessels would be prohibited
  within established TURFs.

  The TURFs would bring a greater measure of local decision-making, within a framework of fisheries
  management at the national level. Each TURF would be managed by a TURF Committee comprising
  locally selected fishermen and elders.

  The Ministry of Fisheries (MoF) would prepare prior to Project effectiveness a decree officializing
  TURF Committees and indicating their objectives. These objectives could include: a) resolving
  conflicts, notably the allocation of available quantities of fish among fishermen in a TURF area, b)
  preparing and implementing fisheries management plans, c) optimizing income from the sale, processing
  and marketing of fish products, and d) ensuring the long-term sustainability of fish resources.

  The Project would provide resources to the MoF to support the establishment of TURFs by fielding

                                                      3
                                                                                                        ISDS


qualified TURF facilitators and supporting access to services required for TURF operation. The
facilitators would: i) inform fisher communities about the TURF process and objectives, by presenting
demonstration videos or by organizing visits to existing area-based co-management initiatives, ii)
explain the link between the TURF process, the management of ecosystems (Component 2) and the
reconversion initiative (Component 3), iii) aid communities in identifying and delineating possible
TURFs, using rapid appraisal tools, iv) help communities in registering TURF Committees as GIEs
(Groupement d'intérêt économique), v) assist communities in establishing a list of user rights within the
TURF, vi) draft a framework agreement between each TURF Committee and the MoF, as well as
yearly performance plans, vii) develop a participatory fish stock evaluation program for TURF target
species, viii) help the TURF Committee develop a Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS) Plan,
ix) monitor TURF implementation and report to the MoF. As a rule of thumb, each facilitator would
cover no more than 3 fishing communities. The facilitators would reside in the communities and their
offices would also serve as information centers for the TURF Committees.

Each framework TURF agreement would spell out the obligations of the MoF and the TURF
Committee, including:

     a) User Rights. The MoF would concede exclusive access rights to target fish species within the
         TURF area to registered TURF members. TURF boundaries would be finalized in
         collaboration with the Centre de Recherches Océanographiques de Dakar-Thiaroye (CRODT).
         The MoF would provide permanent marker buoys to indicate TURF boundaries. The TURF
         Committee would establish a register of users allowed to fish within the TURF, using an
         established set of principles that take into account equity, past activity and customary tenurial
         claims. The register would also indicate the type of vessel and gear for each user. Users would
         marks their vessels to facilitate recognition. TURF Committees would set the conditions that
         fishermen originating from outside the local community would have to meet to fish within the
         TURF.
     b) TURF Management Plan. The TURF Committee would prepare a plan for the sustainable
         management of the TURF that would set a target for the fishery. It plan would include
         measures to reduce fishing effort to allow fish stocks to reach and stay on target, including
         limits on the number of vessels, the type of gear, fishing sites, or fishing season.
     c) Resource Assessment. The MoF fisheries would contract CRODT to analyze data collected on
         target species by TURF members through the participatory fish stock evaluation program, and
         to conduct any further investigation required to determine the abundance and trend of these
         species, as required for TURF management. The results of these analysis and investigations
         would be shared with the TURF Committee.
     d) Monitoring, Control and Surveillance (MCS). The TURF Committee would develop a
         Monitoring, Control and Surveillance Plan to ensure fulfillment of the TURF management
         objectives. MCS measures may include the monitoring of fish landings, the surveillance of the
         TURF area by fishermen, patrols by law enforcement officers, the application of bylaws
         developed by the TURF Committee, and procedures to call on formal MCS capacity when
         required (for example when an industrial vessel intrudes on the TURF).
     e) Accompanying Measures. The MoF would support the purchase of communication equipment
         and small boats, technical assistance and training, and operating expenses required for the
         establishment of the TURF, and for TURF operations.

Each TURF Committee would enter into annual performance contract with MoF that would: i) set the
aggregate allowable catch for target species, and ii) specify how the aggregate catch is to be shared
amongst registered users, iii) indicate the management measures to be taken to ensure that the catch
does not exceed the aggregate allowable amount. The performance contract would also include a

                                                       4
                                                                                                          ISDS


  budget. Following TURF startup, the signature of such a contract would be a trigger for the release of
  funds to the TURF Committee.

  The Project would test the TURF approach with 4 fishing communities during the first year (2 in the
  Saloum Delta and 2 in the Cap Vert Peninsula). The Project would then commission an independent
  study to assess the effectiveness and feasibility of the TURF concept, and recommend adjustments to
  the TURF design and implementation procedures in light of socio-cultural and economic conditions in
  different parts of the coast. Following the study, the number of intervention sites would be increased to
  12. The number of intervention sites would again be increased following the mid-term review, to cover
  at least 50% of fisheries in the three pilot areas.


Sub-Component 1.2: Fisheries Management Plans (US$1.0 million)

  The proposed area-based co-management system would require a process at the national level to
  allocate fish resources to the different TURFs for each type of fisheries. The 1998 Fisheries Law
  empowers the Minister to commission the preparation of fisheries management plans. The project
  would support the preparation by the Direction des Pêches Maritimes (DPM) of management plans for
  5 key fisheries, in cooperation with CRODT. The list of key fisheries will be agreed with Government
  prior to Project Appraisal.

  The Project would provide resources to the MoF to ensure that the Conseil National Consultatif des
  Pêches Maritimes (CNCPM) functions as the negotiation forum amongst stakeholders (including local
  fisheries committees such as TURF committees) for each of the 5 key fisheries, regarding the total
  allowable catch and fishing effort, necessary reductions in fishing capacity, and the nature of
  compensation for fishermen having to leave the sector. Resources would include operating expenses,
  secretariat services, specialized studies, startup and targeted TA, and training.


Sub-Component 1.3: Strengthening of the Ministry of Fisheries (US$1.2 million)

  The proposed area-based comanagement system would also require capacity within the Ministry of
  Fisheries. The Project would support the establishment of a Cellule opérationnelle de mise en oeuvre
  du Projet (COMO) within the MoF to: i) oversee the implementation of TURFs, including studies on the
  effectiveness of TURF management and the functioning of the local MCS systems, ii) help the MoF
  adjust to the area-based co-management system, iii) provide support for the preparation and negotiation
  of international fisheries agreements. The extent of this support will be finalized prior to Project
  appraisal.

  The MoF will also determine prior to appraisal: i) what measures (training, recruitment) are required to
  ensure that staff involved in the establishment and operation of TURFs have the professional skills and
  experience required to implement the Project, ii) whether these staff will be directly responsible to the
  functional directorates in MoF (DPM, Direction de la Protection et de la Surveillance des Pêches:
  DPSP) or through the regional directorates.


Sub-Component 1.4: Evaluation of Fish Resources (US$1.2 million)

  The Project would provide resources to the MoF to contract CRODT to support the TURF management
  system, including the baseline assessments of key fish stocks, and the development of appropriate
  procedures to monitor and assess fish stocks. This sub-component would complement local research
  activities funded through Sub-component 1.1.

  CRODT will be asked to prepare a proposal during project preparation to support the implementation

                                                         5
                                                                                                          ISDS


  of the TURF system, preferably with the support of FAO or another donor. CRODT would coordinate
  rather than execute every individual research activities, entering into cooperation agreements or
  arrangements for "contract" research with foreign research organizations, as well as local and foreign
  scientists. Research planning would fully incorporate the views of stakeholders, and reflect the research
  priorities defined at the national level in the fisheries management plans.


Sub-Component 1.5: Fisheries Management Fund (US$0.2 million)

  The long-term sustainability of the TURF system would require sustainable funding for fisheries
  management, research and MCS activities. Following the preparation of the Public Expenditure
  Review for the fisheries sector during Project preparation, the Project would support a follow up study
  that would assess the political, economic and institutional viability of establishing an independent
  source of funding for fisheries management, research and MCS activities at the local and national level.
  The study would assess the feasibility of mixed private/public funding of fisheries management, identify
  the instruments required to collect private and public support; the most suitable institutional structure of
  such fund, and how it should plan and execute its operations. The study would also evaluate the
  feasibility of using the fund as a disbursement channel for project funds in the last two years of Project
  implementation .

  The Fund would most likely support the operations of the TURFs, MCS surveillance committees
  groups, Fisheries Councils, specific routine research activities that are essential for stock assessment
  and resources management purposes, and clearly defined national MCS activities. It would cover both
  operational budgets as well as capital investments.

  If the study concludes for establishing such a Fund is feasible, the Project would support its creation
  with a combination of TA and training.


Project Component 2: Conservation of Critical Habitats and Species (US$ 7.7 million)

  The purpose of this component is to improve the long-term management of Senegal's network of coastal
  protected areas. This would be done by: i) developing and implementing management plans of these
  areas, according to an ecosystem approach, and ii) restructuring the biodiversity management
  framework, to overcome the constraints that have limited the effective management of protected areas.

Sub-Component 2.1: Managing ecosystems (US$ 6.0 million)

  The Project would provide support to update, prepare, and implement management plans for 3 pilot
  sites: the Saloum Delta Biosphere Reserve, the proposed Senegal River Delta Biosphere Reserve, and
  the Cap Vert peninsula. Following is a preliminary proposal that will be updated once the results of the
  Biodiversity Baseline Study become available in January 2004. Most particularly, the list of
  on-the-ground activities and planned investments will be finalized prior to appraisal.

  Preparation of each plan would be supervized by a management committee for each site including the
  conservateurs of the Protected areas within the proposed site, regional MoF officials, the TURF
  facilitators mentioned in Component 1.1, and representatives of the local communities. The Direction
  des Parcs Nationaux (DPN) would competitively select consultants to lead the preparation of the
  management plans, according to ToRs approved by the management committee. The consultants would
  then prepare the plans in consultation with local stakeholders. The management committees would
  review the draft plans and approve the final version.

  The plans would incorporate the ecosystem approach, as a model of sustainable economic use and

                                                        6
                                                                                                            ISDS


   biodiversity conservation. They would bring together existing initiatives in each of the sites, and build
   upon their achievements. The plans would include: i) the rehabilitation and maintenance of park
   infrastructure, ii) comanagement of resources to provide environmentally sustainable sources of revenue
   for the communities living in and around protected areas, iii) participatory assessments and monitoring
   of biodiversity, including turtle nesting sites and breeding colonies of seabirds, iv) participatory
   surveillance and enforcement, v) measures to involve communities in providing services to tourists, vi)
   capacity and awareness building for local stakeholders, and vii) a system to monitor and evaluate
   performance and impact during implementation. The management plans would also include
   transboundary cooperation with the Niumi National Park in The Gambia, in the case of the Saloum
   Delta, and with the Diawling National Park in Mauritania, in the case of the Senegal River Delta.

   The management plan for the Saloum delta would update and implement a plan prepared in 2000 by
   IUCN for the Saloum Biosphere reserve. The management committee for the Saloum River delta would
   bring together the numerous initiatives in the Saloum River delta to increase coherence,
   complementarities and synergies. The plan would also establish linkages with proposed TURFs in the
   delta (Component 1.1), and include measures to manage fishing activities within the Parc National du
   Delta du Saloum.

   The management plan for the Senegal River Delta would consolidate the set of protected areas in the
   Senegal River delta and contribute to the establishment of a proposed biosphere reserve. It would
   specifically help protect breeding sites for sea turtles and sea birds, as well a breeding sites and nursery
   grounds for coastal fish species. The Project would help establish a Zone de Protection Speciale by the
   Ministry of Environment that would freeze land use in the area south of the Saint-Louis to Ross road, to
   avoid further disruption of the ecosystem.

  The management plan for the Cap Vert Peninsula would be a first step towards the creation of the Cap
  Vert Biosphere Reserve, including the Parc National des Îles de la Madeleine. The expected outcome is
  a set of agreements with local fishing communities to participate in the sustainable management of
  biodiversity along the coast of the Cap Vert Peninsula.

  Implementation of the management plans would also be overseen by the management committees for
  each of the pilot sites. The plans would be implemented by DPN staff assigned to the protected areas
  within the pilot sites. Each protected area conservateur would designate one or more community liaison
  officer to work with local communities. Implementation would be accompanied by an awareness
  campaign and regular consultations at the community level.

  The project would also provide complementary support to efforts by WWF, the Oceanium and other
  NGOs to establish Marine Protected Areas and coastal Natural Community Reserves (NCRs). The
  emphasis of this support would be on capacity building for local stakeholders and targeted technical
  assistance to help establish the protected areas. The extent of this support will be determined prior to
  appraisal following consultations with World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the Océanium.

Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening the Biodiversity Conservation Framework (US$1.7 million)

  Restructuring of the biodiversity management framework would include a thorough revision of the legal
  framework, the institutional framework, the governance mechanism and the establishment of a
  mechanism to ensure long-term sustainability.

Activity 2.2.1: Biodiversity law

  The Project would support the preparation of a Biodiversity and Protected Area Law, setting national
  objectives, incorporating obligations under international conventions and treaties that Senegal has

                                                      7
                                                                                                       ISDS


  signed, defining the different types of protected areas, their objectives and management principles,
  adopting comanagement as a driving principle and setting comanagement guidelines, redefining the
  mandate of DPN, and defining the mandate of the National Biodiversity Committee and its link to the
  DPN. One of the options that would be considered is the establishment of a semi-autonomous
  Biodiversity and Protected Area Agency (ABAP in French), with its own governance mechanism. Such
  an Agency would be permitted to keep the revenue that it collects from tourism, permits or fines.

Activity 2.2.2: Strengthening of DPN

  The project would provide support to the DPN, to reorganize itself according to the new mandate
  spelled out in the Biodiversity and Protected Area Law. Prior to the adoption of the Law, the Project
  would support a reorganization of DPN according to the organogram adopted in 2003. Proposed
  measures would include:

           l training of officers in participatory planning and in communication,
           l technical training in biodiversity management techniques (focusing on coastal biodiversity),
                and monitoring,
           l strengthening of performance monitoring and evaluation,
           l critical equipment.

  Monitoring and evaluation would focus on the performance of management plans for protected areas
  (Biosphere reserves, National Parks, Reserves, Marine Protected Areas and Community Nature
  Reserves) overseen by the DPN. Monitoring and evaluation would also cover all activities within the
  DPN work program. M&E results would provide effective and efficient oversight of DPN's activities to
  its management.

Activity 2.2.3: National Biodiversity Committee and Biodiversity Monitoring

  It is expected that the Biodiversity and Protected Area Law will establish the National Biodiversity
  Committee as the main Governance body regarding biodiversity management in Senegal. The
  Committee would, amongst other functions, ensure a seamless integration between the activities of the
  Project and those of the UNDP funded Projet de Gestion Intégré des Ecosystèmes du Sénégal (PGIES).
  The Project would support the National Biodiversity Committee (NBC) to monitor and evaluate the
  state of biodiversity in Senegal and the performance of the DPN. A study proposed for financing under
  a PHRD grant will define the set of biodiversity indicators that would be regularly monitored. The
  NBC would produce a State of Biodiversity Report with annual updates, and disclose them to the
  general public. The Report would indicate the status and trends of significant or threatened species and
  habitats.

  Biodiversity monitoring would include data gathered by DPN in the protected areas that it manages (see
  above), as well as data collected through targeted studies or programs. The Project would fund certain
  key studies, most particularly regarding sea turtles, but the NBC would also seek the support of the
  conservation community, as well as the assistance of national and foreign researchers through research
  agreements.

  The Project would also support the strengthening of the nascent biodiversity information system, to
  manage data and records resulting from the above mentioned monitoring activities.

Activity 2.2.4: Sustainable financing

  In partnership with WWF, the Project would fund a feasibility study and consultations regarding the
  Establishment of a Trust Fund for Biodiversity Conservation in Senegal. The process would be

                                                         8
                                                                                                          ISDS


   overseen by the National Biodiversity Commiteee. The study would build upon the results of the Public
   Expenditure Review and Economic Analysis of Biodiversity, proposed to be funded under a PHRD
   grant. It would also take into account documents produced by the Groupe de Recherche et d'Appui
   Scientifique et Technique (GRAST), as well as the efforts to establish an International Niokolo Koba
   Foundation in 1993.

Component 3. Program management, M&E and Communication (US$1.2 million)

   3.1 Monitoring and evaluation (US$0.5 million). The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will manage
         aid from donors and co-operating partners, and ensure the efficient flow of project funds to
         implementation cells and procurement activities. The Project will support the development by a
         consultant and implementation by the PCU of a system to monitor and evaluate overall project
         performance and impact, using a set of key indicators. The PCU will be responsible for gathering
         the relevant information from the implementing institutions. The Project will also support periodic
         independent evaluations of program impacts and beneficiary assessments by independent
         consultants at startup, midterm and completion.
   3.2 Coordination (US$0.4 million). The PCU will ensure the operations of the GIRMaC Steering
         Committee and the Advisory Scientific and Technical Committee. It will also support the
         multi-institutional structures necessary in the pilot intervention areas to ensure coordination
         amongst various implementing agencies, including joint sessions between the CNCPM and the
         national Biodiversity Committee. Linkages will be worked out prior to appraisal.
   3.3 Communication (US$0.2 million). The PCU will develop and implement a communication plan
         to ensure the flow of necessary information to and from stakeholders on project activities.
   3.4 Sub-regional Coordination (US$0.1 million). The PCU will coordinate with sub-regional and
         regional structures involved in similar initiatives.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)

   The Project will focus on 3 pilot sites, the Saloum River Delta, the Senegal River Delta and the Cap Vert
   Peninsula. The pilot sites include 4 National Parks, 2 Nature Reserves and a biosphere reserve.


B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)

Comments: The project objective is to improve the sustainability of coastal and marine resources. However,
the Project Team wishes to properly address any potential side effects.


C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on   for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
                                     Policy                                            Triggered
    Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)                           Yes      No     TBD
    Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                                   Yes      No     TBD
    Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                                    Yes      No     TBD
    Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                      Yes      No     TBD
    Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                  Yes      No     TBD
    Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                   Yes      No     TBD
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          Yes      No     TBD
    Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)

                                                        9
                                                                                                          ISDS


                                                                                  Yes    No       TBD
    Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)                  Yes    No       TBD
    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*                       Yes    No       TBD



Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The two main safeguard issues that might be raised by the Project are: i) the impact of creating
   Territorial User Rights Fisheries (TURFs) on migrant fishermen, and ii) the impact of the
   reestablishment of natural floods on local populations in parts of the Senegal River delta.


II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
   There are no cumulative impacts.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
   The main long-term impact would be the reestablishment of natural floods in part of the Senegal River Delta.

II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)
   N/A

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
   Environmental Assessment. An Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out during Project
   preparation. An additional EA would be carried out if the GoS decides to rehabilitate ecological
   functions in the Senegal River delta.

   Natural Habitat. One of the main objectives of the project is to conserve and protect natural habitats in
   three pilot areas. The GEF component is designed specifically to address conservation of these habitats
   and the maintenance of their ecological functions. The Project does not involve the significant
   conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats.

   Cultural Property. The Project should not have an impact on cultural property, but nonetheless
   procedures are included in the Environmental Management Plan to address cultural property issues if
   OP11.03 happened to be triggered during Project implementation.

   Involuntary Resettlement. A process framework has been prepared that deals with restriction to natural
   resources issues in protected areas. In addition, a policy framework has been prepared to address
   impact on people and property in association with project activities that are not in protected areas, such
   as the establishment of TURFs. A Resettlement Action Plan would be prepared if the project goes
   ahead with the rehabilitation of the ecological functions in the Senegal River Delta.


II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   Stakeholders were visited during identification, leading to the establishment of a discussion and
   implementation framework in the Saloum Delta. The PCU will facilitate the establishment of similar

                                                      10
                                                                                                           ISDS


   frameworks for the Cap Vert peninsula and the Senegal River Delta prior to Project appraisal.

   Several stakeholder workshops were also held during project preparation and served to capture
   stakeholder concerns and expectations. The workshops have helped in building ownership and
   partnerships in the development process. The project's final design will incorporate the outcome of
   these workshops when setting priorities within the program. It is believed that stakeholder involvement
   during project preparation has increased the chances of its successfull implementation.

   During project implementation, stakeholder participation will be ensured through the Steering
   Committee and the Scientific and Technical Committee. In addition, stakeholders in each of the pilot
   areas will participate through the local discussion and implementation frameworks.


E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.

[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
         management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
         technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF. ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
         projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
         issues.

F. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:                         Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               12/31/2003        1/20/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           2/18/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            2/18/2004
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive         Not Applicable Not Applicable
Directors (For category A projects)

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                                        Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               12/31/2003        10/2/2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           2/18/2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            2/18/2004

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:                             Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Pest Management Plan:                                                      Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            Not Applicable Not Applicable

Dam Safety Management Plan:                                                Expected          Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               Not Applicable Not Applicable

                                                     11
                                                                                                     ISDS


Date of "in-country" disclosure                                          Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.

Signed and submitted by               Name                                               Date
Task Team Leader:                     Yves Andre Prevost                                 February 18, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:     Nicolas Kotschoubey
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:     Robert A. Robelus
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:     Kristine Ivarsdotter

Approved by:                         Name                                                Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: Thomas E. Walton                                        February 19, 2004
Sector Manager                        Mary A. Barton-Dock                                February 18, 2004
Comments
This looks okay to me. Cleared -- Mary

