Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/14/2005 
Report No.: 32083
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Serbia and Montenegro 
Project ID:  P084604 
Project Name:   Serbia Danube River Enterprise Pollution Reduction Project  (under the 
BSDP) 
Task Team Leader:  Tijen Arin 
GEF Focal Area: International waters 
Global Supplemental ID:  
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 23, 
2004 
Estimated Board Date: May 12, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSSD 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%);Agro-industry 
(30%);Central government administration (30%) 
Theme:  Pollution management and environmental health (P);Environmental policies and 
institutions (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
9.02 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.60 
 LOCAL 
COMMUNITIES 
8.46 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
0.13 
 
SWEDEN: SWEDISH INTL. DEV. COOPERATION AGENCY (SIDA)  3.93
13.12 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The development objective of the project is to increase the use of environmentally 
friendly practices among eligible enterprises and thereby reduce nutrient pollution of the 
Danube River.  The global environment objective is to demonstrate measures for 
reducing reduce nutrient pollution of the Danube River and the Black Sea.  
 
Progress towards achieving these principal project outcomes will be measured in terms 
of percentage of selected farms and slaughterhouses implementing nutrient and manure 
management plans properly two years after joining the project.  
 
The Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) which will be submitted to the World Bank 
Board of Directors in mid-December emphasizes environmental sustainability as an 
Page  2
important component of economic growth.  It states that "[A]chieving  Goal 2: Creating a 
larger, more dynamic private sector will require progress in a number of difficult areas..  
Fourth, further progress on cleaning up and protecting the environment is necessary to 
ensure quality economic growth over the medium term." .  
 
The project will also fulfill the goals of the relevant GEF Operational Program, OP. 8 
Waterbody-based Operational Program under the GEF International Focal Area:  The 
project will be implemented under the GEF Strategic Partnership on the Danube and 
Black Sea Basin which was established to support the ICPDR and the Black Sea 
Commission in their quest to reducing nutrient pollution in the Danube River and Black 
Sea.  The project will help Serbia reduce its nutrient discharges into the Danube from 
agricultural sources in the long run as they specified in FRY/SAM's Five Year Nutrient 
Reduction Plan submitted to the ICPDR.  As such, the project will serve the program's 
long-term objective  to undertake a series of projects that involve helping groups of 
countries to work collaboratively with the support of implementing agencies in achieving 
changes in sectoral policies and activities so that transboundary environmental concerns 
degrading specific water bodies can be resolved.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Support to Policy and Regulatory Reform  (Total cost: US$ 0.22, of which 
GEF funded: US$ 0.21 million):  
 
The objective of this component is to strengthen the policy and regulatory framework 
that regulates nutrient run-off and discharge from livestock farms and slaughterhouses, in 
line with the European Union Nitrate Directive.  In particular, the project will support (i) 
the development of a Code of Good Agricultural Practices; (ii) a study to identify nitrate 
vulnerable areas in Serbia, (iii) the development of an implementation plan for the Nitrate 
Directive; and (iv) the drafting of a law on fertilizers and fertilization.  
 
Component 2:  Investment in Nutrient Reduction (Total cost: US$ 17.90 million, of 
which GEF funded: US$ 7.09 million)  
 
The objective of this component is to demonstrate cost-effective methods by livestock 
farms and slaughterhouses to reduce nutrient run-off and discharge into the Danube River 
and its tributaries; and to improve agricultural advisory service capacity to extend 
knowledge on these technologies.  The project will support a) investments in manure 
management in livestock farms; b) investments in slaughterhouse animal waste 
management; c) the establishment of a Training and Information Center (TIC) on proper 
nutrient, manure and slaughterhouse waste management; and d) local advisory units to 
raise awareness among farmers and slaughterhouses on proper nutrient / manure and 
animal waste management and assist enterprises participating in the project.  
 
Investments in nutrient management in livestock farms will be supported through partial 
grants to farms that meet pre-established eligibility and selection criteria.  The 
investments will mainly consist of the establishment of a farm nutrient management plan 
(NMP), construction of proper manure storage facilities and the purchase of manure 
Page  3
spreading equipment.  Geographical focus will be on four municipalities, Novi Sad, 
Vrbas, .abac and Po.arevac where livestock density and pollution levels are high.  During 
the first year of project implementation, 8 pig and cattle farms of differing sizes will be 
selected for support as demonstration farms.  These will be used to refine practices that 
are most suitable to local conditions, to demonstrate them to other interested farmers, and 
to monitor water and soil quality improvements as a result of the project interventions.  A 
"grant scheme" will be implemented during project years 2-4 whereby a grant of up to 
60% of the total investment cost or US$100,000 will be provided to cover part of the cost 
of investments in approximately 150 livestock farms.  The total investment cost per farm 
may range from US$ 36,000 in small cattle farms to US$ 440,000 in very large pig farms.  
 
Grant support of up to 30% will be offered to approximately 8 large or very large 
slaughterhouses to acquire animal waste separation, treatment and land application 
facilities and equipment.  Only those enterprises that are capable of meeting meat hygiene 
requirements for export to the EU and those that manage risky animal waste , as certified 
by veterinary authorities, will be eligible to grant financing.  There will be no 
geographical limitation to eligibility other than being in the Danube River Basin.  The 
total cost of investment at each site will range from US$ 350,000 - US$ 450,000 
depending on the size of the enterprise. Some enterprises may already have some of the 
equipment or facilities in which case the total investment cost will be lower.  A manure 
management and nutrient management operational manual (OM) has been developed 
providing detailed guidelines for the component.  
 
The project will also fund the establishment of a Training and Information Center (TIC) 
in the Institute for Animal Husbandry (IAH) which will offer training to agricultural 
advisors, farmers, regulators and environmental inspectors on proper manure and 
slaughterhouse animal waste management, to conduct applied research and be a national 
repository of knowledge on evolving EU regulations in this field.  The IAH's own manure 
and slaughterhouse animal waste management facilities will be upgrade so that they can 
be used for demonstration purposes.  An OM detailing investments in activities by the 
TIC has been prepared.  
 
Farmers and slaughterhouses will be offered advice on proper nutrient, manure and 
slaughterhouse waste management through three Local Advisory Units in the project 
region.  These units will also evaluate eligibility of interested farms and assist those that 
are eligible in preparing investment plans and grant applications.  Furthermore, LAUs 
will ensure and verify that project investments in selected farms and slaughterhouses are 
properly implemented.  LAUs will be provided guidance in their activities through a 
detailed OM.  
 
Component 3: Water and Soil Quality Monitoring, Public Awareness Raising and 
Replication Strategy (Total cost: US$ 1.21 million, of which GEF funded: US$ 0.63 
million)  
 
The objective of this component is threefold: To assess the impact of the project 
interventions on water and soil quality in the Serbian Danube Basin; to increase local 
Page  4
communities', enterprises' and policy makers' awareness on water pollution from 
livestock farms and slaughterhouses and of improvements made through the project; to 
devise a strategy to replicate the projects interventions in other parts of the Danube River 
Basin in Serbia and beyond.  This will be achieved through four sub-components: a) 
Capacity Building and Support for Water and Soil Quality Monitoring; b) Public 
Information Campaign (PIC); and c) Replication Strategy Development.  An OM for soil 
and water quality monitoring will be used in the implementation of this component.  
 
Component 4: Project Management and Project Impact Monitoring (Total cost: US$ 
0.60 million, of which GEF funded: US$ 0.54 million)   
 
This component will support project management, including project co-ordination and 
administration, procurement, financial management and all reporting.  All project 
outcome and results monitoring will be carried out under this component as well.  
 
A
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established to implement the project and to 
carry out day-to-day activities of the project under the overall supervision of the 
MAFWM.  The PIU, on behalf of the responsible ministries, will provide for project co-
ordination and administration of staff, procurement, financial management reporting and 
overall project monitoring and evaluation activities for all components.  
 
A
Project Steering Committee will be established to provide overall guidance, advice 
and approval for project activities, while execution will be responsibility of the PIU.  
 
An OM has been prepared detailing the roles and responsibilities of individual 
government agencies, institutions, PSC and the PIU.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project area belongs to the Danube River Basin.  Project activities will focus on four 
municipalities: two 2 in Province of Vojvodina (Novi Sad and Vrbas), and two in Central 
Serbia (Sabac and Po.arevac).  These are mainly low lying areas with high groundwater 
tables. Agricultural production in project areas is well developed. The main problems 
associated with the agricultural production in project areas are: overuse of herbicides and 
pesticides; increased nutrient pollution of groundwater, local canals and soil due to 
nutrient run-off and waste discharge from livestock farms; lack of animal waste 
management practices at livestock farms; lack of animal waste management plans and 
practices in slaughterhouses. The investments envisaged under the project will be made 
on private land by the respective owners. Documentation of land ownership or long-term 
agreements for land use will be one of the qualifying factors in the elegibility selection 
procedure. The investments will not involve any land acquisition, eviction of tenants or 
restrictions of access. The likelihood of the project supporting investments that could 
affect objects of cultural value is considered highly unlikely. Project activities will not 
take place in any sensitive natural habitats.   
 
Page  5
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Only the Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01) applies.  
 
There will likely be no large scale, significant or irreversible impact. Activities could 
possibly include small scale negative impact during construction stage if adequate 
mitigation measures are not applied. The impacts mainly relate to noise, dust and odor, 
although in case of slaughterhouses could also be associated with public and workers 
health and safety, in case of inadequate wastewater /sludge/ waste management 
procedures.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
No negative impacts are envisaged if project activities are carried out as designed. 
Positive long term impacts are envisaged due to introduction of proper slaughterhouse 
animal waste management techniques, waste separation and controlled application of  
manure on soil. Corresponding reduced loads/ discharges of nitrogen and phosphorusinto 
water bodies will have overall positive impact on ground and surface water quality. 
Application of manure and slaughterhouse animal waste on soil in a sustainable fashion 
will reduce need for use of artificial fertilizers and contribute to improvement of soil 
quality.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
In case of deviation from documentation submitted as part of the application the PIU 
should instruct the recipient to undertake corrective measures. In case of non compliance 
disbursement of funds should not be approved.   
 
Page  6
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
PIU will monitor implementation of proposed construction works against the criteria 
spelled out in the EMP. Reimbursement of costs will be carried out after the PIU 
establishes that the construction and purchase of equipment have been carried out 
according to specifications approved as a part of application.  The PIU will have a 
specialist member designated to ensure compliance with the EMP.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders are: farmers; slaughterhouse owners; municipal administration; 
provincial secretariate for environment; provincial secretariate for  agriculture, forestry 
and water management; republic ministry for agriculture, forestry and water 
management; republic ministry of science and environment; NGOs; public at large.  
 
Public consultation and disclosure process:  
 
?
The EMP and the OM Environmental Chapter were disclosed to the publicon  
Tuesday November 16, 2004 through i) an announcement in the nationally circulated 
newspaper Politika, including an invitation to a public consultation meeting on November 
22, 2004; ii) posting on the official website of the Directorate for Environmental 
Protection; iii) mailing to the municipal administrations of the four project areas with a 
request for posting on bulleting boards.  
 
?
A
public meeting was organized in the premises of the Institute for Protection of 
Nature of Serbia on November 22, 2004.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/24/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
11/15/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
11/30/2004 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
Page  7
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Tijen Arin 
08/18/2004 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Nikola Ille 
11/23/2004 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Jan Pakulski 
11/23/2004 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
08/20/2004 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Marjory-Anne Bromhead 
09/07/2004 
Comments:   
