Page  1
Report No. AC952
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
DRAFT CONCEPT STAGE
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:  July 23, 2004
I.
BASIC INFORMATION
A.
Basic Project Data
Country:  Regional
Project ID: P089908
Project Name:  Bay of Bengal Large 
Marine Ecosystem 
Tas
k Team Leader:  Malcolm Jansen
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 2005
Loan/Credit amount ($m.): GEF:10; 
Bilateral Funding 10
Estimated Board Date:  June 2005
Managing Unit:  SASES
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Trust Fund Grant
Sector: Fisherie
s
Themes:  Biodiversity, environmental 
policy/institutions, water resources 
management, pollution management
Safeguard Policies Specialists in Task team: Nagaraja Rao Harshadeep, Lars Lund, 
Other Financing amounts by source:  Participating Governments (
TBD)
B.
Project Objective:
The long
-
term goal to which the project will contribute is to develop a Strategic 
Action Program (SAP) to protect the health of the ecosystem and manage the living 
resources of the Bay of Bengal Large Marine Ecosystem on a
 sustainable basis to 
improve the food and livelihood security of the region's large coastal population. As a 
first step in this process, its objective is to provide a comprehensive framework for 
regional and national action and identify specific actions r
equired to address the priority 
trans
-
boundary problems in the region, including potential investment, technical 
assistance and capacity
-
building interventions, at the national and regional level.  The 
expected outcomes of the project are: (i) an improved 
scientific understanding of the 
major environmental issues and trans
-
boundary problems of the Bay; (ii) improved data 
and information on condition of the resource base; and (iii) a good understanding of the 
root causes of the problems and potential opportu
nities for their resolution.  It is 
anticipated that the SAP would be endorsed by regional bodies such as SAARC and 
ASEAN and adopted by each participating country, as relevant.  Other key outcomes 
would be improved collaboration between the participating 
countries and improved 
capacity within national and regional institutions to manage priority concerns of the Bay. 
Page  2
The proposed project budget is US$20M (GEF
-
US$10M and Bilateral Cofinancing
-
US$10M).
C.
Project Description:
The project would support the fo
llowing activities:
(A) Trans
-
boundary Diagnostic Analysis
:
The TDA would involve: (i) the systematic, 
scientific analysis of the priority environmental issues and trans
-
boundary problems of 
the Bay of Bengal LME; (ii) in
-
depth studies, as required, to fil
l data and information 
gaps; (iii) identification of the root causes of
the problems and potential opportunities for 
their resolution (policy, institutional, technological, economic and legal options); and (iv) 
preliminary indication of priority actions wh
ich could form part of
the SAP.  The priority 
environmental issues that have been identified through the initial process of the Trans
-
boundary Diagnostic Analysis (TDA), include the (i) over
-
exploitation of marine living 
resources(e.g. illegal unreported a
nd uncontrolled fishing and destructive fishing 
practices); (ii) critical habitat degradation, especially of mangroves, coral reefs and sea 
grass beds; (iii) land
-
based sources of pollution; and (iv) ship
-
based sources of pollution, 
including dumping. 
(B)
  Development of the Strategic Action Plan:
The SAP would identify the actions 
required to resolve the priority trans
-
boundary problems identified in the TDA, identify 
responsible actors, set realistic targets and provide an analysis of costs and benefits.
(C)  Implementation of priority regional and sub
-
regional activities:
This would 
involve collaboration between a number of participating countries for implementation of 
priority regional activities. Some of the regional activities are likely to include, 
as per 
guidance received by the countries at the three regional meetings held so far during the 
PDF B Phase, but not be limited to: (i) strengthening fisheries management information 
systems; (ii) monitoring and assessment of critical habitats; (iii) addre
ssing key data gaps 
in critical habitat knowledge; (iv) establishment of a coastal ecosystem information 
network; (v) evaluating the impact of selected fishing gear and methods on critical 
habitats and species; (vi) water quality criteria harmonization; (v
ii) dissemination of 
environmental assessment best practices; (viii) advocacy and awareness building on clean 
technologies to prevent land based pollution; etc.  Potential collaborative pilot activities 
at the sub
-
regional level are likely to include, as p
er guidance received by the countries, 
but not be limited to: (i) collaborative fisheries management of shared/straddling resource 
stocks to provide policy recommendations and species
-
specific fishery management 
plans; (ii) collaborative management of mari
ne habitats and species, and biosphere 
reserves; (iii) joint environmental monitoring of land
-
based pollution sources, etc.  
Institutional arrangements
 is considered in the context of BOBLME being a long
-
term program with two implementation phases.  The p
articipating countries have 
collectively  agreed that in the first implementation phase (proposed project), the 
BOBLME program, on a temporary basis, will be located in Chennai (India).  The Project 
Appraisal Document would fully describe the financing of 
the BOBLME Secretariat that 
would be agreed with the participating countries.  The management, operation, finances, 
Page  3
administration, policy making and staffing of BOBLME Secretariat during project 
implementation will follow the existing arrangements of the 
preparation phase. 
The institutional arrangements, including location and management, related to the long
-
term program would be reached within the first three years of the proposed project and be 
in place by the end of the project period.  Until this deci
sion is reached, the current 
project  management  system,  comprised  of  a  Program  Steering,  network  of  National 
Coordinators  and  National  Task  Forces  would  continue.    The  proposed  project  will 
include  a    component  for  the  development,  financing  and  establishm
ent  of  the  final 
institutional arrangements.  
Project location (if known)
The project objective is the improved management of the Bay of Bengal which borders 
the eight participating countries.  Pilot regional and sub
-
regional activities are likely to be
largely related to information sharing, awareness, policy and capacity development.   
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity
Improving institutional capacity and sharing knowledge is central to the design of this 
operation.  National fisheries and environme
ntal ministries will be the lead responsible 
agencies for project preparation and implementation. Regional sub
-
regional and national 
centers of excellence would be directly involved in implementation specific components 
of the project, based on their stren
gths and outreach. Relevant national institutions will 
need  to  build  their  capacity  and  skills  for  data  collection  and  analysis,  information 
dissemination and sharing, resource assessment and analysis, collaborative management, 
etc.
II.
SAFEGUARD POLICIES
 THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?
Safeguard Policy
If Applicable, How might it apply
[x]
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
[ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
[ ]
Pest Management 9OP 4.09)
[ ]
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
[ ]
Indigenous People
s (OD 4.20)
[ ]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)
[ ]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
[ ]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 
–
 OPN 11.03)
[ ]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)
[ ]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)
Page  4
Environmental Assessment Ca
tegory:
[ ] A    [ ] B    [X] C    [ ] FI    [ ] TBD (to be determined)
Safeguard Policies Classification:
[ ] S1    [ ] S2   [ ]  S3     [ ] Sf   [ ] TBD (to be determined)
If TBD, explain follow
-
up and calendar/steps for the determination of the clas
sification:  
This will be determined once the pilot activities have been finalized and designed.  
Proposed to be completed by September 2004 (during pre
-
appraisal)..
III.
ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
A. What actions might be needed during project
 preparation to assess safeguard 
issues and prepare to mitigate them?
Social  and  Environmental  assessment  (SEA):   
The  objective  of  the  project  is  to 
develop  an  overall  framework  of  cooperation  between  the  participating  countries  to 
address the key environ
mental (and social) aspects of the Bay of Bengal.  The proposed  
regional and sub
-
regional pilot activities largely directed at information sharing, resource 
assessment and monitoring, awareness building and collaborative management of species 
and  habitats
  and  does  not  entail  direct  investment  in  on
-
the
-
ground  activities.    Sub
-
regional  activities  directed  at  improved  management  of  species  and  habitats  would 
involve species and habitat mapping, resource assessment and monitoring, information 
exchange, etc.  
Hence no direct adverse environmental and social impacts are envisaged 
at this stage.
B.
How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed:
As this is a multi
-
country program that revolves around a common and shared resource, 
consultation  a
nd  consensus  development  are  critical  requirements  for  the  successful 
design and implementation of the project.  Project preparation has focused extensively on 
establishing  procedures  and  processes  for  in
-
country  consensus  and  multi
-
country 
collaboration a
nd decision making.  At the regional level, a project steering committee 
has guided and reached consensus on priority environmental issues of the Bay, identified 
priority regional and sub
-
regional pilots and activities, and is in the process of agreeing 
on
 proposed project activities, implementation arrangements, data gathering and sharing, 
etc.  In
-
country, national tasks forces guide national level priorities and decisions and 
disseminates information relating to the project.  It is anticipated that in te
rms of the 
regional and sub
-
regional pilots, stakeholder workshops will be held to define and agree 
on the scope and content of these projects.  It is anticipated that the project documents 
would be widely disseminated and available for public review and c
omment within the 
participating countries.
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:
Malcolm A. B. Jansen
5/26/04
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:
Frederick E. Brusberg
7/19/
04
Comments
Sector Manager:
Jeffrey Racki
7/23/04
Comments
