Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC520 
 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 22, 2003 
 
I.  
BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A. 
Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Sri Lanka 
Project ID: P086411 
Project Name: SL- Road Sector Assistance Project 
Task Team Leader: Isabel Chatterton 
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 1, 2004 
Estimated Board Date: April 1, 2005 
Managing Unit: SASEI 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector 
development (P);Regulation and competition policy 
(S);Rural services and infrastructure (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Sumith Pilapitiya (Env), Sasanka Perera (Social) 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IDA: 100 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
 
 
B. Project 
Objectives 
 
The development objective of the proposed project is to provide beneficiaries with improved and 
sustainable road transport by enhancing the durability, efficiency and economic impact of the 
national road network in use.  In addition, a secondary objective is to set to establish the 
framework for improving the institutional capacity of the decentralized governance system for 
rural road infrastructure maintenance and rehabilitation.     
 
Monitorable Project Outcomes
: A Project Monitoring Framework will be developed during project preparation, and 
will include monitoring outcomes on (i) reduction in travel time and transport costs of road users; and (ii) increases 
in the number of rural people with improved access to motorable transport. 
 
C. Project 
Description 
 
Project Costs and Financing.
 The total project cost is estimated at about US$125 million, with about US$100 
million financed by IDA. A Specific Investment Loan (SIL) would be the lending instrument. The final project size 
and IDA financing will be determined during project preparation and will be suitably adjusted to reflect the 
maintenance and rehabilitation needs of national roads which are strategic. The proposed project will support the 
GOSL in achieving the vision set out in Regaining Sri Lanka.  It will include the following components:   
  
Deferred Maintenance, Rehabilitation and minor Upgrading of Priority National Highways 
(about $70 million).  
Over $110 million worth of urgent rehabilitation works on priority national roads have been identified by RDA as 
requiring immediate attention.  As part of this component, the most urgent works will be considered for funding, 
including those on strategic roads and those at the most advanced level of preparation (i.e. those with pre-feasibility 
or feasibility studies).  Roads will be screened for technical and economic viability, and environment and social 
issues before they are included for financing under the proposed project. This would be complemented by the 
financing of deferred maintenance of strategic roads.   
  
Selected Pilot Investments on Rural Roads (about $10 million)
.  This component will initiate 
Bank support to local roads by piloting small assistance initiatives with a view to implementing 
Page  2
 2
subsequently a major investment operation.  It will include: (i) the analysis required to determine 
the current status of the rural road network and to identify the core rural network to be 
maintained and improved; and (ii) the investment required to address the main road rehabilitation 
and maintenance needs of a few (2-3) Pradeshiya Sabhas, using different community-based 
implementation schemes.  The investments will test the feasibility of community-based 
initiatives for  maintaining and rehabilitating rural roads in the context of a decentralized 
governance system for rural road infrastructure provision. 
 
Policy Reform (about $5 million)
.  The Bank would complement ADB’s support in separating the policy and 
operational functions of the road sector agencies and government departments.  The road map for this support would 
be the re-engineering action plan of road sector institutions being followed by the GOSL.  In particular, the project 
will: (i) consolidate existing and newly gathered information into a road inventory system for asset management and 
planning; (ii) strengthen the capacity of RDA and the pilot Pradeshiya Sabhas to effectively rehabilitate and 
maintain roads through private sector contracts; and (iii) strengthen RDA’s capacity to contract out and manage 
maintenance works, including developing and implementing processes and systems for contract monitoring and 
management.   
 
Unallocated 
(about $ 15 million) - Potential Capital Grants for Private Sector Participation in Roads
.
  The Bank will 
provide support in the form of GOSL’s capital contributions for PPP arrangements for developing expressways and 
national highways when clear and transparent International Competitive Bidding Procedures (ICB) are used.  
Possible arrangements could include Maintain-Operate-Transfer (MOT), Rehabilitate-Operate-Transfer (ROT) and 
Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) as well as long term performance-based maintenance contracting or maintenance 
concessions. This would be a small component of the proposed project and would only provide seed money for these 
arrangements.  Potential roads for this support would be selected once the ongoing high mobility network study and 
the national highways master plan are finalized during 2004.  Should no suitable PPP operation be identified, the 
unallocated amount would be used for deferred maintenance and rehabilitation of other priority national roads. 
 
D. 
Project location (if known) 
 
All road improvements, except for those covered by the unallocated component, will follow existing alignments and 
will be located on existing ROWs. Where a new alignment or realignment might be needed to provide a safer road 
or to rectify existing environmental problems (landslides, poor drainage, flooding etc) ,  it will be selected after 
considering two or more alternatives to ensure that land acquisition and disruption to environmental assets are 
minimized.  Where an existing alignment or ROW poses environmental hazards, these will be addressed through 
appropriate design and construction. The specific road improvement and maintenance works will be identified 
during project preparation.
   
 
E. 
Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 
 
Sri Lanka has made impressive strides in developing legislation on protection, management and 
enhancement of the environment and on prevention, control and abatement of pollution as well 
as frameworks for environmental planning and environmental assessments or development 
projects.  Efforts have resulted in broad environmental management capacity including project-
specific environmental assessments.  However, more effective environmental management 
requires progress with: (i) reviewing the current system of Project Approving Agencies (PAA) 
for issuing environmental clearances towards formulation of a policy either supporting the 
current PAA system or conferring sole authority to the Central Environmental Agency (CEA) for 
clearing environmental impact assessments; (ii) promoting increased use of strategic and sectoral 
environmental assessments to mitigate any serious unanticipated environmental consequences; 
(iii) further strengthening of the capacity of CEA to supervise the implementation of 
environmental monitoring plans (EMPs); and (iv) appointing an independent committee of 
stakeholders for each major development project to review CEA’s monitoring of EMPs.  
Page  3
 3
 
The national Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP) adopted in 2001 governs 
resettlement/compensation issues insofar as development projects are concerned.  NIRP provides 
a framework consistent with best practices.  Nevertheless, the following steps would go a long 
way in implementing NIRP effectively: (i) delineating unambiguous roles and responsibilities of 
different government agencies in implementing the Rehabilitation Action Programs; (ii) 
clarifying the responsibility of the Central Environment Authority in monitoring the 
environmental aspects of resettlement plans; (iii) ensuring consistency in the quality of the 
training programs and process manuals conducted by various agencies; (iv) rationalizing the 
discrepancies between existing policies and the NIRP (e.g. the Framework for Relief, 
rehabilitation and Reconciliation (RRR).  
 
To improve the capacity of the borrower to manage safeguard issues, the project will install the 
required capacity, systems and procedures at both RDA and the Ministry of Home Affairs, 
Provincial Councils and Local Government to meet national standards and Bank requirements 
and closely monitor compliance. RDA will hire an Environmental and Social Impact adviser to 
work with RDA’s project preparation team.  In addition, the RDA project preparation team may 
have an Environmental Engineer and sociologist to oversee safeguard issues during project 
preparation and implementation. 
 
II. 
SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.01) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Natural Habitats
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.04) 
 
 
[ ] 
Pest Management
 (
OP 4.09
) 
 
 
[X] 
Involuntary Resettlement
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.12) 
 
 
[ ] 
Indigenous Peoples
 (
OD 4.20
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Forests
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.36) 
 
 
[ ] 
Safety of Dams
 (
OP
/
BP
 4.37) 
 
 
[TBD] 
Cultural Property
 (draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
) 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects in Disputed Areas
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 7.60)
*
 
 
 
[ ] 
Projects on International Waterways
 (
OP
/
BP
/
GP
 
7.50) 
 
 
 
 
Environmental Assessment Category:
    
[X] A   [ ] B   [ ] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
                                                          
 
*
 
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
 
disputed areas
 
Page  4
 4
Comments: 
The project has been categorized as ‘A’ largely due to the “Unallocated Component” which may provide 
capital grants for private sector participation in national highways and expressways.  Since the roads that may be 
supported under this component are not known at this stage, specific environmental issues cannot be identified.  
Based on past experience in the road sector in Sri Lanka, it is anticipated that most of the environmental impacts will 
be local and reversible, and could be mitigated and managed through good environmental management practices. 
 
III. 
SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A. 
Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS would be 
prepared.   
 
Should the GOSL decide not to fast track this operation, then the team would aim to request a Quality Enhancement 
Review (QER) Meeting for around May 2004 and no later than June/July 2004.  A fast track operation would not 
leave enough time for a QER. 
 
B. 
For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS 
 
C. 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  The specific 
studies and their timing
1
 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
 
Studies would be completed by November 2004. 
 
IV. APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
  
Task Team Leader: 
Isabel Chatterton 
December 9, 2003 
Project Safeguard Specialist 1 
Sumith Pilapitiya 
December 10, 2003 
Approved by: 
  
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Frederick Brusberg             
December 11, 2003 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Guang Z. Chen 
December 11, 2003 
Comments 
                                                          
 
1
 
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially af
fected 
persons.
 
 
