                            Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
Section I ­ Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: October 19, 2004                  Report No.: AC1094
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A.1. Project Statistics
COUNTRY: SRI LANKA                             PROJECT ID: P083932
PROJECT: NORTH EAST HOUSING                    TTL: Naresha Duraiswamy, Christoph
RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM                         Pusch
APPRAISAL DATE: October, 2004                  IBRD AMOUNT ($m):
BOARD DATE: December, 2004                     IDA AMOUNT ($m): 75
MANAGING UNIT: SASEI                           SECTOR: Energy and Infrastructure
LENDING INSTRUMENTS: Sector                    STATUS: Preparation
Investment Loan

I.A.2. Project Objectives
NEHRP would provide the poorest conflict-affected families in the North East that meet accepted
vulnerability criteria with improved and affordable housing units. It would entail a cash grant paid in
installments to vulnerable families to help reconstruct their homes. The intent is to help launch a housing
program that would continue in ensuing years with alternate sources of finance. The program would be
implemented in four phases over four years. A district would have to complete the construction of 50% of
the houses targeted in that phase to trigger a move to the next phase of the project.


I.A.3. Project Description

NEHRP would facilitate the reconstruction of 46,0001 houses in the North East over a four-year period
through the provision of housing grants. In doing so, it would also support the return of displaced
populations in the North East and the regularization of land title to targeted beneficiaries. It would
contribute to the training of skilled construction workers, consequently allowing the           resumption of
economic activity in the war devastated region through increased construction activity. The program will
have three components:

(a) Housing Assistance (US$ 69 million). NEHRP would finance housing reconstruction
through the transfer of a cash grant of either Rs150,000 for a fully damaged house or
Rs70,000 for a partly damaged house to eligible beneficiaries. It would transfer the cash
grant to the joint2 bank accounts of the selected beneficiary in four tranches for the fully
damaged housing grant category and two tranches in the case of a partly damaged house.
The pace of installments would be performance-based and the beneficiary would be
allowed a period of four months to complete construction.

(b) Capacity Building and Monitoring ($3 million). NEHRP will offer a
comprehensive technical assistance program to ensure smooth implementation. To this
end, IDA would support the sub-components on Land Dispute Resolution pertinent to
NEHRP, Skills Training for Construction, Support for Partner Organizations, Housing
Finance, and Technical Assistance for Program Monitoring including the
Communications Strategy, Continuous Social Impact Assessment, Continuous
Environmental Impact Assessment and a Technical Audit of Construction.

(c) Program Management (US$ 3 million). This component includes program management and
implementation assistance that is to be engaged to assist in successful implementation of NEHRP.




1This figure will be revisited at the mid-term review at the end of the third year of the program to take into
account any cost savings or increases that may have been gained due to currency fluctuations or other
factors.
2Specifically, in the name of both husband and wife, unless it be a single headed household.

I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social characteristics of
the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or critical natural habitats, or
any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The proposed program would cover the 8 districts of the North East Province of Sri Lanka. The long years
of conflict in the North East have resulted in significant natural resource degradation. Clearing of vast tracts
of original forestland due to security reasons is one of the most significant and irreversible impacts the war
has had on the natural environment in that region. As a result, habitats of many plant and animal species
have been fragmented and/or lost. The program will not finance reconstruction activities within natural
habitats, declared forest and wildlife areas, therefore would not have any adverse impact on
environmentally sensitive areas. The targeted population is highly vulnerable after several years of
ethnically motivated conflict. The targeted program beneficiaries are the most vulnerable population of the
North East measured against identified criteria, as outlined in the project appraisal document



B1. Check Environmental Classification A [ ], B [X}, C [ ], FI [ ], TBD [ ]
Comments:
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
Click on Policy name for brief summary of objectives, triggers and requirements
Click on Policy reference number for full policy
I.C1. Table on applicability                                                     Yes        No          TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                                         [X]        [ ]         [ ]
Forestry (OP/GP 4.36)                                                            [X]        []          [ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    [ ]        [X]         [ ]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                      [ ]        [X]         [ ]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                        [ ]        [X]         [ ]
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30)                                               [X]        []          []
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                     [X]        []          []
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                    [ ]        [X]         [ ]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                                      [ ]        [X]         [ ]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                              [ ]        [X]         [ ]



Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
II.D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not
available, describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.




*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the
parties'claims on the disputed areas

II.D.1a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The long years of conflict in the North East have resulted in significant natural resource degradation.
Clearing of vast tracts of original forestland due to security reasons is one of the most significant and
irreversible impacts the war has had on the natural environment in that region. As a result, habitats of many
plant and animal species have been fragmented and/or lost. In addition, forests in other parts of the dry
zone have been continually exploited for shifting agriculture, land development, human settlements and
timber harvesting. The demand for construction material could increase the mining of sand and clay (the
latter mainly for bricks). The mining of sand in rivers has the potential to cause the lowering of the river
bed, collapse of the banks, intrusion of sea water and reduced sand replenishment in the beaches. Mining of
coastal sand exacerbates coastal erosion. Increased beach erosion due to excessive river and sea sand
mining is a serious problem in some coastal stretches of the country, especially in the South Western
quarter where it is done in a widespread manner. Finally, solid waste management, particularly the
disposal of construction debris, will also have to be addressed in a comprehensive manner to ensure that the
direct and indirect environmental impacts of the program is minimal.


Overall, the program is expected to have limited negative social impact. None of the NEHRP components
include activities that trigger a drastic change in the local economic infrastructure with adverse social
consequences. The housing assistance will provide support for the renovation and reconstruction of already
existing damaged housing units of those families with legitimate ownership. This is a socially feasible
program targeted at poor families who had lost their habitat due to the war. However, as far as social
safeguard issues related to NEHRP are concerned, initial diagnostic studies and social impact assessments
have examined a number of potential social risks, longer term social concerns, and reintegration issues.
These include ethnic and gender equity, complexities in land ownership and tenure, cultural identities of
indigenous population, community absorptive capacity and social capital. The safeguards on indigenous
peoples and involuntary resettlement may be triggered.
II.D.1b. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one
safeguard policy or due to multiple project component.

The main safeguard policy to be triggered under this project, is the Environmental
Assessment Safeguard Policy. Since the sites for housing reconstruction is on existing
housing sites and resource use will be from designated sites for natural resource
exploitation under license from the relevant authorities, it is not anticipated that there will
be any cumulative impact due to application of more than one safeguard policy or due to
multiple project components.

II.D.1c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area.

The North East region suffered much damage in the last two decades due to the civil
conflict. Existing infrastructure has been destroyed and no development work was
undertaken during the conflict. Post conflict reconstruction in the war affected areas have
just begun and will continue for a considerable period. Out of the various development
needs housing has been selected as a top priority in order for the displaced persons to
return to their homes. Therefore, further development in this region is to be expected but
at this point these development programs have not been developed and hence it is not
possible to say what those activities will be. However, for large development programs
EIAs/IEEs will be mandatory in accordance with the National Environmental Act and
associated regulations, hence the impacts will be addressed through the EIA/IEE studies
in the future. The EIAs/IEEs will take activities funded under this project into account,
therefore, cumulative impacts, if any, will be addressed at that stage.

Overall, the proposed program is expected to have limited negative cumulative social
impacts in the long term. Neither the Capacity Building component nor the Project
Implementation component are envisaged to include any activities that would result in
adverse social impacts. The Housing Assistance component will support urgent in-situ
repair and reconstruction work for households who have legitimate ownership of land.
However, some expansion might result in resettlement in a few instances, with all
resettlement currently expected to be voluntary. The issue of land ownership and land
title would be crucial to the proposed Housing Reconstruction Program. The program
will support the accelerated resolution of routine land ownership issues in program
villages including encroachment on previously un-alienated State lands, occupation by
adult children of un-subdivided land currently held in the name of a parent and property
boundary uncertainty. Broader land issues involving claims of entire communities are
beyond the scope of the mechanisms proposed under the program and will require higher
level interventions including political settlement.
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of alternatives (if required)

The project is aiming at reconstructing those houses that have been either partially or
fully destroyed in the North East region, which is considered as a social and political
priority. Therefore, alternative options do not apply.

II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues

The policy and regulatory framework in Sri Lanka provides an adequate basis for the
mitigation of potential environmental impacts mentioned above. These include the
National Environmental Act (NEA) where activities that fall into a prescribed category is
required to go through a comprehensive environmental screening and planning process
(EIA or IEE), the Forest Ordinance where felling of trees in forest reserves are
completely prohibited, mining of sand and clay are also regulated by the Geological
Surveys and Mines Bureau (GSMB) where only designated areas are permitted to be used
for sand mining and the Local Authority Ordinances, where all building plans need to
submitted to the local authority to obtain approval based on conformation to a specified
building code. However, although an adequate policy and regulatory framework exists
in the country for natural resource management and conservation, enforcement of such
policies and regulations has been weak, although these are being strengthened through
capacity building efforts by donors.

An Environmental Assessment and Management Framework has been developed during project
preparation. The Framework served as a template to undertake EAs on a village basis for the 29 pilot
villages. Based on the 29 EIA that have been conducted, the main environmental issues have been
identified and a detailed Environmental Assessment Questionnaire Form has been developed. If the EA
Form identifies significant environmental issues, a full EIA will be required prior to fund disbursement.
Monitoring of the implementation of mitigatory measures will be mainly entrusted with the regional
officers of the CEA attached to the District and Divisional Administrative Offices.

To mitigate negative risks on social impacts, a Social Safeguards Framework has been prepared using PPF
funds which has incorporated the relevant IDA Operational Directives (OD) and Operational Policies (
OP).    The Framework will serve as a template to undertake specific social audits, monitoring and
evaluation in the locations identified for housing reconstruction. A continuous social impact assessment
forms part of the program design.

Housing projects undertaken indigenous people could trigger OD 4.20. Given that the
selection of beneficiaries for the program will be an ongoing process, it is not yet clear
whether indigenous communities will be involved as beneficiaries. If it seems likely that
any of these communities are to be included in NEHRP, a diagnostic consultation will be
undertaken at that point with the communities in question. The consultation will be
undertaken by a qualified social scientist/institution, with knowledge of the traditions and
culture of the Indigenous people, to ascertain their specific wishes and to minimize the
possibility that interventions by the program and/or its contractors inadvertently create
adverse effects within the communities. Based on the consultation report, NEHRP will
decide what specific modalities to implement vis-à-vis these communities.

There will be no involuntary settlement under NEHRP. Most houses will be repaired in
situ. The operational policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) will apply when the
needed land for the relocation of landless and others is alienated by the Government.
However, when a village social assessment determines that resettlement is unavoidable,
the NEHRP will provide a resettlement plan consistent with these principles to the Bank
for approval. NEHRP's operations will follow the following principles: (i) Involuntary
resettlement will be avoided where feasible, or minimized, exploring all viable alternative
program designs; (ii) where it is not feasible to avoid resettlement, resettlement activities
will be conceived and executed as sustainable development programs, providing
sufficient investment resources to enable the persons displaced by the program to share in
NEHRP benefits.         Displaced persons will be meaningfully consulted and will have
opportunities to participate in planning and implementing resettlement programs; (iii)
Displaced persons will be assisted in their efforts to improve their livelihood and

II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

The main stakeholder groups would be (a) conflict affected returnees (b) politicians and policy makers at
the local and national level (c) institutions involved in natural resources management (d) The LTTE (e)
NGOs and CBOs (representing community) (e) building contractors

Consultations with these groups have been held in the form of group discussions and/or regional workshops
during the process of formulating the Environmental Assessment Framework and the preparation of the
EIAs and the SIA for the pilot villages. Public consultation was an integral part of the process of
preparation of the Frameworks as well as the EIAs and SIA.


E. Safeguards Classification (select one). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy.
Or on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is triggered the
provisions of that policy apply.
[ ] S1. ­ Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and
institutional risks in management of one or more safeguard areas
[ ] S2. ­ One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their
impact and are technically and institutionally manageable
[ ] S3. ­ No safeguard issues
[ ] SF ­ Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven
development or similar projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic
approach to address safeguard issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements                               Expected Date Actual Date
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 5 /15/04 .../.../...       or N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             4/15/04    .../.../...     or N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                              5/15/04    .../.../...     or N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                                                          .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Resettlement Action Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                               .../.../... 09/30/04         or N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           .../.../... 09/20/04         or N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                            .../.../... 10/18/04         or N/A
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                               .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                            .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                               .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                            .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                               .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                           .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                            .../.../...  .../.../...     or N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
why.

Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                                             Naresha Duraiswamy           Date August 29, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:                              Sumith Pilapitiya            Date: August 29, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:                              Mohamed Razaak               Date: October 10, 2004

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator                               Fredrick Brusberg            Date: 10/25/2004
Comments
Sector Manager                                                Sonia Hammam                 Date: 10/25/2004
Comments
N/A Not Available
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on
the disputed areas (this disclaimer appears only for projects triggering OP/BP 8.60)

