                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I ­ Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: Tuesday, October 15, 2004 (Draft)      Report No.:AC 1089
A. Basic Project Data
A.1. Project Statistics
Country: Tajikistan                         Project ID: P089566
Project: SECOND FARM                        TTL: T.V. Sampath
PRIVATIZATION SUPPORT PROJECT
Total project cost (by component):
Land Registration: US$ 4.8 million
Farm Information and Irrigation Support: US$ 4.3 million
Project Management and Policy Support: US$ 1.6 million
Total Costs: US$10.7million
Appraisal Date: November 1, 2004            Loan/Credit amount($m): US$10.0 m IDA

Board Date: December 21, 2004
Managing Unit: ECSSD                        Sector:
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment
Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency      Yes? [ ]           No? [X ]
recovery?
Environmental Category: B                   Safeguard Classification: S3

A.2. Project Objectives
Project objective. To expand farm privatization through a repeater project to enable more farm workers
to become farmers and take management decisions in response to market forces, by providing them
secure land use rights certificates distributed in a transparent and fair manner, and providing essential
complementary support services

Outcome indicators. The key outcome indicators will comprise
·   At least 75,000 certificates issued to family farms in accordance with agreed standards
·   At least 75% of rural adult population in the 36 participating raions, including vulnerable groups,
    are well informed about land law and procedures governing farm privatization
·   At least 10,000 ha of agricultural lands restored through-farm irrigation and water management
    rehabilitation, and covered by well functioning water user organizations.
·   At least 3,600 farmers acquire better informed about integrated pest management through exposure
    through field demonstrations and participation in training
·   Project reputation for integrity as reflected in public opinion surveys
·   Increased understanding of policy issues related to farm privatization, and increased consensus on
    long-term vision among senior policy makers, as demonstrated in reform initiatives and plans

Output indicators. Implementation will be assessed mainly on the basis of output indicators including:
·   At least 300 CSFs mapped, 4 existing land office upgraded and 3 new regional offices established in
    accordance with agreed standards.
·   At least 425,000 ha mapped, 4 existing land offices upgraded to regional status, and 3 new regional
    land offices established, in accordance with agreed standards
·   At least 75,000 rural people trained and in receipt of publicity on land use rights and farm
    privatization process
·   At least 120 water user associations or farmer organizations established, and all on-farm irrigation
    and water management subprojects in annual work plans completed
·   At least 36 demonstration plots established, and at least 36 field level training sessions conducted in
    integrated pest management.
·   Satisfactory supervision ratings by Bank visiting missions
·   Policy unit established, and training program and action research on post conflict land issues
    completed
Borrower's Objectives. The key elements of Tajikistan's Poverty Reduction Strategy Program (PRSP)
emphasizes accelerated growth, provision of basic social services, targeted support for the poor, and
improved governance. For the agriculture sector, the Government's strategy supports the efficient use
of, and access of the poor to land, water, financial and other resources, and eliminating government
intervention in private farm decision making. The PRSP includes an analysis of farm privatization
issues, and specifies measures to increase transparency and fairness, and to reduce costs and delays.
The project is consistent with the PRSP, and responds to a specific Government request for the project.
Investments will directly contribute to accelerated private sector growth by creating an enabling
environment of improved land access and tenure security, as well as irrigation support, and policy
development. The creation of secure land use rights supported by the fair and transparent farm
privatization process including registration of land use rights, plus the capacity development, and policy
development will strengthen overall governance. The information and capacity development activities
target the disadvantaged. The project is also consistent with the borrower's agriculture strategies.

Bank Country Assistance Strategy. The proposed project is a priority in the 2003-2005 Country
Assistance Strategy. It meets the Bank's three strategic engagement principles: (a) it responds to a

"strong client pull" and interest in reform, (b) it uses a programmatic approach, and (c) it works in
partnership with NGOs and other donors. The project addresses the CAS objective of selective support
furthering the Government's PRSP agenda by
·   generating growth through private sector development, especially in the area of agriculture and
    related agribusiness development and
·   strengthening the institutions needed for a market economy, including establishment of secure
    tenure, building capacity and knowledge to meet technical and marketing requirements for viable
    income-generating investments, and addressing key policy issues related to farm privatization
    including local post-conflict land issues
A.3. Project Description: Project activities comprise:
Farm Privatization and Land Registration Component (US $4.8 million) will privatize 300 state
and collective farms (SCFs) in a transparent and fair manner, issue at least 75,000 secure land use
certificates, and establish a uniform, parcel-based system of registration of land use rights by further
supporting the central office of the SLC in Dushanbe, upgrading six Regional Land Registration Offices
(RLROs) and training staff to provide the required services. The project will finance equipment for
surveying, mapping, digitization software and hardware, and training.

Farm Information and Irrigation Support Component: (US $ 4.3 million). This component will
involve three subcomponents:
·   Information for farmers. This subcomponent will expand the FIAS established under FPSP I to
    cover all 36 project raions, using local specialists to provide rural citizens with detailed information
    on the privatization process, including the land law, rules and regulations governing the allocations,
    and individual's rights to farmland. It will train project area rural people and also support nation-
    wide campaigns through mass media programs, and booklet preparation and distribution, with a
    systematic approach to reach youth and women.
·   On-farm irrigation and water management support. This subcomponent will provide grants to
    water user and farmer organizations for works and goods needed to rehabilitate on-farm irrigation
    and water management systems, including the retrofitting required due to the smaller size of farms.
    It will foster the creation of water users and farmer organizations to ensure a beneficiary
    contribution of at least 20% in the rehabilitation investments and that these groups assume full
    responsibility for the operation and management of field level irrigation.
·   Integrated Pest Management. This subcomponent will build the capacity of FIAS to advise and
    train farmers and others in integrated pest management.             It includes support for training,
    demonstration plots, and equipment.

Project Management and Policy Support (US$ 1.6 million). This component will support; a) the
incremental costs of using the existing Project Management Unit (PMU) to manage SFPSP and, b)
capacity development within the Ministry of Economy or other central government agency to enable
Tajikistan to address national policy issues associated with scaling up the FPSP-I approach. The policy
support will include the establishment of a small policy unit, as well as technical assistance and training,
to address land administration, cotton, and other policy issues related to farm privatization. The policy
support will also address the special issues associated with the de facto land redistribution during the
civil war.
A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
Some two thirds of Tajikistan's population is directly dependent for their living on the country's 4.6
million ha of agricultural land, of which the greater part is rainfed pasture land. Only about 850,000 ha
are arable and irrigated, some 800,000 ha of which in lowlands are under rotation between cotton and

cereal crops, with about 320,000 ha under cotton at any one time. The repeater project will expand SLC
and local land staff capacity to enable support to an additional 36 raions (beyond the six raions
supported by the first farm privatization project), and covering at least 300 of the 660 CSFs. The
project will function at the field level primarily on lands which do not face significant difficulties in
terms of cotton-related vested interests, but it is estimated that at least 5% or 16 of the CSFs covered by
the repeater project will be in cotton growing areas. The project will also includes a modest efforts to
address at the policy level the special tenure reform difficulties in cotton-growing areas and in areas
most affected by the civil war. The site of a local post-conflict land issues pilot will be selected during
project implementation.

B. Check Environmental Category A [ ], B [X], C [ ], FI [ ]

Comments:
The environmental effects of the project, if any, will be minor and indirect. The civil works would be
limited to office building rehabilitation and rehabilitation of on-farm irrigation systems. The project
will not involve any major construction requiring resettlement or land acquisition. Temporary minor
impact (dust, minor soil loss) can be expected from planting activities, and building and irrigation
rehabilitation. Based on experience to date, farm privatization is likely to be associated with the
development of more environmentally acceptable pest management strategies and skills, and will
address natural habitat, sustainable land management, and other environmental considerations. The
project will not convert or degrade critical natural habitats.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered
                                                                     Yes                         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP
                                                                     [X]                           []
4.01)
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                         [ ]                        [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                            [X]                          [ ]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN
                                                                      [ ]                        [X]
11.03-)
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 [ ]                        [X]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                          [ ]                        [X]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                  [ ]                        [X]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                           [ ]                        [X]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP
7.60)*                                                                [ ]                        [X]

Projects on International Waterways
                                                                      [ ]                        [X]
(OP/BP/GP 7.50)
Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The environmental impact of the proposed project is expected to be positive. Findings from the first
project and from land registration projects in other countries indicate that the improving farmer's tenure


    *
     By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
    claims on the disputed areas

security and ability to make farm management decisions has a positive impact on land and soil
management and therefore on the environment in general. In addition to the existing officials in the
Government's environment agency, the Project Management Unit also include a specialist who will
monitor environmental impacts and compliance, including pest management aspects, on a full-time
basis.

The project will further develop the country's existing Pest Management Plan (which includes
integrated pest management assessment, development, training, and networking as well as replacement
of harmful pesticide regimes with environmentally friendly alternatives) by developing more
environmentally acceptable pest control strategies for specific crops in order to enable the Farm
Advisory Service and Farmer Training Center (which have been established under the first farm
privatization project) to develop the capacity of farmers to implement these strategies.

The project will not involve resettlement nor issuance of family farm certificates to areas subject to
transhumance movement of livestock.
D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area.
None
D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)
None
D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Although FPSP-I did not have a formal consolidated environmental management framework, existing
environmental management standards and practices under the FPSP-I are satisfactory and will continued
to be used by SFPSP. These will be summarized in a summary environmental assessment including
management framework to be posted in the PIC prior to appraisal. All civil works will be designed and
implemented in accordance with environmentally sound engineering practices, and governed by existing
environmental screening procedures and contractual standards developed under FPSP I. FPSP I also
demonstrated satisfactory environmental performance regarding its farm information and advisory
services. While FPSP I did not have a formal Pest Management Plan, it did foster integrated pest
management practices under the farm information and advisory services program, which SFPSP will
continue to develop. SFPSP will also build on the country's Pest Management Plan that was developed
for the Community Agriculture and Watershed Management Project. The project further includes a
Integrated Pest Management sub component that will help newly emerging farmers adopt
environmentally safe and sound crop management practices and supporting integrated management of
pest and increase use of organic inputs.
D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary project beneficiaries will be farm workers lacking (a) meaningful input into farm
management decision making and (b) knowledge of their land use rights or farm privatization
procedures. The systematic farm privatization approach developed under FPSP I is participatory
whereby all farm workers are involved in a process generally regarded as transparent, equitable, and
socially acceptable. During the implementation of SFPSP, community groups and NGOs will
participate in the legal and agricultural information campaigns, a key element of the project.
Community groups and NGOs will also be involved in the pilot activities on input/output marketing and
local post-conflict land issues. The results monitoring framework includes the use of public opinion
surveys, and will take into consideration ongoing efforts by NGOs to carry out independent monitoring

of the farm privatization process. The policy development activities will also involve consensus
building through workshops and other mechanisms.
F. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                   September 25, 2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                               September 30, 2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 October 14, 2004
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors                                                     Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                   September 25, 2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                               September 30, 2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 October 14, 2004
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                 Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
NA
Section III ­ Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                              Yes          No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan?

                                                                                  Yes          No
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                                               X
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                 N/A
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                        Yes          No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                    N/A
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       X
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?                          X
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:                                    Yes          No

Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                N/A
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
                                                                                      N/A
adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                                   Yes   No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in
                                                                                      N/A
consultation with the Indigenous People?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve
                                                                                      N/A
the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed
                                                                                      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                          Yes   No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been
                                                                                      N/A
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve
                                                                                      N/A
the plan / policy framework / policy process?
OP/BP 4.36 ­ Forests:                                                           Yes   No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
                                                                                      N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                      N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                      N/A
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                                    Yes   No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                  N/A
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts
                                                                                      N/A
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
                                                                                      N/A
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                                  Yes   No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                                N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification                  N/A
requirement, then has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the
memo to the RVP prepared and sent?                                                    N/A
What are the reasons for the exception?
     Please explain:
N/A
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                               N/A
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                           Yes   No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the
                                                                                      N/A
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the
Legal Department and sent to the RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                                   Yes   No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a

form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                       Yes         No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
                                                                              X
been prepared for the implementation of the safeguard measures?
Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                  X
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project
                                                                              X
implementation?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                              X
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
Signed and submitted by:                               Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                                    T.V. Sampath                Oct 14, 2004
Project Safeguards Specialist 1:                     Grzegorz Peszko
Project Safeguards Specialist 2:                      Shahridan Faiez
Project Safeguards Specialist 3:
Approved by:                                           Name                         Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                      Ronald Hoffer
Comments:
Sector Manager:                                      Joseph Goldberg
Comments:

