                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/18/2005                                     Report No.: AC1089

1. Project Statistics
Country: Tajikistan                           Project ID: P089566
Project Name: Land Registration and Cadastre System for Sustainable Agriculture
Project (LRCSP)
Task Team Leader: Thirumangalam V. Sampath
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 25,         Estimated Board Date: April 21, 2005
2004
Managing Unit: ECSSD                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Loan
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Land administration and management (P);Personal and property rights (P);Rural
policies and institutions (P);Technology diffusion (S);Rural services and infrastructure
(S)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             10.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                  0.10
        LOCAL COMMUNITIES                                                   0.50
        Financing Gap                                                       0.00
                                                                            0.60
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []              Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)          Yes [ ]       No [X]

2. Project Objectives
Project objective. To expand farm privatization through a repeater project to enable more
farm workers to become farmers and take management decisions in response to market
forces, by providing them secure land use rights certificates distributed in a transparent
and fair manner, and providing essential complementary support services
 Outcome indicators. The key outcome indicators will comprise
 " At least 75,000 certificates issued to family farms in accordance with agreed
standards
 " At least 75% of rural adult population in the 36 participating raions, including
vulnerable groups, are well informed about land law and procedures governing farm
privatization
 " At least 10,000 ha of agricultural lands restored through-farm irrigation and water
management rehabilitation, and covered by well functioning water user organizations.

 " At least 3,600 farmers acquire better informed about integrated pest management
through exposure through field demonstrations and participation in training
 " Project reputation for integrity as reflected in public opinion surveys
 " Increased understanding of policy issues related to farm privatization, and increased
consensus on long-term vision among senior policy makers, as demonstrated in reform
initiatives and plans
 Output indicators. Implementation will be assessed mainly on the basis of output
indicators including:
 " At least 300 CSFs mapped, 4 existing land offices upgraded to regional status, and 3
new regional land offices established, in accordance with agreed standards
 " At least 75,000 rural people trained and in receipt of publicity on land use rights and
farm privatization process
 " At least 120 water user associations or farmer organizations established, and all on-
farm irrigation and water management subprojects in annual work plans completed
 " At least 36 demonstration plots established, and at least 36 field level training
sessions conducted in integrated pest management.
 " Satisfactory supervision ratings by Bank visiting missions
 " Policy unit established, and training program and action research on post conflict
land issues completed
 " Value of agricultural output per ha increases by 5%.
 Borrower's Objectives. The key elements of Tajikistan's Poverty Reduction Strategy
Program (PRSP) emphasizes accelerated growth, provision of basic social services,
targeted support for the poor, and improved governance. For the agriculture sector, the
Government's strategy supports the efficient use of, and access of the poor to land, water,
financial and other resources, and eliminating government intervention in private farm
decision making. The PRSP includes an analysis of farm privatization issues, and
specifies measures to increase transparency and fairness, and to reduce costs and delays.
The project is consistent with the PRSP, and responds to a specific Government request
for the project. Investments will directly contribute to accelerated private sector growth
by creating an enabling environment of improved land access and tenure security, as well
as irrigation support, and policy development. The creation of secure land use rights
supported by the fair and transparent farm privatization process including registration of
land use rights, plus the capacity development, and policy development will strengthen
overall governance. The information and capacity development activities target the
disadvantaged. The project is also consistent with the borrower's agriculture strategies.
 Bank Country Assistance Strategy. The proposed project is a priority in the 2003-2005
Country Assistance Strategy. It meets the Bank's three strategic engagement principles:
(a) it responds to a "strong client pull" and interest in reform, (b) it uses a programmatic
approach, and (c) it works in partnership with NGOs and other donors. The project
addresses the CAS objective of selective support furthering the Government's PRSP
agenda by
 " generating growth through private sector development, especially in the area of
agriculture and related agribusiness development and
 " strengthening the institutions needed for a market economy, including establishment
of secure tenure, building capacity and knowledge to meet technical and marketing

requirements for viable income-generating investments, and addressing key policy issues
related to farm privatization including local post-conflict land issues

3. Project Description
: Project activities comprise:
 Farm Privatization and Land Registration Component (US $4.7 million) will privatize
300 state and collective farms (SCFs) in a transparent and fair manner, issue at least
75,000 secure land use certificates, and establish a uniform, parcel-based system of
registration of land use rights by further supporting the central office of the SLC in
Dushanbe, upgrading six Regional Land Registration Offices (RLROs) and training staff
to provide the required services. The project will finance equipment for surveying,
mapping, digitization software and hardware, and training.

 Farm Information and Irrigation Support Component: (US $ 4.4 million). This
component will involve three subcomponents:
 " Information for farmers. This subcomponent will expand the FIAS established under
FPSP I to cover all 36 project raions, using local specialists to provide rural citizens with
detailed information on the privatization process, including the land law, rules and
regulations governing the allocations, and individual's rights to farmland. It will train
project area rural people and also support nation-wide campaigns through mass media
programs, and booklet preparation and distribution, with a systematic approach to reach
youth and women.
 " On-farm irrigation and water management support. This subcomponent will provide
grants to water user and farmer organizations for works and goods needed to rehabilitate
on-farm irrigation and water management systems, including the retrofitting required due
to the smaller size of farms. It will foster the creation of water users and farmer
organizations to ensure a beneficiary contribution of at least 20% in the rehabilitation
investments and that these groups assume full responsibility for the operation and
management of field level irrigation.
 " Integrated Pest Management. This subcomponent will build the capacity of FIAS to
advise and train farmers and others in integrated pest management. It includes support
for training, demonstration plots, and equipment.

 Project Management (US$ 1.2 million). This component will support the incremental
costs of using the existing Project Management Unit (PMU) to manage SFPSP.

 Policy Support (US$ 0.3 million) This component will support capacity development
within the Ministry of Economy or other central government agency to enable Tajikistan
to address national policy issues associated with scaling up the FPSP-I approach. The
policy support will include the establishment of a small policy unit, as well as technical
assistance and training, to address land administration, cotton, and other policy issues
related to farm privatization. The policy support will also address the special issues
associated with the de facto land redistribution during the civil war.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Some two thirds of Tajikistan's population is directly dependent for their living on the
country's 4.6 million ha of agricultural land, of which the greater part is rainfed pasture
land. Only about 850,000 ha are arable and irrigated, some 800,000 ha of which in
lowlands are under rotation between cotton and cereal crops, with about 320,000 ha
under cotton at any one time. The repeater project will expand SLC and local land staff
capacity to enable support to an additional 30 raions (beyond the six raions supported by
the first farm privatization project), and covering at least 300 of the 616 CSFs. The
project will function at the field level primarily on lands which do not face significant
difficulties in terms of cotton-related vested interests, but it is estimated that at least 15%
of the CSFs covered by the repeater project will be in cotton growing areas. The project
will also includes a modest efforts to address at the policy level the special tenure reform
difficulties in cotton-growing areas and in areas most affected by the civil war. The site
of a local post-conflict land issues pilot will be selected during project implementation.

5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team



6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                  Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                             X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                         X
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                                  X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                              X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                       X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental impact of the proposed project is expected to be positive. Findings
from the first project and from land registration projects in other countries indicate that
the improving farmer's tenure security and ability to make farm management decisions
has a positive impact on land and soil management and therefore on the environment in
general. In addition to the existing officials in the Government's environment agency, the
Project Management Unit also include a specialist who will monitor environmental
impacts and compliance, including pest management aspects, on a full-time basis.

 The project will further develop the country's existing Pest Management Plan (which
includes integrated pest management assessment, development, training, and networking

as well as replacement of harmful pesticide regimes with environmentally friendly
alternatives) by developing more environmentally acceptable pest control strategies for
specific crops in order to enable the Farm Advisory Service and Farmer Training Center
(which have been established under the first farm privatization project) to develop the
capacity of farmers to implement these strategies.

 The project will not involve resettlement nor issuance of family farm certificates to
areas subject to transhumance movement of livestock.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
None

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Although FPSP did not have a formal consolidated environmental management
framework, existing environmental management standards and practices under the FPSP
are satisfactory and will continued to be used by LRCSP. These will be summarized in a
summary environmental assessment including management framework to be posted in
the PIC prior to appraisal. All civil works will be designed and implemented in
accordance with environmentally sound engineering practices, and governed by existing
environmental screening procedures and contractual standards developed under FPSP.
FPSP also demonstrated satisfactory environmental performance regarding its farm
information and advisory services. While FPSP did not have a formal Pest Management
Plan, it did foster integrated pest management practices under the farm information and
advisory services program, which LRCSP will continue to develop. SFPSP will also
build on the country's Pest Management Plan that was developed for the Community
Agriculture and Watershed Management Project. The project further includes a
Integrated Pest Management sub component that will help newly emerging farmers adopt
environmentally safe and sound crop management practices and supporting integrated
management of pest and increase use of organic inputs.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary project beneficiaries will be farm workers lacking (a) meaningful input into
farm management decision making and (b) knowledge of their land use rights or farm
privatization procedures. The systematic farm privatization approach developed under
FPSP I is participatory whereby all farm workers are involved in a process generally
regarded as transparent, equitable, and socially acceptable. During the implementation of
SFPSP, community groups and NGOs will participate in the legal and agricultural
information campaigns, a key element of the project. Community groups and NGOs will
also be involved in the pilot activities on input/output marketing and local post-conflict

land issues. The results monitoring framework includes the use of public opinion
surveys, and will take into consideration ongoing efforts by NGOs to carry out
independent monitoring of the farm privatization process. The policy development
activities will also involve consensus building through workshops and other mechanisms.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    09/25/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                09/30/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 10/14/2004
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Pest Management Process:
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    09/25/2004
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                09/30/2004
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 10/14/2004
* If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA      Yes
report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                    No
Is a separate PMP required?                                                   Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by the regional safeguards     Yes
team? Are PMP requirements included in project design?If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's      No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a      No
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected

  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities   Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project  Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the          Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?



  D. Approvals


Signed and submitted by:                              Name                        Date
Task Team Leader:                  Mr Thirumangalam V. Sampath                  10/14/2004
Environmental Specialist:          Ms Rita E. Cestti                            10/14/2004
Social Development Specialist      Mr Shahridan Faiez                           10/14/2004
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Mr Ronald N. Hoffer                          10/15/2004
 Comments:
Sector Manager:                    Mr Joseph R. Goldberg                        10/22/2004
 Comments:

