Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC1569 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06/01/2005 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Ukraine 
Project ID: P090903 
Project Name: Agricultural Competitiveness and Food Safety Project 
Task Team Leader: Julian A. Lampietti 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 16, 2006 
Estimated Board Date: September 14, 2006 
Managing Unit: ECSSD 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (P);Rural markets (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
150.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER 
0.00
0.00 
B.  Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN] 
The project objective is to increase domestic and international competitiveness of the agri-food 
sector. The principal project outcomes will be higher and more stable revenues for farmers and 
food processors, and food quality and safety systems consistent with the EU/Ukraine Action 
Plan.  
 
The project objectives will be achieved through a series of strategic public investments that 
contribute to the efficient operation of the agri-food supply chain. Investments in the supply 
chain will increase competition and reduce bureaucracy, resulting in stakeholders being paid 
according to their contribution. Improving infrastructure and modernizing food quality and food 
safety systems will enable food producers and processors to deliver higher value products to 
domestic and international markets.   
 
C.  Project Description [from section 3 of PCN] 
Component 1: Strengthening National Food Safety Systems  
 
Outcomes will be the regulatory and institutional reforms necessary to modernize food safety 
and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of control procedures. The following types of 
activities may be included:  
Page  2
Regulatory Reforms - (i) Legislative approximation of Ukrainian regulations, norms and 
standards to EU SPS requirements; (ii) translation of current and upcoming Codex standards and 
EU directives; (iii) documents for negotiations; (iv) legal information bureau to monitor 
legislative developments in the EU and international standard setting organizations.  
 
Institutional Reforms - (i) Consolidation of the national food safety system for the 
implementation and administration of SPS requirements for the agri-food sector comparable to 
those emerging in EU countries.  
 
Monitoring Capability and Risk Assessments - (i) International accreditation of SPS 
laboratories and modernization of analytical capacity; (ii) rapid alert system for pest and disease 
control (and farm traceability systems); (iii) interactive veterinary and phytosanitary inspection 
service (including animal identification systems); and (iv) public sector awareness about food 
safety issues, risk analysis and its components, and private certification systems (i.e., HACCP, 
ISO). Links with the Global Environment Facility Methyl Bromide Phase Out project will be 
explored.  
 
Food Science and Research Programme - (i) Multi-disciplinary research capacity in innovation, 
food quality, and food safety; (ii) knowledge exchange between EU and Ukrainian stakeholders 
in the food industry; and (iii) post-graduate education in food technology and safety.  
 
Component 2: Increasing Efficiency of the Food Supply Chain  
 
Outcomes will be better supply chain price formation, reductions in transaction and 
transportation costs, enhanced food quality and safety standards and increased supply chain 
transparency. The following types of activities may be included:  
 
Marketing and Storage Infrastructure - (i) strategic planning for marketing infrastructure; (ii) 
fresh fruit and vegetables wholesale markets; (iii) upgrading storage infrastructure; (iv) 
commodity markets development (with possible links to commodity markets in neighboring 
countries); and (v) market information systems.  
 
Agricultural Transportation Infrastructure Pilots - (i) Improvements in railway transportation 
network; (ii) investments to speed up processing at key customs points; and (iii) improvements in 
river transportation network.  
 
Component 3: Establishing a Quality Culture in the Food Supply Chain  
 
The outcome will be the creation within the workforce of a quality-conscious organizational 
culture. The following types of activities may be included:  
 
Extension services - (i) Good Agricultural Practices/Good Management Practices; (ii) quality 
control systems (i.e., HACCP-based or alternative food safety risk management systems); (iii) 
traceability (in compliance with regulation 178/2002/EC on General Food Law); (iv) 
international certification schemes (i.e., BRC, EurepGap); and (v) production and marketing 
cooperatives.   
 
Page  3
D.  Project location (if known) 
The precise location of project investments will be determined during project preparation. 
Investments in laboratories (component 1) may be in almost every oblast. Investments in 
wholesale market infrastructure and infrastructure pilots (components 2) are most likely to be 
concentracted in the western and southern parts of the country.   
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN] 
The Government's institutional capacity for environmental assessment has been improving. In 
particular, the Ministry of Environment is starting to demonstrate an ability to review and 
evaluate complex environmental assessments for a range of projects. The project preparation 
team will work closely with the Ministry of Environment and other stakeholders to complete the 
required environmental and social due diligence for the project.   
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Investment in laboratories may have environmental impacts. Such laboratories may be 
required to handle and dispose of hazardous materials. An EA will be conducted and it will 
include: (i)a review the national legislation that regulates handling and disposal of hazardous 
materials that are commonly used by such laboratories; and (ii) determination of the minimum 
safety standards that the upgraded laboratories would have to incorporate in their good 
Laboratory Practice manuals.  
 
Other project components that may require environmental assessment include: (i) fresh fruit 
and vegetables wholesale markets; (ii) upgrading storage infrastructure; (iii) improvements in 
railway transportation network; and (iv) improvements in river transportation network. If the 
project proceeds with investments in storage infrastructure, the EA will outline strategies to 
phase out the use of methyl bromide in the rehabiliated storage facilities.  
 
It is very unlikely that the cultural property safeguard would be triggered. However, please 
note that the environmental assessment should confirm this.  In addition the environmental 
management plan and contracts with contractors implementing works should cover the steps to 
be taken in accordance with national law and the Bank's safeguard should any chance finds 
emerge during the implementation of works.  It will be important to be sure that the 
environmental specialist on the team ensures that these measures don't slip through the cracks.   
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 
X
Investment in improving the river transportation network may involve activities such as 
dredging works. If the preparation team proceeds with these activities they may trigger the 
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) safeguard. This would depend on the area that such works cover and 
the technology used. The environmental assessment would assess if the sites that will be dredged 
support critical aquatic habitats (upstream and downstream). It will also need to indicate the 
composition of the sediments and the adequacy of the sites where they will be disposed.   
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X  
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X  
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 
X
With respect to physical cultural resources, it seems quite unlikely that the cultural property 
Page  4
Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No TBD 
safeguard would be triggered. Therefore it was agreed that this would not be checked. However, 
please note that any environmental assessment work should confirm this. In addition the 
environmental management plan and contracts with contractors implementing works should 
cover the steps to be taken in accordance with national law and the Bank's safeguard policy 
should any chance finds emerge during the implementation of works.   
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X  
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 
X
Major works may be associated with wholesale market construction, rehabilitation of 
construction points, and improvements in the river transportation network. If land acquisition or 
encroachments on rights of way becomes an issue based on works identified during project 
preparation, the team will make sure that project documents include appropriate instructions for 
addressing both land acquisition and encroachments.   
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X  
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 
X
The subcomponent on improvements in river transportation network may trigger the 
International Waters safeguard. If the team proceeds with this activity, notification letter will be 
sent out in accordance with the OP.   
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X  
Environmental Category:
 
B
-
Partial Assessment 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
A.  Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS 
would be prepared:  09/20/2005 
 
B.  For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage 
ISDS:  N/A 
 
C.  Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.  
The specific studies and their timing
1
should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS. 
The team is going on the first preparation mission in mid-june. By the end of that mission 
they will have a clear idea of which investment activities the government is most interested 
in persuing and will at that time prepare a detailed schedule for safeguard related studies.   
 
1
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the 
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected 
persons.
 
Page  5
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Julian A. Lampietti 
05/31/2005 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Ronald N. Hoffer 
05/31/2005 
Comments:  Cleared for safeguards at this stage; we will meet with the Task Team later in the project 
cycle to assess any needed changes in safeguards based on shifts in project components and other 
details. 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Benoit Paul Blarel 
06/01/2005 
Comments:  Cleared to proceed 
