Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET 
CONCEPT STAGE 
Report No.:  AC907 
 
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: August 9, 2004 
 
I.  BASIC INFORMATION 
 
A.  Basic Project Data 
 
Country: Uruguay 
Project ID: P057481 
Project Name: UY Road Maintenance and Rural 
Access 
Task Team Leader: Jorge M. Rebelo 
Estimated Appraisal Date: October , 2004 
Estimated Board Date: January, 2005 
Managing Unit: LCSFT 
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan 
Sector: Roads and highways (75%);Sub-national 
government administration (15%);Central 
government administration (10%); 
Rural services and infrastructure (P);Trade 
facilitation and market access (S);Infrastructure 
services for private sector development (S);Small 
and medium enterprise support (S);Other rural 
development (S) 
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: Marco Zambrano 
Loan/Credit amount ($m.):  
IBRD: 59.5 
Other financing amounts by source:  
($m) 
B.  Project Objectives  
The overall purpose of the project is to contribute to economic growth of the Uruguayan economy by 
maintaining its basic road network in a condition which will facilitate the movement of freight and 
passengers at a cost-efficient level of service. This overall objective will be accomplished by assisting the  
MTOP in the implementation of its strategy for arresting any further deterioration of the network due to 
recent fiscal restrictions, and ensuring the preservation of existing road assets in the long term. This will 
be a key condition for increasing the competitiveness of the economy and fostering future broad based 
economic growth based on regional trade and poverty reduction. The proposed project builds on the 
achievements of the First Transport Project  (Loan 3021-UR), Second Transport Project (Loan 4395-UR), 
and the on-going Forest Product Transport Project (Loan-4204-UR). 
 
Project specific objectives are to: (a) continue rehabilitating and upgrading to Mercosur standards selected 
national roads and bridges to permit transit of larger and heavier vehicles and reduce transport costs 
between Uruguay and its Mercosur trading partners; (b) improve the capacity of the departmental road 
network and access to rural areas so as to enhance the comparative advantages of the rural sector and to 
improve integration of secondary urban centers and the rural population in the national economy; and (c) 
assist MTOP in creating the enabling environment to attract more steady and reliable private funding for 
road maintenance and rehabilitation.  
 
These objectives reflect essential priorities for the transport sector in Uruguay and are consistent with the 
government strategy for regional integration and trade, road network conservation, strengthening of road 
sector management, private sector involvement in road management and more efficiency in road 
financing/road user charges. They also reflect the priorities identified in the Bank's Country Assistance 
Strategy (CAS).
 
Page  2
C.  Project Description  
 
The overall cost of the proposed project is now estimated at US$84.7 million of which US$80.5 million 
for the infrastructure components (95%) and the remaining US$4.2 million for the institutional 
strengthening and transport infrastructure safety components. The Bank would finance US$59.5 million 
(70%) and the, GOU would finance US$25.2 million (a tentative Project Cost Table is given in Annex 1). 
The costs indicated include price and physical contingencies, and the front end fee. To support the stated 
objectives the project would consist of the following components: 
 
Component 1 : Road Rehabilitation and Bridge Restoration (US$37.8 million).
 This component is 
fundamental in restoring the service levels of strategic sections of the road network, whose critical 
condition constrain the efficient provision of transport services, and in particular, the transit of heavier 
and larger trucks loaded up to Mercosur standards. The roads will be selected as links between capitals or 
major economic poles or access to ports or terminals, and their consequent relevance in achieving the 
project objectives. This component entails carrying out reinforcement, replacement, and rehabilitation 
works and will be subdivided into two subcomponents : Subcomponent (A) : Road sections and bridges 
outside of the 
Megaconcession
,
and Subcomponent (B) : Road sections and bridges within the 
Megaconcession
 .
The objective of this subcomponent is to support and strengthen the
 Megaconcession
 
project as a whole. 
Subcomponent (A) (US$8.0 million) entails carrying out:  (a) rehabilitation works consisting of 
reinforcing the pavement structures of : (i) about 15 km between ex-national Route 3-594km700 on 
national Route 3; (ii) about 20 km between Rio Tacuarí-Cañada Santos on national Route 18; all sections 
are part of international corridors. 
Subcomponent (B) (US$29.6) entails carrying out: (a) rehabilitation works consisting of reinforcing the 
pavement structures of : (i) 4 km of the km144-National route 22 section of National route 1, about 16 km 
of the Km 144-National route 2 section of National route 1, and about 3 km of the La Planta Urbana-
Young section on national Route 3; (b) carrying out of reconditioning works consisting of strengthening, 
widening or replacing the existing structures of 22 bridges located on national Routes 1, 5, 6, 7, 8, 21, 26, 
27, 28, 30 and 200 (
Interbalnearia
 route). 
 
Component 2 : Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Contracting (CREMA contracts) (US$22.7 
million).
 This component entails carrying out rehabilitation and maintenance works in five road sub-
networks covering an estimated 981 km of national roads through performance-based CREMA contracts.   
 
A
CREMA contract is a multiyear (four to five-year) performance-based contract between DNV and a 
private contractor. The contract obligates the latter to undertake all phases of road rehabilitation and 
maintenance works as a single package, from the design and programming of works, through the 
execution of such works. 
 
The sub-networks under each contract comprise different pavement types and service conditions. The 
contracts to be financed under the proposed project cover five networks : National route 3 (between 
National route 1 and Paso del Puerto, about 243 km), National route 5 (between Km97-Paso de los Toros, 
184 km), road access to Montevideo (85km), Canelones center west sub-network (130 km), Canelones 
east sub-network (140km), and tourist zone (200km). 
 
Component 3 : Departmental Road Maintenance (US$20.0 million
)
This component consists of 
carrying out departmental maintenance subprojects over the project period in the participating 
departments.  The departmental road maintenance program under the proposed project entails routine 
maintenance of about 10,000 km of gravel roads per year, including some periodic maintenance of roads 
and bridges. All departments in the country, excluding Montevideo, are expected to participate in the 
program and it should cover three years or the maintenance requirements for these roads. 
Page  3
Component 4 : Road Safety Program (US$3.6 million).
 
This component entails: (i) implementing low-
cost measures to increase road safety, including roads passing through urban areas, following the 
experience with the Second Transport project, and (ii) acquisitions and installation of road safety 
elements.  
 
Component 5 : Transport Sector Management and Institutional Building  (US$0.6 million). 
This 
component would entail: (i) assistance to MTOP in the preparation of its transport infrastructure plan for 
years 2005-2009, including engineering and economic studies as needed; (ii) assistance in capacity 
building and installation of HDM-4 model, and (iii) support the strengthening of infrastructure 
management practices. 
 
Some of the Borrower's highest transport priorities reflected in the above-described objectives (e.g. 
rehabilitating and upgrading internationally vital parts of the road infrastructure and arresting the 
deterioration of the overall network, expanding the role of the private sector in road maintenance, and 
strengthening road sector management) were directly linked to these project components. The proposed 
project would give high priority to maintenance and also build on and considerably deepen Uruguay's 
contractual road maintenance efforts, which would allow the road infrastructure deterioration to be kept 
under control.  All this would be complemented by the capacity strengthening and institutional building 
component. 
 
The proposed project design will take into account relevant lessons learned in prior projects and the Bank 
experience in Uruguay and in the region. Indeed, performance-based contract maintenance, in particular 
via CREMA contracts, have been a great success. In addition, the project execution would be greatly 
facilitated, especially in terms of procurement delays, project coordination and supervision, by the 
experience on design of previous transport projects. 
 
D.  Project location  
 
The project is national covering several sections of roadway in different areas of the country. They 
include both primary and secondary roads as well as departmental roads ans are specified in section C. 
 
E.  Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies  
 
The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) was established within Ministry of Transport an Civil Works 
(MTOP) for the execution of the First Transport Project, Second Transport Project and the on-going 
Forest Products Transport Project, and it will remain in charge of coordinating the proposed project 
activities. 
 
In the context of preparation of two externally funded projects in 1998 (Bank/JEXIM's Forest Products 
Transport, and IDB's Road Corridor Improvement), consultants reviewed the existing environmental 
legislation in Uruguay. The assessment concluded that the legislation provides an appropriate framework 
to implement environmental mitigation measures. In particular, the legislation requires that prior to 
executing any major civil independent consultants must conduct detailed EIAs before National 
Environmental Directorate (DINAMA), the national environmental agency, can issue the necessary 
environmental licenses.  
 
DNV adopted an Environmental Manual, in 1998, that sets guidelines and specifications to be followed 
during execution of works to avoid or mitigate any potential adverse environmental impact.  The Bank 
reviewed the Manual at the time, and found it satisfactory.  The Manual also incorporates procedures 
Page  4
requiring: (i) consultations with DINAMA in dealing with works in or near actual or proposed protected 
areas or other sites of high conservation value.  This consultation must take place at two stages, by the 
design engineer early in the engineering design phase, and later on by the supervisor prior to commencing 
the works; (ii) the use of ecologically friendly policies for vegetation management along rights-of-way.  
In general, vegetation control is restricted to about 15 meters from each side of the roadway allowing for 
a
safety area and proper functioning of drainage systems. On occasion, grass is kept short throughout the 
right-of-way along roads serving urbanized and tourist areas where often gardens have substituted natural 
vegetation; and (iii) the use of low toxic herbicides to control weeds declared national plagues such as 
abrojo grande/chico
 (xanthium cavanillesii/spinosum) and 
margarita de piria
 (coleostephus myconis). 
All project works carried out under the project must comply with the Environmental Manual.  
 
DNV has established a formal unit charged with the oversight of all environmental aspects for road 
projects and the enforcement of DNV’s Environmental Manual. Several initiatives with external support 
have been carried out through out the years to stregthen the unit : (i) technical assistance to strengthen the 
unit, provided by international consultants; (ii) training courses for DNV staff on environmental 
assessment of road projects; (iii) a survey of Uruguay’s environmental heritage along the national road 
network; (iv) a study on the transport of hazardous materials by road, within the context of related 
Mercosur guidelines.  The proposed Bank project would monitor the environmental impact of on-going 
DNV initiatives. 
 
II.  SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 
 
Applicable?
 
Safeguard Policy 
If Applicable, How Might It Apply? 
[X] 
Environmental Assessment
(
OP
/
BP
4.01) 
[
]
Natural Habitats
(
OP
/
BP
4.04) 
[
]
Pest Management
(
OP 4.09
)
[
]
Involuntary Resettlement
(
OP
/
BP
4.12) 
[
]
Indigenous Peoples
(
OD 4.20
)
[
]
Forests
(
OP
/
BP
4.36) 
[
]
Safety of Dams
(
OP
/
BP
4.37) 
[X] 
Cultural Property
(draft OP 4.11 - 
OPN 11.03
)
[
]
Projects in Disputed Areas
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.60)
*
[
]
Projects on International Waterways
(
OP
/
BP
/
GP
7.50) 
Environmental Assessment Category:
 
*
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the 
disputed areas
 
Page  5
[
]
A
[X] B   [] C   [ ] FI   [ ] TBD (to be determined) 
 
III.  SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN 
 
The target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS is October 2004 
 
IV.  APPROVALS 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
 
Task Team Leader: 
Jorge M. Rebelo 
07/15/04 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
Sector Manager: 
Name 
Date 
Comments 
