Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/19/2005 
Report No.:  AC1544
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Uzbekistan 
Project ID:  P070084 
Project Name:  Public Finance Management Reform Project 
Task Team Leader:  Roland N. Clarke 
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 14, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 1, 2005 
Managing Unit:  ECSPE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (100%) 
Theme:  Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (P);Standards and 
financial reporting (P);Other accountability/anti-corruption (P);Macroeconomic 
management (S);Other economic management (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
14.24 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.29 
 
EC: TECH ASSISTANCE FOR CIS - TACIS 
2.81 
 
ISLAMIC DEVELOPMENT BANK - AL AQSA FUND 
0.28 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
2.33
7.71 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
Improve transparency and accountability of the public sector.  
 
Strengthen institutional capacity to use public resources more effectively, efficiently and 
transparently, in line with Government priorities.   
 
3. Project Description 
a) 
Support for budget preparation: Provides assistance for the development of a 
Medium Term Budgetary Framework and the publication of a Budget in Brief  
 
b) 
Establishment of a Treasury including a Government Financial Management 
Information System (GFMIS). This component would finance consulting services, goods 
and training for the modernization of  treasury operations through the implementation of 
a
Government Financial Management Information System (GFMIS).  
 
Page  2
c) 
Change management and training to support the establishment of the Treasury: 
Provides training for workgoups on Treasury, IT specialists and Establishment of training 
centers and Treasury training program  
 
d) 
Project Management and monitoring and evaluation   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Tashkent - no relevant physical characteristics   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The proposed project is rated C and does not require an Environmental Assessment (EA) 
or Environmental Assessment Plan (EAP). There is no environmental impact or Civil 
Works.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable   
 
Page  3
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
No 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
No 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
No 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
No 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
No 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
No 
Page  4
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Roland N. Clarke 
05/19/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Roland N. Clarke 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Roland N. Clarke 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Johnson Appavoo 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
 
 
Comments:  Delegated to Sector Manager 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Deborah L. Wetzel 
05/19/2005 
Comments:  The project has no environmental or safeguard implications and I therefore authorize 
this ISDS form. 
