                              Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS)
Section I ­ Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: December 7, 2004                                               Report No.:AC1148
A. Basic Project Data
A.1. Project Statistics
Country: Vietnam                                          Project ID: P085080
Project: Road Safety Project                              TTL: Jerry A. Lebo
Total project cost (by component):

Total project costs is US$28.85 million (IDA US$25.61 million).

A. Institutional and Capacity Building Program (US$5.49 million)
B. Road Safety Demonstration and Awareness Program (US$17.65 million)
C. Road Safety Monitoring and Evaluation Program (US$5.35 million)
Appraisal Date: December 2004                             Loan/Credit amount($m): IDA: US$25.61
Board Date: March 17, 2005
Other financing amounts by source:                        N/A
Managing Unit: EASTR                                      Sector: Roads and highways (70%);Health
                                                          (20%);General education sector (10%)
Lending Instruments: Specific Investment Loan
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency recovery?)             Yes?    [ ]          No?    [X]
Environmental Category: Category B, Partial
Assessment
A.2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to reduce the rate of serious injury and death associated with road
transport. The key performance indicators are:

      1.   Rate of death and injury on project road corridors reduced;
      2.   Development and government approval of a national road safety strategy specifying achievable
           performance targets and a financing plan;
      3.   Driver behavior and compliance with vehicle and licensing standards on project road corridors
           improved; and
      4.   Monitoring and evaluation framework implemented in project corridors and used to prioritize
           road safety interventions, and national road accident database system (NRADS) established and
           updated regularly.

The project will assist the Government of Vietnam to reduce the rate of road fatalities and crashes in
Vietnam. This will reduce health shocks that push people into poverty or make escape from poverty
difficult as well as the health costs and economic inefficiencies resulting from road crashes. The project
also addresses the administrative, legal, and governance arrangements over the longer term, emphasizing
cross-sector capacity building for the transport, health, education, and judicial sectors. The project also
aims to support the incorporation of a wider array of World Bank - and other donor-funded road safety
initiatives - into an integrated safety management framework for the long term.

A.3. Project Description
The project has three components: (A) Institutional and Capacity Building Program, (B) Road Safety
Demonstration and Awareness Program, and (C) Road Safety Monitoring and Evaluation Program.

Component A. Institutional and Capacity Building Program (US$5.49 million)
This component will provide technical assistance and project implementation support to strengthen the
management and technical capacity of the National Traffic Safety Committee (NTSC) Executive Office
and the newly created project management unit (NTSC-PMU) and to prepare long term national road safety
strategy.
·      A.1 NTSC advisory services (US$4.92 million)--Provides technical assistance aimed at strengthening

      the capacity and performance of NTSC in (i) monitoring and evaluating road safety; (ii) managing
      and assessing project road safety interventions; (iii) developing databases, conducting surveys, and
      collecting data for monitoring and evaluating road safety; (iv) training in leadership, coordination,
      and strategic planning; and (v) developing a national program of road safety interventions,
      monitoring, evaluation, and reporting for later phases of the project.
·     A.2 Environmental implementation support (US$50,000)--Supports local experts to screen selected
      sites and proposed treatments for environmental impact and ensure that mitigation measures are
      included and provides support to NTSC for monitoring implementation of the project environmental
      management plan (EMP).
·     A.3 NTSC equipment to support implementation (US$70,000)--Provides office equipment and other
      goods for NTSC Executive Office and PMU, including air and water quality monitoring equipment
      and noise measuring equipment.
·     A.4 Independent safeguards monitoring (US$50,000)--Supports local environmental experts to
      conduct independent monitoring of project resettlement safeguard compliance and ensure
      compliance with the project resettlement policy framework (RPF).
·     A.5 Operating costs (US$0.40 million)--Covers NTSC's operations during project implementation,
      funded by the government.

Component B. Road Safety Demonstration and Awareness Program (US$17.65 million)
This component will assist the government in developing and implementing comprehensive, integrated
safety programs, including enhancement of road safety auditing processes and funding of blackspot
treatments, for three high-risk road corridors: (i) National Highway 1 between Hanoi and Vinh (281 km);
(ii) National Highway 1 between Ho Chi Minh City and Can Tho (151 km); and (iii) Highway 51 from Ho
Chi Minh City to the coast (80 km). Component B also includes a program of road user education, traffic
safety enforcement, and emergency service preparedness along the three demonstration corridors. If
project funds remain after works on the three demonstration corridors are completed, successful road safety
improvement techniques will be replicated elsewhere in the country.
·     B.1 Blackspot treatment program (US$3.08 million)--Includes physical works for blackspots. In
      years 2 to 4 of the project, works will be selected by the Vietnam Road Administration (VRA) in the
      preceding year on the basis of the most recent accident data.
·     B.2 Resettlement (US$0.65 million)--Covers resettlement and land acquisition costs arising from
      implementation of the blackspot program, funded by the government.
·     B.3 Design and construction supervision (US$0.12 million)--Provides technical assistance to VRA
      in managing the preparation and implementation of civil works, including engineering surveys,
      construction drawings and preliminary designs, specifications, cost estimates, and bidding
      documents; and a construction supervision contract to ensure that works meet contract requirements
      and that formally approved adjustments are made when necessary.
·     B.4 Vehicle inspection computer system upgrade (US$1.08 million)--Provides computer and
      communications equipment, software, and facilities for upgrading the vehicle inspection computer
      system nationwide, and vehicle inspection equipment for inspection stations in Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh
      City, and Vinh Long. Also supports a program of mobile vehicle testing in the demonstration
      corridors.
·     B.5 Driver training and testing (US$1.08 million)--Funds consulting services to assist VRA in
      reviewing driver training, testing, and licensing to prepare a national plan to improve management,
      procedures, and facilities. On the basis of review of findings, provides equipment for centers in Chi
      Linh and Ho Chi Minh City.
·     B.6 Road safety audits and safety inspection (US$0.26 million)--Provides consulting services for
      VRA in road safety audit and blackspot or black route identification and treatment: (i) developing,
      formalizing, and applying procedures; (ii) working with the Traffic Police to specify data and
      evaluation and monitoring requirements; and (iii) identifying and investigating blackspots and black
      routes, designing treatments, and monitoring and evaluation of treatment effectiveness.
·     B.7 Demonstration corridor safety enforcement (US$4.20 million)--Funds purchase of vehicles and
      equipment for the RRTPA to implement a general-deterrence traffic-enforcement model on
      demonstration corridors.
·     B.8 Road user education and awareness (US$2.96 million)--Provides materials, consulting services,

      and other inputs to implement coordinated road safety education program.
·     B.9 Road safety education program (US$1.08 million)--Provides road safety education materials,
      equipment, and associated training for schools in demonstration corridors.
·     B.10 Road accident emergency treatment (US$1.38 million)--Provides materials and equipment
      associated with emergency response in demonstration corridors and training of traffic police in
      emergency medical treatment through the Ministry of Health.
·     B.11 Operating costs (related ministries)--Covers the operations of VRA and the ministries of
      Police, Education, and Health during project implementation, funded by the government.
·     B.12 Consulting services (related ministries)--Covers local consulting services and other costs for
      the operation of sub-PMUs in the VRA and ministries of Police, Health, and Education (US$50,000
      each per year net of contingencies).

Component C. Road Safety Monitoring and Evaluation Program (US$5.35 million)
This component will support the development of a national road accident database system (NRADS), with
NTSC making data available to government agencies. The database will be used initially by VRA to
enhance the identification and treatment of blackspots and by the Ministry of Police to improve
enforcement strategies and priorities. In combination with other data sources, the system will help monitor
and evaluate the impact of the NPTS and other government road safety strategies.
·     C.1 National Road Accident Database System (US$2.69 million)--Develops system elements for
      recording, storing, managing, analyzing, reporting, and displaying road accident data, together with
      the necessary legal and organizational frameworks, procedures, and training.
·     C.2 RRTPA strategy advisory services (US$0.86 million)--After the NRADS has been established
      and initial experience on the demonstration corridors evaluated, provides consulting services and
      other support for developing and implementing a national traffic enforcement strategy emphasizing
      general deterrence, based on international best practice, and specifying performance targets and a
      funding plan.
·     C.3 Demonstration corridor monitoring and evaluation (US$1.54 million)--Consulting services to
      carry out independent monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of the Road Safety
      Awareness and Demonstration Program.
·     C.4 NRADS operating costs (US$0.27 million)--Covers operations during implementation of the
      NRADS, as well as office furniture and equipment associated with implementation of the system,
      funded by the government.

A.4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

The project location will be in, or very near, the right-of-way along three road demonstration. If project
funds remain after activities on the three corridors are completed, successful road safety improvement
techniques will be replicated elsewhere along high traffic road corridors in other areas of the country. The
three demonstration corridors are:

          1.  National Highway 1 (km 172-km 463) Ha Noi to Vinh
          2.  National Road 51 (km 0-km 75) Bien Hoa to Vung Tau; and
          3.  National Highway 1 (km 1915-km 2068) Ho Chi Minh city to Can Tho.

Of the above project components, only subcomponent B.1- Blackspots Treatment Program will involve
potential negative social and/or environmental impacts, and these are expected to be minor. Blackspot
improvements typically include small engineering works such as installation of guard rails, signage, and
rumble strips; construction of traffic islands and segregated traffic lanes; and minor road widening and
improvements to accommodate pedestrian paths, site distances, and curvature.

Social. The expected adverse social impacts are expected to be minor. These will include small-scale land
acquisition related to addition of pedestrian facilities, minor widening or realignment to improve site
distances or curvature. Potentially affected persons are those residing along the above demonstration road
corridors where re-alignment or addition of facilities are needed. In addition, intersections improvements
may be required, which are typically in urban and urbanizing areas.            An examination of first year

improvements showed that only one of the proposed eight blackspot treatments include land acquisition.
For the location where minor land acquisition is required, none of the affected persons were severally
affected and/or would required resettlement. No ethnic minorities reside in areas that have been identified
for the Blackspot Treatment Program.

Environment. Direct environmental impacts will be confined to existing roadways and immediate
adjacent areas where civil works will be undertaken.

IDA undertook field investigations in October 2004 to confirm that: (i) there are no undisturbed habitat;
(ii) no special-status wildlife species exists; and (iii) there are no cultural relicts in the project area or
immediate environs.

The project proposes no bypass, realignment, or other action in undisturbed areas.

No blackspot treatments are near a national park.

All works will be on existing roadways, and road improvements will be performed within present
alignments. No long-term nor adverse impact to area soils and hydrological characteristics are expected.

The overall impacts on the environment are expected to be minor, short and confined to construction areas.

Overall, the project will generate long-term positive impacts as traffic flows and road safety improve.

B. Check Environmental Category A [ ], B [X], C [ ], FI [ ]

Comments: The environmental category is to be confirmed at the project safeguards meeting on December
7, 2004.
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered

                                                                        Yes                        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.01)                                [X]                        [ ]
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           [ ]                        [X]
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               [ ]                        [X]
Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03-)                          [ ]                        [X]
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   [X]                        [ ]
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                            [ ]                        [X]
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    [ ]                        [X]
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             [ ]                        [X]
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*                             [ ]                        [X]
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)                     [ ]                        [X]




*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'
claims on the disputed areas

Section II ­ Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues.
D.1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

OP4.01 ­Environmental Assessment While the project is classified as category B, the EA analysis found
that the scale and magnitude of the potential impacts are very low, much lower that typical category B
projects. Most of the impacts are site-specific, none are irreversible. The overall environmental impact of
the project will be positive, as traffic flows and road safety improve.

OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed by the
borrower in full accordance with the OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement and in meaningful consultation
with key stakeholders. This RPF has been applied for year one civil works and will be applied to annual
RPs of subsequent years. The Project Resettlement Policy is given as in annex 10 of PAD. Even though the
social impacts of small scale land acquisition are expected to be very minor, the RPF is aimed to ensure
that all displaced persons (DP) will be compensated for their losses at replacement cost and provided with
rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least maintain, their pre-project living standards and
income earning capacity. The RPF has been disseminated to all project provinces of year 1 program and
disclosed at VDIC of Viet Nam World Bank office on November 22, 2004. According to a small scale of
impacts on land acquisition, only one abbreviated RP for year 1 is required. The number of DP is 52 (10
Households), all of DP will be affected with a small area of land and some trees, annual crops, there are no
buildings affected. No resettlement is required.

A social assessment was also done by the borrower, its purposes is to ensure that the project is informed
by and take into consideration relevant social issues, including:

     (i)       Understand the socioeconomic condition in the project areas.
     (ii)      Identify social issues such as poverty.
     (iii)     Identify stakeholders.
     (iv)      Provide an evaluation and monitoring framework; and
     (v)       Establish a framework for futures participation and consultation on the project.

The social assessment include screening of the three demonstration corridors with the project team,
consultation with schools, hospitals, medical clinic, police, traffic safety committees along the route,
assessment of available primary and secondary data and an information- sharing workshop with selected
stakeholders.

D.2 Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area.

No long term negative impacts are expected.

Potential indirect environmental impacts are possible with respect to materials supply (aggregates for
pavement, bitumen, and concrete, for example), but these would be very minor. The EMP has provisions
which require materials to be supplied from certified source in order to mitigate this impact.

D.3. Describe the treatment of alternatives (if relevant)

Alternative designs for blackspots were discussed during project preparation in the context of ensuring the
proper and cost-effective treatments for high accident locations (blackspots). The need for realignment or
widening was carefully considered, due to costs and the effect on travel speeds (which tend to go up with
alignment improvements).

D.4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

An environmental assessment has been prepared for the project in accordance with World Bank policies.
Based on the findings of the EA, and EMP was prepared. The EMP includes a policy framework and
guidelines for environmental assessment and impact mitigation for annual work programs as they are
identified. The policy framework outlines studies and actions that may be required to ensure that a work
package meets the Bank's environmental and social requirements. All work package proposals will be
required to contain basic environmental and social information to determine whether they are likely to have
significant environmental impact or require land or asset acquisition or resettlement.               Blackspot
improvement works with minor impacts will use the standard operating procedures outlined in the EMP
before the design is approved. It is not expected that any works will have serious environmental impacts.
Public consultation meetings were held in a sample of communes in the demonstration corridors. The
social assessment and final EMP developed for the project reflect the stakeholders' comments and
suggestions.

To ensure effective implementation of the EMP, during appraisal, the following actions will be discussed
and confirmed with MOT, NTSC and its Project Management Office (PMO):

         · During appraisal, the PMU will confirm environmental requirements to be included in the
              standard specification of civil work contract document, and a plan to build NTSC capacity to
              implement the EMP and address the safeguard issues.

         · During construction stage, PMU will ensure that the contractors are aware of their
              environmental obligations and ready to comply before signing the contracts. Field engineer
              will monitor the environmental performance of the contractors on a daily basis. Records must
              be kept in the monitoring file. The monitoring plan will be prepared in line with the
              construction plan.

         · During follow-on program, PMU assisted by project environmental safeguard training will
              undertake the screening for next year blackspot improvement program. If the impacts are
              significant, consultation with IDA will be necessary and assistance from external consultants
              may be required.

         · Capacity of the NTSC at its provincial associated branches is limited and have no pre-
              experiences working in Bank funded project, but they are committed to carry out the agreed
              management plans. The project will finance training for the implementing agencies and
              provincial environmental specialists.

A Project Resettlement Policy Framework as well as RP-year 1, which were developed in accordance with
OP 4.12 need to be adopted by the project provinces, approved by MOT and then disseminate to all
provinces participating in year 1 prior to a project negotiation. Procedural manuals for guidance on
safeguard issues (steps to implement for RP-year 1 and preparing RPs for coming years, etc.) will also be
developed during project preparation and will be included as a part of the Project Implementation Manual.
The project Management Units also need adequate arrangements for human resource, working facilities
and counterpart funds as well as trainings on the safeguards for their staff and local officials who will be
working for the project. The project Management Units will also prepare Terms of Reference for
Independent monitoring and select agencies for this task at the beginning of RP-year 1 implementation one
An important task of independent monitoring agencies will be to review the compensation unit costs
applied in RP and recommend to PMUs and project PPCs to adjust for the costs if they are lower than the
replacement ones.

The final draft of the EA was received and cleared by the Bank in (November 2004) and disclosed
thereafter in compliance with the World Bank's disclosure policy. The Government will adopt all project
safeguards documents in December 2004 prior to project negotiations. The environmental documents to be
used by the Government during implementation of the project are (i) Vietnam Road Safety Project,

Environmental Assessment (November 12, 2004); and (ii) Vietnam Road Safety Project, Environmental
Management Plan (November, 16, 2004).

D.5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

More than ten consultation workshops and meetings with key stakeholders have been held by
representatives of MOT and its Department and PMUs (e.g., Departments of legislation; Transport;
Planning and Investment; International Affairs; Science and Technology, Viet Nam railways and PMU1);
other line ministries and Donors such as MOP; MOH ; JICA; DFID as well as project provinces (Ha Noi,
Ha Nam, Ninh Binh, Thanh Hoa, Nghe An, Long An, Can Tho etc.) and DPs. The consultation workshop
and meetings discussed the causes of accidents, proposed mitigation measures as well as identified other
potential for socially adverse impacts. The feedback was integrated into the project design and the project
policy framework/ guidelines on safeguards. A stand alone report was issued on the findings of the
consultation process, "Vietnam Road Safety Project, Report on Public Consultation" dated November
2004. Significant effort in the design of year 1 had been made to avoid impacts on land acquisition and the
RPF was developed with the key principle being that project affected persons will be compensated for their
losses at replacement cost and provided with rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve, or at least
maintain, their pre-project living standards and income earning capacity. A Project Resettlement Policy
Framework as well as RP-year 1, has been disseminated to all provinces participating in year. These
documents have been disclosed at VDIC of Viet Nam world Bank office in Ha Noi on November, 22 2004.

F. Disclosure Requirements             Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Date of receipt by the Bank                              March 2004 (first draft), November 2004 (final)
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          November 22, 2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                           November 23, 2004
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                                                         Not Applicable
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
Date of receipt by the Bank                              November 2004
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          November 22, 2004
Date of submission to InfoShop                           November 23, 2004
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:
Date of receipt by the Bank                              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                           Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                           Not Applicable
Dam Safety Management Plan:
Date of receipt by the Bank                              Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                          Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                           Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.



Section III ­ Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
(To be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment:                                                        Yes         No
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                            X
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA report?             X
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?           X
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats:                                                              Yes         No
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
natural habitats?                                                                                       X

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-
critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to                  X
the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management:                                                                  Yes         No
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                                  N/A
Is a separate PMP required?                                                                 N/A
If yes, are PMP requirements included in project design?                                    N/A
Draft OP 4.11 (OPN 11.03) - Cultural Property:                                              Yes         No
Does the EA include adequate measures?                                                       X
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts
on physical cultural resources?                                                              X

OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples:                                                               Yes         No
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in consultation
with the Indigenous People?                                                                             X

If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement:                                                   Yes  No
Has a resettlement action plan, policy framework or policy process been prepared?        X
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve the plan /
policy framework / policy process?                                                       X

OP/BP 4.36 ­ Forests:                                                                    Yes  No
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been
carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions
for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams:                                                             Yes  No
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE)
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been
made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways:                                           Yes  No
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification requirement, then
has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception?
     Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas:                                                    Yes  No
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international aspects of the
project, including the procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for dealing
with the issue, been prepared, cleared with the Legal Department and sent to the
RVP?
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure:                                                            Yes  No
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?       X
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local     X
NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies:                                                                  Yes  No
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
prepared for the implementation of the safeguard measures?                               X

Have safeguard measures costs been included in project cost?                             X
Will the safeguard measures costs be funded as part of project implementation?           X
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
safeguard impacts and measures?                                                          X

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?                       X

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date

Task Team Leader:                                             12/7/2004
                                  Jerry A. Lebo

Project Safeguards Specialist 1:  Vinh Quoc Duong             12/15/2004


Project Safeguards Specialist 2:                              12/15/2004
                                  Hong Vu (consultant)
                                                      Name
Approved by:                                                     Date

Sector Manager:                   Jitendra Bajpai             12/16/2004
Comments:

WB156224
N:\Projects\Vietnam\P085080 - Road Safety Project\road safety project\PAD\VRSP ISDS PAD (appraisal 121004).doc
December 15, 2004 2:27 PM

