                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                              Report No.: AC365


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: November 15, 2004

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Vietnam                              Project ID: P083581
Project Name: Hanoi Urban Transport           Task Team Leader:
Development Project                           Shomik Raj Mehndiratta
Estimated Appraisal Date:                     Credit amount: US$ 150-170 million
February 2006
Estimated Board Date:
June 2006
Managing Unit: EASTR                          Lending Instrument:
                                              Specific Investment Loan
Sector: General transportation sector         Theme: Access to urban services for the
(70%);Roads and highways (30%)                poor (P);State enterprise/bank restructuring
                                              and privatization (P);Regulation and
                                              competition policy (S);Pollution
                                              management and environmental health (S)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team:
Jitendra Shah, Lead Environmental Specialist (EASEN)
Vinh Quoc Duong, Operations Officer (EASEN)
Hoa Thi Mong Pham, Operations Officer (EASSD)
Lars Lund, Sr. Social Scientist (EASSD)
Ke Fang, Social Development Specialist (EASSD)

Other financing amounts by source:                                                ($m.)
Government of Vietnam                                                               25
Global Environment Facility                                                         10

B. Project Objective

1. The project development objective is to assist Hanoi in implementing a sustainable growth
strategy, by supporting a development plan and urban transport improvements that meet the
city's growth needs while providing priority for public transport. This objective will be
supported through the establishment of high capacity busways on the major corridors of the City,
by integrating investments in road infrastructure with land-use plans to generate a transit friendly
urban landscape, and by enhancing the capacity of the City's institutions to create/implement a
comprehensive urban transport policy that provides priority to public transit.

C. Project Description

2. Total project costs are estimated in the range of US$170-200 million. The size of the IDA
Credit is expected to be between US$150-170 million. In addition, the Global Environmental
Facility (GEF) has also expressed interest in providing up to US$12 million in co-financing
under GEF's Operational Program 11 (Promotion of Environmentally Sustainable Transport).
The project has three components:
   · A bus transport component (total US$60-90 million, IDA+GEF US$55-85 million)
       that includes (i) supporting reorganization the bus system, (ii) development of busways
       and bus priority on a selection of new and existing roads, (iii) development of bus
       maintenance facilities, secure ticketing systems and (iv) other institutional strengthening.
   · A road infrastructure component. (total US$100-120 million, IDA US$80-100
       million). that includes construction of a section of Ring Road 2 (6 km) from Cau Say
       north to the dyke road (the site of the planned bridge at Nhat Tan) to facilitate
       development of the area West of West Lake, and ultimately North of Red River. In
       addition, Hanoi has proposed the Western extension of Hoang Quoc Viet Street (3 km).
       Both of these road sections go through a combination of farmland and settled land and
       will entail resettlement. Hanoi has asked the Bank to finance infrastructure development
       on the resettlement site.
   · Institutional strengthening.(~US$15-20 million IDA+GEF US$ 15-20 million) This
       component includes subcomponents related to safety and air quality requested by Hanoi.
       Preparation of these subcomponents is at a very preliminary level, but it is likely that the
       subcomponents will include studies, training, equipment and other technical assistance.
       In addition, this component covers studies, training and other efforts related to the three
       major policy foci of this project on which we have already started a dialogue with
       Government: reform of bus services, enhancement of the capacity of City institutions
       responsible for land planning and development including integration with transport
       planning, and the development/implementation of a comprehensive urban transport
       policy that covers issues such as parking, traffic control and vehicular restrictions.

3. IDA specialists have been working with officials from Hanoi's Department for Natural
Resources and the Environment (DONRE) regarding the air quality subcomponent.
Conceptual agreement with IDA has been reached on the approach to prepare the sub-
component. According to the existing concept that has been agreed upon, it is expected that the
subcomponent will include the following elements:

   · Capacity building and technical assistance to develop an Air Quality Management Plan.
       To develop and implement a sound Air Quality Management Plan, there is need to
       provide assistance on 4 building blocks, which would also be part of the project: (a)
       Emissions inventories; (b) Air quality monitoring; (c) Health impact assessment; and (d)
       Control Measure analysis;
   · Public Awareness and participation; and
   · Strategic Environmental Assessment, to overview the environmental consequences of the
       plans for urban transport, and land-planning.

4. Hanoi is completing work on a PPIAF grant (US$250,000) to assist with the bus
reorganization process. As already mentioned GEF has also expressed interest in co-financing
elements of the project that would address global climate change concerns. GEF pipeline entry
has been obtained for activities focusing on (a) promoting a modal shift away from personal-
use motor vehicles (the bus component), (b) encouraging non-motorized travel (c) development
of a sustainable urban development policy and (d) a complementary urban transport policy.

D. Project location (if known)

The location of the project is in the Hanoi Urban area. Busways are proposed on the major East-
West corridor (road 32) as well as on major corridors connecting the central area to the South
and Southwest (Le Duan, Bach Mai and Tay Son corridors). Both the proposed roads are in the
Northwest quadrant of the urban area: the proposed section of the 2nd Ring Road has a North
South alignment West of West Lake, and the Western extension of Hoang Quoc Viet Street runs
East ­ West North of road 32, West of the airport access road.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity

The PMU has a lot of experience in managing social and environmental safeguards in the
government funded projects, but it has little experience in preparing and implementing EIA and
RAP for Bank-assisted projects. It has been implementing a Bank funded project - Urban
Transport Improvement Project (UTIP), but the project mainly focuses on strengthening capacity
of urban traffic management. The PMU's current expectation is that it will set up a social and
environment unit staffed by social and environmental specialists to be specifically responsible
for preparing EIA/EMP and RAP and supervising implementation of these documents.
Adequate training will be provided to these social and environmental staff through the IDF-
funded capacity building project by the end of September, 2004. It is also expected that staff in
other relevant agencies will be also trained before starting implementation of RAP and EMP.


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


Applicable?    Safeguard Policy
               If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
    [X ]       Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

     [ ]       Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

     [ ]       Pest Management (OP 4.09)

    [X ]       Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

     [ ]       Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

     [ ]       Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

      [ ]          Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

      [ ]          Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)

      [ ]          Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*

      [ ]          Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)




Environmental Assessment Category:
[X ] A [ ] B [ ] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)


Safeguard Policies Classification:
[ ] S1 [X] S2 [ ] S3 [ ] SF [ ] TBD (to be determined)


III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION

A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues
and prepare to mitigate them?
Environmental Assessment: The PMU has been requested to designate a full time staff with
experience in environmental management and road engineering to be responsible for EA since
the beginning of the project preparation. The EIA ToR has been prepared and reviewed by the
Bank and the task team has commissioned an independent consultant to start preparation of EIA
and EMP. In the meantime, the TT will strengthen the PMU's capacity through the on-going
IDF safeguard training program.

The EIA will also look at cultural property issues, following requirements of OPN 11.03.

Resettlement: A socio-economic survey will be conducted to assess resettlement impacts of the
proposed project components. A draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) in compliance
with OP4.12 has been prepared. After the socio-economic survey and correspondent feasibility
studies are completed, a Resettlement Plan(RAP) will be developed following the resettlement
policy set up in the RPF which both the Bank and the city government agree upon.

B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed?
Environmental Assessment: The Bank's consultation and disclosure requirement for EIA
preparation of the category A project is applied and has been documented in the EIA TOR.

Resettlement: During the socio-economic survey, key stakeholders will be identified, and
intensive consultation with these stakeholders will take place. The draft RPF and the draft RAP
will be disclosed before the project appraisal.

*By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas


