Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/24/2005 
Report No.:  32431
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P073361 
Project Name:  Natural Disaster Risk Management Project 
Task Team Leader:  Laurent Msellati 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 23, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASRD 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%) 
Theme:  Natural disaster management (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
86.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.00 
 
JAPAN: MINISTRY OF FINANCE - PHRD GRANTS 
4.50 
 Financing 
Gap 
5.50
23.00 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed project is the first step in assisting the Government of Vietnam (GoV) to 
implement its Second National Strategy in order to reduce Vietnam's vulnerability to 
frequently occurring natural disasters.  The NDRMP supports a conceptual shift from 
disaster response to disaster-risk management.  
 
The overriding goal of the proposed project is to save lives, reduce vulnerability, protect 
economic assets, and ensure rapid recovery of poor communities living in hazard prone 
areas.  To this end, the proposed project would have the following specific objectives:  
 
-
Reduced vulnerability to flood and storm hazards in project areas;  
 
-
More efficient recovery and reconstruction efforts; and  
 
-
Stronger national and local disaster risk-management institutions.  
 
These would be achieved through the provision of funding for (a) structural and non-
structural investments to mitigate the impact of recurring natural disasters; (b) 
rehabilitation and reconstruction of essential public infrastructure in the aftermath of 
natural disasters; and (c) capacity building for national and local institutions in the areas 
of preparedness, response, and long-term recovery.   
Page  2
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Prevention and Mitigation Investments (US$75 million)  
 
This component would support a range of priority structural and non-structural 
prevention and mitigation sub-projects of medium-scale investment.  
 
Structural sub-projects.  Structural investments will center on planning, construction and 
rehabilitation of flood and storm-control infrastructure.  Included in this category are 
rehabilitation of weirs, irrigation and drainage pumping stations, stabilization of river 
banks, strengthening of river and sea dyke systems, river training structures, 
improvement of river-flow capacity (e.g. dredging, flow-diversion weirs), construction of 
diversion channels, construction of safe harbors for small fishing boats, improvement of 
water flow along main highway and railway systems, strengthening of bridges in critical 
areas, construction of elevated earth pads for resettling  people.  Rehabilitation of existing 
reservoirs could be added to this list for the Central Region, provided it meets the 
"mitigation" and "integration" selection criteria.  
 
Non-structural sub-projects.  The objective of the non-structural investments is to set up 
the basis for a system of flood and storm risk-management in priority disaster-prone 
areas.  These sub-projects would include flood plain and hazard mapping, flood 
forecasting and modeling systems, restoration of environment and ecological systems, 
review of building codes and design standards, weather forecasting, early warning and 
response systems.  While non-structural investments may potentially be applied 
nationwide, limited resources require prioritization and focus on specific areas to achieve 
maximum benefits.  
 
Two structural and one non-structural sub-projects have been included in the project's 
first year implementation program: (a) Vuc Mau reservoir rehabilitation in Nghe An 
Province (North Central Region); (b) Ba Tri sea dyke construction in Ben Tre Province 
(Mekong Delta Region); and (c) the Mekong River Delta Flood Warning and Monitoring 
System.  A list of 31 potential sub-projects posterior to year 1 has also been prepared and 
is included in the PAD.  
 
Component 2: Community-based Disaster Risk Management (CBDRM) ($2.5 million)  
 
Under this component, the CBDRM approach would be used to build the capacity of the 
most vulnerable populations to carry out risk reduction measures.  CBDRM would 
combine with the other components to reduce the vulnerability of hazard-prone 
communes.  Financing will be provided from a Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) 
grant of US$1.5 million to pilot the CBDRM participatory approach in designing 
appropriate community-driven disaster risk reduction and mitigation measures.  The 
JSDF Grant would identify, design and implement natural disaster risk-management 
activities using participatory methodologies in vulnerable communes in the disaster-
prone provinces of Ben Tre, Thua Thien Hue and Ha Tinh.  
 
Page  3
Three types of activities would be financed under this component: (a) community and 
local government capacity building, including village and commune-level capacity 
building to support development of Safer Commune Plans (SCP) using participatory 
planning in about 10 pilot communes; (b) community driven disaster risk reduction and 
mitigation, including the construction of safe water systems, multi-purpose evacuation 
centers, health posts, canals for drainage, protection dykes, and improved roads for 
evacuation and access to humanitarian relief; and (c) community driven disaster risk 
preparedness, including non-structural CBDRM sub-projects to support safer commune 
planning for disaster preparedness and response, improved early warning and 
communications systems, evacuation plans and demonstration, food and water storage 
containers, first aid training and equipment.  
 
Complementary non-refundable grant funding (about US$1.0 million) is being sought to 
prepare the development of safer village and safer commune planning in 30 more 
communes.  These will be identified through consultation process with key districts and 
provinces, both where structural sub-projects will be financed, and in particularly 
vulnerable areas after carrying out a risk assessment.  
 
Component 3: Post-Disaster Reconstruction Support ($21 million)  
 
This component aims to provide a rapid disbursement facility to fund post-disaster 
reconstruction of essential government infrastructure and thereby support fast recovery.  
It has three specific objectives: (a) to ensure more rapid post-disaster reconstruction, 
limiting poverty-exacerbating and economic growth-dampening impacts of disasters; (b) 
to strengthen government capacity to undertake post-disaster damage assessments; and 
(c) to strengthen government speed and efficiency in the allocation and disbursement of 
disaster assistance.  The component will be implemented by the MOF and will operate to 
the extent possible in accordance with existing government procedures for allocation and 
disbursement of its State Contingency Budget.  It will be accompanied by institutional 
support, for an estimated amount of US$1 million, to improve the damage assessment 
process and the efficiency and effectiveness of utilization of public resources for post-
disaster reconstruction.  
 
Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building ($10.5 million)  
 
This component would strengthen government institutions to ensure better coordination 
and integration among the various agencies and different levels responsible for 
prevention, response and recovery.  Institutional strengthening and capacity building at 
the central government level would focus initially on strengthening the Disaster 
Management Center (DMC), which acts as the Standing Office of the Central Committee 
for Flood and Storm Control, situated in MARD, and the General Department of Hydro-
Meteorological Services situated in Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment 
(MONRE), amongst many other important agencies and departments. At the provincial 
government level, the focus would be on the Provincial Flood and Storm Control 
Committees, with an emphasis on inter-Provincial cooperation mechanisms, as well as on 
multi-sectoral planning involving all ministries.   
Page  4
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The overall program, including the two phases of the APL, will be implemented in eleven 
Central and Northern Provinces and six Provinces in the Mekong region (namely Thanh 
Hoa, Nghe An Ha Tinh, Quang Binh, Quang Tri, Thu-Thien Hue, Quang Nam, Quang 
Ngai, Binh Dinh, Phu Yen, Khanh Hoa, Ninh Thuan, Binh Thuan, Long An, An Giang, 
Dong Thap and Ben Tre Provinces).  
 
The project's larger investments (on average <US$ 10M) in disaster mitigation 
infrastructure would be mainly in coastal areas in southern and central Vietnam.The 
small scale investments through the Community Based Natural Disaster Mitigation 
component are located in both coastal plain areas and in inland areas (but still in coastal 
provinces).  
 
Environmental.  Key environmental issues for large structural sub-projects under 
Component 1 are water resources management and conservation of sensitive ecosystems 
(aquatic and terrestrial).  
 
Social.  Many of the project areas have high population densities, although the project 
will not have large resettlement requirements.  Some project provinces have large 
populations of ethnic minorities, and it will therefore be important to ensure their 
participation in project activities, including as beneficiaries.  Gender considerations have 
been included in Component 2 on CBDRM.  It has also been included into other 
components and project activities, especially for Component 4 on institutional 
strengthening and capacity building to ensure both women and men have equal 
opportunities as participants and beneficiaries of this project.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Lars C. Lund (EASSD) 
Ms Hoa Thi Mong Pham (EASSD) 
Ms Nina Bhatt (EASSD) 
Mr Phillip Brylski (EASES) 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong (EASEN) 
 
Page  5
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The appraisal decision meeting on May 11, 2005 concluded that the Bank's safeguard 
requirements for appraisal were met. A summary of the main safeguard issues is as 
follows:  
 
OP 4.01, Environmental Assessment.  The project would have positive environmental 
and social impacts by mitigating flood disasters. The Phase I investments in infrastructure 
have the potential for adverse impacts on water resources and coastal habitats.  The 
Environmental Assessments for the subprojects identified for the first year of the project 
satisfy the Bank's requirements for OP 4.  01.  OP 4.01 will also be applied to structural 
investments under component 1 that will be considered for financing under the project in 
years 2 and beyond.  For two components - the Community-based Disaster Risk 
Management and Post-Disaster Reconstruction Support components - environmental 
screening and assessment procedures will be applied to avoid or mitigate environmental 
impacts.  
 
OP 4.04, Natural Habitats.  The Bac Tri sea dyke sub-project triggers the Bank's OP on 
Natural Habitats.  Eight species of birds that are considered either threatened or nearly so 
were observed in the salt pans and intertidal mud flats around the project area in 2000, 
within the Binh Dai Important Bird Area (IBA; Birdlife International, 2003).  Although 
the project would not directly impact the majority of habitats within this IBA, it could 
result in the loss of up to 15 hectares of mangrove forest and result in indirect impacts as 
a
result of human disturbance during construction and operation of the sea dyke.  Two 
key mitigation measures to be considered by the appraisal mission are: (i) planting an 
equivalent or larger area of mangroves to replace those that are directly impacted by the 
project, (ii) improving protection for the Important Bird Area, either by enlarging the 
existing Thanh Phu Nature Reserve to include the Binh Dai IBA, or establishing a 
community-based conservation unit for the Binh Dai IBA site.  For the Community-based 
Disaster Risk Management and Post-Disaster Reconstruction Support components, 
Page  6
environmental screening procedures have been developed that will, inter alia, ensure that 
natural habitats are not significantly impacted.  
 
OP 4.37, Safety of Dams.  The project would repair and upgrade Vuc Mau dam to 
ensure safety of the reservoir during a catastrophic flood event.  This is a 34 meter earth 
fill dam with a maximum reservoir capacity of about 75 million m3.  The reservoir is 
experiencing losses through seepage, which is preventing the use of the reservoir at its 
design capacity.  The project would finance earth works to bank protection, construction 
of a second spillway, and upgrading the emergency service roadway.  The Vuc Mau sub-
project triggers the Bank's safeguard policy on Dam Safety (OP 4.37).  A Dam Safety 
Report for the Vuc Mau dam has been prepared in accordance with the Bank's safeguard 
requirements.  The report provides recommendations on remedial works to ensure dam 
safety, the implementation of which will be supervised by the Dam Safety Unit (DMU) 
established within MARD for the Vietnam Water Resources Assistance Project 
(VWRAP).  The DMU will be responsible for ensuring that emergency management 
plans, dam safety inspections, and Vietnam laws and regulations on dam safety will be 
met.  There are no dam safety sub-projects other than Vuc Mau in the list of 31 potential 
sub-projects posterior to Year 1.  However, procedures and guidelines for preparing Dam 
Safety Reports will be included in the final EA, published after the appraisal mission.  
 
OP 4.11, Cultural Property.  The environmental and social reviews carried out on the 
first subprojects have not identified any assets covered under this OP that would be 
adversely affected by the project.  For sub-projects in years 2 and beyond, the 
environmental screening procedure addresses cultural property, and if it is triggered 
appropriate impact analysis and mitigation (including choosing alternatives that avoid 
impacts) will be applied.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.  Since all sub-projects will not be identified by 
appraisal, but selected on a yearly basis, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has 
been prepared to provide the policies and provisions that will govern mitigation measures 
of any negative impacts caused by land acquisition or change in land use by the project.  
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the three Year-1 sub-projects have been prepared 
and provide relevant details, including census surveys, asset valuation, description of 
compensation and other resettlement assistance, consultations, and institutional 
responsibility for implementation arrangements.   
 
Sub-projects: During the first year of implementation, there will be three sub-projects  
(two structural and one non-structural): (a) Vuc Mau reservoir rehabilitation; (b) Ba Tri 
sea dyke construction; and (c) the Mekong River Delta Flood Warning and Monitoring 
System (MRDFWMS).  
 
These sub-projects will cause impacts on the land, environment and socio-economic 
activities within the project area.  Impacts will include acquisition of non-public lands, 
potential negative effects on livelihoods, and the displacement of households.  Of the 
three sub-projects Vuc Mau will entail land acquisition estimated at US$ 30,000;  Ba Tri 
Sea Dyke entails land acquisition (aquaculture areas, salt marshes, forests & farm land, 
Page  7
houses) and the resettlement of 70 households.  The Ba Tre land compensation and 
resettlement is 6 percent of the total investment in this project (US$900,000).  While 
MRDFWMS is a non-structural sub-project, it will entail significant land acquisition for 
the construction of 132 hydro meteorological stations in the flood area.  The 
compensation cost for each station is estimated at US$13,000, or about 30 percent of total 
cost for station construction.  
 
Under component B, Community-based Disaster Risk Management, some small 
projects may require land. For projects causing marginal impacts, a provision for 
voluntary land and asset donation may be adopted.  
 
Since the OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement differs from the regulations governing 
resettlement and compensation in Vietnam, relevant waivers will be obtained from the 
Prime Minister's Office.  
 
OD 4.20 (being converted to OP 4.10), Indigenous Peoples (IP).  An Ethnic Minority 
Development Framework (EMDF) has been prepared together with an Ethnic Minority 
Development Plan (EMDP) for Vuc Mau.  Data on numbers, socio-economic profiles, 
livelihood impacts, and location of ethnic minorities in the project area obtained confirms 
that it is likely that the project will affect up to 30 of the 53 officially recognized ethnic 
minority groups who live in the project areas.  These groups reside mainly in uplands and 
central coastal regions, and three minority groups in the Mekong Delta plains.  
 
The most significant negative impact will likely be in Component 1 (Prevention and 
Mitigation Investments) which has structural investments likely to result in resettlement, 
including among ethnic minorities.  The RAP and Ethnic Minority Development Plan 
(EMDP) provide details on this.  Special attention will be given in this component to 
ensure that these groups are informed and consulted about the specific proposed 
infrastructure developments in ways that are meaningful and culturally appropriate.  
 
For Component 2 (Community-based disaster risk management), eliciting localized 
solutions to problems posed by natural disasters will be a key step towards ensuring that 
ethnic minority needs, institutions, and customs are accounted for to adapt responses 
which may be best known to these communities themselves.  
 
The Post Disaster reconstruction support in Component 3 (the repair of roads, schools, 
health clinics, bridges) is particularly pressing where ethnic minorities are concerned.  As 
upland minorities often reside in remote and isolated areas with limited road access, they 
are more susceptible to being cut-off from the outside, receiving aid at a later stage, 
including having basic infrastructure  (in health, education, communication, water 
supply) repaired at later stages compared to the majority populations. Here, stakeholder 
participation in all aspects of disaster recovery will be one of the means to mitigate 
adverse effects in this area.  
 
For Component 4 (Institutional Strengthening), possible impacts include the exclusion 
of ethnic minorities from the recruiting, hiring, training and skills development 
Page  8
opportunities.  Attention to their  capacity building in these areas is an integral step 
towards their empowerment by enhancing their ability to better manage disasters.  
 
BP 17.50, Public Disclosure.  All drafts of the RPF, RAPs, EMPF and EMDP were 
disclosed in Washington DC by February 15, 2005.  The Vietnamese translations were 
ready and disclosed by March 15, 2005.  The Bank's disclosure requirements (effective 
January 1, 2002) have been followed.  All documents were disclosed locally and were 
accessible in a form, manner, and language intelligible to local NGOs and project 
affected people.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The impact to the Binh Dai Important Bird Area (IBA) is potentially significant, but the 
direct habitat loss is small (up to 15 hectares of semi-natural mangrove forest) and can be 
mitigated by extending protection to the remaining important habitats.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
The EAs for the two main structural investments under component 1 (Bac Tri and Vuc 
Mau) cover an adequate range of feasible alternatives. For the Vuc Mau Reservoir 
subproject, four alternatives were considered, and for the Bac tri sea dyke, two 
alternatives were analyzed.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment.  An independent environmental consultant prepared five documents as part 
of the environmental review: (a) a general EA for the entire project; (b) specific EAs for 
the three sub-projects in Phase I; and (c) an environmental review procedure for 
investments under the CBDRM component.  A separate environmental review procedure 
has also been developed for investments under Component 3 (Post-Disaster 
Reconstruction Support).  
 
Social.  Both the resettlement and ethnic minorities strategies are described in the 
respective resettlement Policy Framework and the Ethnic Minority Development 
Framework which have been prepared for the project in accordance with World Bank 
Operational Policy 4.12 and Operational Directive 4.20.  The involuntary resettlement 
policy framework covers all possible adverse impacts caused by the taking of land 
(acquisition) for the project.  The Ethnic Minority Strategy ensures that in the  project 
design:(a) that ethnic minorities benefit from development projects, and (b) that the 
project avoids or mitigates potentially adverse effects on ethnic minorities caused by the 
project.  Resettlement and Ethnic Minority Plans for sub-projects where land acquisition 
is known to take place for the first year investments have also been prepared in 
accordance with World Bank safeguard policies.  
 
Implementation arrangements.  The PMU within the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development (MARD) will establish an office with social and environmental specialists 
Page  9
to manage and supervise safeguard implementation (for phase I investments) and 
preparation (for later phases).  An independent agency will monitor compliance 
throughout project implementation  
 
Capacity.  The Borrower possesses adequate capacity for assessing the project's 
environmental and social impacts, and proposing mitigation measures for these. The EA 
identifies the training needs for implementing the Environmental Management Plans, 
which have been included in the project costs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are the beneficiaries of the disaster mitigation investments - 
households and communities in the 18 provinces that benefit from the structural and non-
structural investments under Component 1 or assist in the design of community-based 
investments under Component 2.  Stakeholders also include Women's Unions, Farmers' 
Unions/Associations and Veteran Associations as the most important local political-
social organizations, Water User Groups (WUGs) or Irrigation Cooperative Groups. 
Public-sector stakeholders include the Provincial, District and Commune People's 
Committees (PPCs, DPCs and CPCs), Natural Resources and Environment offices at the 
provincial and district levels, and the Department Labour, Invalids and Social Affairs 
(DoLISA).  
 
Extensive consultations were held with public and private sector stakeholders on the 
environmental and social impacts of the Bac Tri and Vuc Mau subprojects, the only two 
large structural investments in the first year of the project. For the smaller community-
based investments under Component 2, the consultations on potential impacts were 
integrated with the community discussions on investment priorities.  
 
Summaries of the safeguard documents (EA/EMPs/RPF/RPs/EMDS) in Vietnamese 
were displayed in each of the district towns at a public place.  The full safeguard 
documents were disclosed at the WB Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi 
and through the InfoShop in Washington DC (disclosure of documents to be confirmed).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/07/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
02/15/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/12/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2005 
 
Page  10
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
11/12/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/16/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/16/2005 
 
Safety of Dams: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
04/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
04/14/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
04/14/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
Yes 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams 
 
Have dam safety plans been prepared? 
Yes 
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts 
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank? 
Yes 
Page  11
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements 
been made for public awareness and training? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Laurent Msellati 
05/23/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong 
05/24/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Lars C. Lund 
05/24/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
05/24/2005 
Comments:  Approved 
Sector Manager: 
Ms Hoonae Kim 
05/24/2005 
Comments:  Approved 
