Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/16/2005 
Report No.:  AC1682
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P075407 
Project Name:  VN-3rd Rural Transport 
Task Team Leader:  Simon David Ellis 
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 19, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: December 22, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASTR 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (100%) 
Theme:  Decentralization (P);Rural services and infrastructure (P);Other financial and 
private sector development (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
100.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
29.00 
 
UK: BRITISH DEPARTMENT FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
(DFID)25.00
54.00 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [X] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The proposed development objective of the project is to improve rural access for 
communities to markets, off-farm economic opportunities, and social services, by:  
 
ï‚§ 
Increasing the number of communities connected to new and improved all 
weather roads access;  
 
ï‚§ 
Improving the management and maintenance of the network to ensure 
sustainableimprovements in access; and  
 
ï‚§ 
Increasing the capacity within government and the private sector to plan, 
implement and maintain improvements in the rural transport network.  
 
Key performance indicators  
 
ï‚§ 
Increased level of rural accessibility in Vietnam as defined by the percentage of 
people living within 2 km of an all weather road;  
 
ï‚§ 
Reduced transport times to markets and schools;  
Page  2
ï‚§ 
Increased levels of road maintenance expenditure and improved condition of the 
rural roads network;  
 
ï‚§ 
Increased capacity of local road administrations as evidenced by the existence of 
prioritized provincial transport plans and basic road condition data.   
 
3. Project Description 
There will be three components that will provide financing and capacity building to 
support administration and implementation of provincial transport plans. Component A 
will provide financial support for the rehabilitation and improvement of the core rural 
roads network. Component B will provide financial support to pilot provinces for the 
introduction of simple maintenance management systems at the district level. Component 
C
will provide technical assistance to support improved planning, implementation and 
maintenance of the rural roads network.  
 
The project has three implementation modes with the intention that provinces move 
from one mode to the next once they have sufficient capacity to meet the requirements. 
The three modes are as follows:  
 
ï‚§ 
Centrally managed implementation with all payments made through PMU-5 but 
as many implementation functions decentralized (e.g. procurement) to the provincial 
level as possible (financing Model 1).  
 
ï‚§ 
Decentralized implementation with all payments made through the state treasury 
system but donor funds identified as a separate line item (financing Model 2). In this case 
all implementation functions will be managed by the province. PMU-5 will be 
responsible for monitoring and evaluation.  
 
ï‚§ 
Full budget support or SWAp (financing Model 3) where donor funds are not 
identified separately from the state budget. Full decentralized implementation. Although 
the project design does not currently include specific activities for a sector-wide approach 
(SWAp) to road financing rural road rehabilitation, this will be considered in the course 
of implementation. If it is decided to pilot a SWAp, this would be based in part on an 
additional safeguard assessment undertaken during the first several years of 
implementation.  
 
The EA preparation requirement are therefore required to develop accordingly following 
this implementation stages.  
 
Component A: Rehabilitation of the core rural roads network (US$ 102.5m) .  
 
This component will finance the rehabilitation and improvement of the core rural roads 
network (district, commune and village roads) in 33 provinces in the North of Vietnam. 
In line with the GoV strategy the focus will be to connect the remaining communes 
which lack all weather motorized vehicle access and to support improvements of the 
network including upgrading economically justified roads to a paved standards and the 
provision of bridges. The focus will be on developing cost effective, coherent networks 
with maximum connectivity. IDA/DFID finance will be coordinated with a $250m GoV 
infrastructure bond issue which will exclusively finance the connection of communes 
without all weather access.  
Page  3
Component B: Maintenance of the district roads network (US$ 12.5 million).  
 
This component will provide additional funding to provincial and district budgets for the 
maintenance of district roads and bridges.  This component will be piloted in 10 of the 
project provinces with the primary purpose to support the introduction and capacity 
building of local road maintenance systems. Disbursements will be based on approved 
district maintenance plans and subject to the implementation of simple systems for the 
collection of road condition data so that changes in network condition can be monitored 
over time.  
 
Component C: Institutional and capacity building program (US$ 12.5 million).  
 
This component will provide technical assistance, implementation support and capacity 
building to strengthen the co-ordinating and advisory role of the Ministry of Transport 
and the implementation capacity of local transport departments. The aim will be to 
provide greater clarity over the role of central government while at the same time 
providing the guidance, tools and training for local transport departments to implement in 
a
decentralized environment. This component has two main sub-components:  
 
Sub-component C.1: MoT Advisory Services (US$4.4m).  
 
These advisory services are designed to strengthen the central role of the MoT in 
providing standards, guidance and systems to support provinces implement their transport 
plans in a decentralized environment. Much of the work will focus on developing 
national guidance and standards and then providing the necessary materials and training 
support to disseminate the information. There will be three main areas of work in this 
sub-component:  
 
C.1.1 Capacity Building and Implementation support to PMU-5 ($??m).  This will be 
the main technical assistance package that will cover:  
 
ï‚§ 
Implementation support for PMU-5 to provide assistance in overall project 
management including project implementation, procurement, financial management, 
planning, resettlement and environmental issues, monitoring, reporting, coordination and 
oversight.  
 
ï‚§ 
Advisory support to functional departments in MoT  to support VRA, RTU, DST, 
DPL in activities such as (i) formalizing national standards for rural roads; (ii) developing 
simple maintenance management systems; (iii) revise network classifications; (iv) 
developing guidance on improved planning, programming and budgeting procedures; and 
(v) supporting the implementation of local transport policies and strategies.  
 
ï‚§ 
Training coordination and course development  will provide support to ensure that 
training materials, course programs and training institutions are mobilized at the correct 
time and to the right audience. Basic training courses will be developed in each key area 
relevant to the project. Additional, courses will be provided in response to expressed 
demand.  Support will also be provided to the DPL and the Training Institutions selected 
for the development and delivery of the training courses.  
 
ï‚§ 
4 regional support centers (RSC) will consist of multidisciplinary teams providing 
outreach services to the PDoTs and district technical offices. The RSC will ensure 
Page  4
consistency in the application of standards, supervision and maintenance activities. The 
RSC will also play a facilitating role in the identification of training needs, 
implementation of training courses and on-the-job training.  
 
C.1.2 Audit and integrated lesson learning consultants ($??m). Funds will be provided 
for consultants to undertake financial and technical audits and integrated reviews of 
project implementation.  The consultants will be responsible for  monitoring the 
performance of  the provinces with regard to the trigger indicators specified in Annex 4C. 
The reviews will cover all aspects of the project cycle including planning, safeguards, 
design, procurement, funds flow, maintenance performance, road standards and technical 
quality. These reviews are designed to increase fiduciary and safeguard oversight but also 
to provide useful lesson learning opportunities.  
 
C.1.3 Equipment to support implementation ($??m). Funds will be provided to purchase 
office equipment, vehicles, training aides, IT equipment and other goods to ensure that 
related agencies have adequate facilities to carry out the project.  
 
Sub-component C.2:  Provincial capacity building services (US$8.1m).  
 
This component is directed towards building capacity of an estimated 14,000 personnel 
in 33 provinces at all government levels and private sector organisations to effectively 
manage and maintain the rural roads network. A needs assessment will be undertaken for 
each province and an action plan prepared to indicate how shortfalls in capacity can be 
remedied. It is anticipated that basic training in key areas will be provided to all 33 
provinces. This will be supplemented with additional training based on the needs 
assessment and expressed demand.  Funds will be used for a comprehensive training 
program and technical and managerial advisory support to the executing agencies and 
their staff.  Training activities will be primarily provided by existing MoT training 
institutions located throughout the country but the training programs of contractor 
associations and other professional associations related to the sector will also be used. 
Due to the large geographical coverage of the project, the technical support and training 
at local level will be supervised through the four RSC.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
There are 33 provinces have been selected as detailed below  
 
ï‚§ 
Northern Mountain area: (12 provinces): Bac Giang, Bac Kan, Cao Bang, Dien 
Bien, Ha Giang, Lai Chau, Lang Son, Lao Cai, Son La, Thai Nguyen, Tuyen Quang, Yen 
Bai.  
 
ï‚§ 
Red River Delta area: (8 provinces): Bac Ninh, Ha Nam, Ha Tay, Hai Duong, 
Hung Yen, Nam Dinh, Ninh Binh, Thai Binh.  
 
ï‚§ 
Middle Lands area: (3 provinces): Hoa Binh, Phu Tho, Vinh Phuc.  
 
ï‚§ 
North Central area: (3 provinces): Ha Tinh, Nghe An, Thanh Hoa.  
 
ï‚§ 
South Central area: (7 provinces): Binh Dinh, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang 
Ngai,  Quang Tri, Thua Thien Hue, Phu Yen.  
Page  5
The Table below presents the provinces and three staged implementation plan:  
 
Provinces included in the RT3 project by Implementation Phase -  
 
Provinces having detailed design available by appraisal: Hung Yen; Quang Nam; Thanh 
Hoa; Tuyen Quang  
 
1st phase:  Bac Giang; Bac Kan; Ha Giang; Ha Tinh; Hoa Binh; Lao Cai; Nghe An; Phu 
Tho; Quang Binh; Quang Ngai;  Quang Tri; Thua Thien Hue  
 
2nd phase: Bac Ninh; Binh Dinh; Cao Bang; Dien Bien; Ha Nam; Ha Tay; Hai Duong; 
Lai Chau; Lang Son; Nam Dinh; Ninh Binh; Phu Yen; Son La; Thai Binh; Thai Nguyen; 
Vinh pSUC; Yen Bai  
 
Environmental.  The project will rehabilitate 4,500km of rural roads in 33 provinces 
locate in the northern mountain, northern highland, Red River Delta and central coast 
regions of Vietnam. The road segments are located in agricultural and residential land use 
areas. None of the road segments to be financed in the first year (100 km of road will be 
rehabilitated in the first year) are located in environmentally sensitive areas such as the 
buffer zones of protected areas or within other important natural habitats.  
 
The environmental review found that there are few impacts associated with the projects 
because of the modest size of the civil works and because there are no changes in road 
alignments. The impacts are those that result from rehabilitation and associated impacts 
from borrow pits and quarries. These impacts can be easily mitigated through a set of 
specific mitigation measures included in the environmental management plan (EMP).  
Roads rehabilitation will create a series of beneficial impacts which included better 
access to services and markets for the local communities.  
 
Social. The project covers a wide range of geographical areas from the northern 
mountains to the south central, crossing many areas where the ethnic minority groups 
live. Therefore, ethnic minorities will be one of the social safeguard issues. Results of the 
social screening for phase 1 show that the impacts on the ethnic minority groups, 
however, do not cause community-wide or severe socio-economic effects, but rather will 
be limited to a modest level of land acquisition.  
 
No major resettlement will be required but land acquisition will occur due to road 
widening. However, each of the road links is anticipated to have low-intensive impacts. 
Land acquisition and resettlement process including public consultation and satisfactory 
compensation and livelihood restoration for the population residing in the project areas is, 
therefore, another main social issue in the project.  
 
Measures for impact mitigation have been considered which include the development of 
a
number of projectâ
 ™s policy frameworks which guide the social safeguard 
implementation. Consultation with and participation of the affect population will also be 
Page  6
remained throughout the preparation and implementation of the project. In overall, the 
project will greatly benefit the local communities, including better access to services and 
markets.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Chaohua Zhang (EASSD) 
Mr Hong Vu (EASSD) 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong (EASEN) 
Mr James Orehmie Monday (EASEN) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project would have positive social and environmental impacts by improving mobility 
and basic connections of rural road networks, and by reducing erosion and dust impacts 
by surfacing the rural roads. The negative impacts are expected to be minor and site 
specific and easily mitigated by applying practical mitigation measures. In addition to the 
rehabilitation of road surfaces, the environmental review considered the potential impacts 
of borrow-pit quarrying. A suite of technical mitigation have been developed for easy 
application in implementation, a standard guideline to incorporate environmental 
provision into civil contract for contractor compliance have been provided.  
 
Although the project design does not currently include specific activities for a sector-
wide approach (SWAp) to road financing rural road rehabilitation, this will be considered 
in the course of implementation. For this reason, the project prepared policy frameworks 
the environmental issues, resettlement, and ethnic minorities, as well as comparisons of 
Vietnam regulations and World Bank safeguard policies. If it is decided to pilot a SWAp, 
this would be based in part on an additional safeguard assessment undertaken during the 
first several years of implementation.  
 
OP 4.04.  Natural Habitats.  The proposed rural road rehabilitation will be implemented 
in well defined areas while the alignment is not expected to change nor newly opened, so 
Page  7
it is not expected to implicate the impact on the natural habitats nor environmental 
sensitive areas. As the project is implemented in a wide ranges of provinces throughout 
the country in different natural environmental settings, the majority of road links are not 
identified upfront at appraisal, an environmental screening procedure has been developed 
that will, inter alia, ensure that natural habitats are not significantly impacted.  
 
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.  The project is expected to have marginal adverse 
impacts of land acquisition and resettlement. However, given the programmatic nature of 
the project and many of the roads are to be identified later during implementation, a 
resettlement policy framework has been developed in line with Vietnamese laws and 
regulations and World Bank policy on involuntary resettlement to guide planning and 
implementation of mitigation measures in case of land acquisition and resettlement.  
 
For the first implementation provinces of Hung Yen, Quang Nam, Thanh Hoa and 
Tuyen Quang, resettlement planning has been completed and resettlement action plans 
have been prepared in line with the Policy Framework. The first 100 km in four provinces 
would affect 1,474 households, bvut generally with low intensity. Of the total of 1,474 
affected households, 31 households lose more than 25% of their productive land and 21 
households, mostly in urbanized Hung Yen province, will have to relocate.  
 
For the subsequent years, an annual resettlement plan will be prepared for each province 
based on their annual work plan and a compensation plan is required for each road link 
which is the update of the impact figures following the detailed technical design and 
DMS, and of the compensation rates. These compensation plans will be subject to review 
by the World Bank.  
 
As RT3â
 ™s
strategic approach is moving into full 
budgetary support to Vietnam 
transport sector, a Resettlement Policy Framework for SWAP was developed based on 
the comparative analysis of the Governmentâ
 ™s
laws and regulations and the 
Bankâ
 ™srequirements on compensation and resettlement and measures fo
r
bridging the 
gaps. With the issuance of the Governmentâ
 ™s Land Law 2003 and its guiding decrees 
and regulations, the grey area between two systems was enlarged. However, divergence 
still exists, mainly in the following areas: i) eligibility for and entitlements to 
compensation, ii) need for meaningful consultation and information disclosure, and iii) 
monitoring requirement. In addition, a common government practice for local road 
construction requires some certain forms of local contribution, including non-
reimbursement for small loss of land or any other assets (crops, trees and structures).  
 
OD 4.20 (being converted to OP 4.10), Indigenous Peoples (IP). In line with the 
programmatic nature, a policy framework for development of Ethnic Minority has been 
developed in line with local laws, regulations and World Bankâ
 ™s
OD4.20 on 
Indigenous people. A screening exercise was conducted in the project areas of the first 
four implementation provinces.  Ethnic minority communities are only found to be in 
Tuyen Quang and Thanh Hoa provinces.  Further assessment work indicates that the 
Muong ethnic minority group in Thanh Hoa is fully integrated with the dominant Kinh 
group through 200 years of gradual acculturation.  They have adopted Kinh language, 
Page  8
dress and economic systems and therefore do not maintain a distinct cultural or social 
identity.  The assessment also shows that they will not suffer differential adverse impacts 
and would not require additional assistant measures. Therefore the assessment concludes 
that this community in the project area does not fall under the World Bank definition of 
indigenous people and the World Bankâ
 ™s
Policy on Indigenous People is not triggered 
in Thanh Hoa. However, the ethnic groups of Tay, Dao and Hoa in Tuyen Quang 
province are in some aspect of distinct culture, and an Ethnic Minority Development Plan 
for Tuyen Quang was prepared.  
 
Roads to be identified and included in the project in the subsequent years would follow 
the policy framework to develop necessary measures to address impact on ethnic 
minority communities.  
 
BP 17.50, Public Disclosure.  The draft policy frameworks (two for environment, two 
for resettlement, and one for ethnic minority development), the Resettlement Plans, 
Ethnic Minority Development Plans, and Environmental Assessment/Environmental 
Management Plans disclosed in Washington DC by 1 July 2005.  The Vietnamese 
translations were also disclosed by 1 July 2005.  The Bankâ
 ™s
disclosure requirements 
have been followed.  All documents were disclosed locally and were accessible in a form, 
manner, and language intelligible to local NGOs and project affected people.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
As the project is dealing with rehabilitation of existing rural road network, it is quite 
limited in alternative treatment. During implementation localized alternative treatment 
might be applicable for individual road link such as material supply, one-sided road 
enlargement or lightly realignment as a mitigation measure to reduce loss of land and 
property.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
For each subproject, a quantitative assessment of potential water sources (surface and 
groundwater) and their quality is carried out. The selection of the water source will 
depend on water availability and quality, and the subproject design will address water 
treatment needs in relation to water quality and standards.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Environment.  To comply with OP4.01, the borrower has prepared the following 
environmental safeguards documents:  
 
ï‚§ 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) to support implementation 
through Models 1, 2  
 
ï‚§ 
4 EA plans based on this EMF have also been prepared for the 100km of roads in 
the 4 pilot provinces for the first year.  
 
ï‚§ 
Another EMF has also been prepared in the event the project pilots a full SWAp 
â
 “
Model 3. 
 
Page  9
Social. During the project preparation, an international consultant team with social 
development expertise was hired to assist PMU5 and PPMUs to develop: i) a 
Resettlement Policy Framework for Model 1 and 2; ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework 
for Model 3 (SWAP); iii) a Policy Framework for Ethnic Minority Development; iv) four 
Resettlement Plans for the first 100 kms of roads in the four 4 provinces; and v) an Ethnic 
Minority Development Plan for Tuyen Quang province. The preparation of projectâ
 ™s 
safeguard documents and implementation of subsequent phases will be guided by these 
policy frameworks.  
 
Implementation arrangements.  An environmental and social unit within PMU5 will be 
established to manage and supervise safeguard implementation. Each participated PPMU 
is to appoint a staff in charge environmental and social safeguard implementation. An 
independent agency will monitor compliance throughout project implementation  
 
Capacity.  The Borrower possesses adequate capacity for assessing the 
projectâ
 ™senvironmental and social impacts, and proposing mitigation measures for 
these.The EA identifies the training needs for implementing the Environmental 
Management Plans, which have been included in the project costs.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Extensive consultations were held with public and private sector stakeholders on the 
environmental and social impacts of the first 100km in 4 pilot provinces. A consultation 
workshop on the project designed environmental safeguards approach was held in Hanoi 
in May 05 with participation on MONRE, PMU5, MOT, WB, DFID, and the 
representative of PPMUs, DONREs of 4 provinces participating in the 1st year program.  
 
Summaries of the safeguard documents (EA/EMPs/RPF/RPs/EMDS) in Vietnamese 
were displayed in each of the district towns at a public place.  The full safeguard 
documents were disclosed at the WB Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi 
and through the InfoShop in Washington DC (disclosure of documents to be confirmed).   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
07/01/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
07/01/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
07/13/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/28/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2005 
 
Page  10
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/28/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/28/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/28/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
N/A.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  11
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Simon David Ellis 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Vinh Quoc Duong 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Chaohua Zhang 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Hong Vu 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Jitendra N. Bajpai 
 
Comments:   
