Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  07/13/2005 
Report No.:  AC1296
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P084871 
Project Name:  VN-2nd Transmission & Distribution 
Task Team Leader:  Richard Jeremy Spencer 
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 28, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 28, 2005 
Managing Unit:  EASEG 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Power (100%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
200.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
0.00 
 SUB-BORROWER(S) 
124.02
124.02 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the project is the efficient development of Vietnam's transmission and 
distribution system.   
 
3. Project Description 
Component 1: Transmission and distribution systems expansion and reinforcement  
 
This component will support investments in the 500 kilovolt (kV) and 220kV 
transmission system and 110 kV distribution system to alleviate power shortages and 
reduce equipment overloads, and improve system reliability and efficiency by upgrading 
and modernizing the transmission and distribution system. At the 500kV level, about 567 
km transmission lines and 1,950 MVA of new transformers will be built to enable the 
evacuation of power from the planned major generation centers at O Mon in the South 
and at Quan Ninh in the north, and around Ho Chi Minh City.  At the 110kV level, about 
59 km of lines and 400 MVA to new transformer capacity will be built to improve 
network capacity, remove bottlenecks and meet growing demand from smaller load 
centers in central Vietnam.  
 
Page  2
The component is divided into two phases:  
 
-
The four sub-projects in the first phase have been appraised and safeguards issues 
assessed; their details are summarized here. A 500 kV substation will be built at Doc Soi 
to support increased load growth around Dung Quat. Substation reinforcements will be 
made at 500 kV and 220 kV levels to meet increased demand in Ho Chi Minh city. 
Additional measures will also be taken to strengthen transmission system control, 
protection and reactive capability so as to improve the quality and stability of the bulk 
power system.  At the 220 kV level, the Project consists of two GIS substation 
constructed  in Southern Vietnam.  The capacity of the Binh Tan and Binh Trieu 220 kV 
substations is 1,000 MVA.  
 
-
In the second phase, sub-projects are under preparation but not yet appraised.  For 
these projects, environmental assessment, resettlement plans and ethnic minorities 
development plans will be prepared according to frameworks and guidelines agreed 
during appraisal.  The frameworks and guidelines have been adopted by the Government 
of Vietnam, disclosed in the Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi and will 
be disclosed at the World Bank Infoshop in Washington DC.  
 
Component 2: Electricity market and system operations modernization  
 
The component consists of (a) the supply and installation of a SCADA/EMS for the 
NLDC with integral market and meter management systems and the supply and 
installation of SCADA systems for each of the three RLDCs; (b) replacement of the 
existing VietPool Interim Market System to a full-function market management system; 
and (c) improving the telecommunications backbone to support the new systems.  Each 
will include both hardware and software to support the system operator and market 
operator responsibilities of NLDC.  
 
Component 3: Market transition support  
 
This component will enable EVN, and in particular the transmission company, to 
manage the transition to fuller commercial operation.  In accordance with the Road Map 
for Power Sector Reform, technical assistance will be provided for studies relating to 
commercialization including developing optimal dispatch strategies, transmission system 
pricing, contractual arrangements, and on the best way to set up financial settlements. In 
addition a review of the staffing implications of reform will be carried out. EVN's 
management capacity will be strengthened, particularly financial and technical, to 
improve their ability to dispatch generation plant based on economic criteria and to 
establish a financial settlements unit. Training in dispatch operations and accounting for 
dispatch center, transmission and distribution staff will be provided, in support of the 
hardware investments.   
 
Page  3
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The 500kV sub projects in Phase 1 are at O Mon and, for the transmission line, in a 
corridor from Cai Lay to Nha Be.  The 220 kV investments will be in the suburbs of Ho 
Chi Minh City (HCMC).  
 
The sub-projects identified for Phase 2 are expected to include: a 500 kV transmission 
line from Quang Ninh to Soc Son and switch bay at Soc Son; an extension to the 500 kV 
Doc Soi Substation; stringing of the second circuit of the O Mon - Cai Lay portion of the 
500 kV O Mon - Nha Be transmission line; construction of the Long An to Phu Lam 
section of the 500 kV O Mon - Phu Lam transmission line and 500 kV switchbay at Phu 
Lam; and connection of the Phu My Power Generation Complex with the North-South 
500kV transmission Line at Tan Dinh through three separate subprojects, namely:  (i) 
construction of the Phu My ? Song May transmission line and installation of two 500kV 
switchbays at the Phu My substation; (ii) construction of the Song May ? Tan Dinh 
transmission line; and (iii) construction of the Song May 500/220kV substation.  The 
three 110kV subprojects that have been identified and are under preparation for inclusion 
in Phase 2 are: the 110 kV Binh Chanh substation and transmission line; the 110 kV Tam 
Quan substation and transmission line and the 110 kV Kon Plong substation and 
transmission line.Subprojects in Phase 2 may change, depending on priorities for 
investment at time of subproject appraisal.  
 
The topographical features vary from mountainous and hilly landscape in Kon Tum and 
Quang Ninh, to coastal plains in the centre of Vietnam, from peri-urban to yellow-red 
soils in the Northeast of Mekong and wetlands in the Mekong Delta.  The Mekong Delta 
has extensive river systems and areas of acid sulfate and saline soils.  
 
The proposed transmission lines and substations are mainly in peri-urban, agricultural, 
and forest areas planted for production but would not cross protected areas with 
significant biodiversity value or natural habitats. There is potential impact for (i) the 500 
kV Soc Son to Quanh Ninh transmission line to affect one area of natural habitat, a forest 
stand near Quang Ninh and (ii) the 110kV transmission line and Kon Plong sub-station in 
Kon Tum province.  These will be further examined when the subprojects are appraised.    
 
Construction in the Mekong Delta will require special care to avoid significant impacts 
on the acid and saline soils with regard to temporary use of lands, as well as to minimize 
the disturbance to the inland waterways navigation.  
 
Social characteristics. Land acquisition and resettlement process including public 
consultation and satisfactory compensation and livelihood restoration for the population 
residing in the project areas is the main social issue in the Project. No specific impacts on 
the ethnic minority communities is anticipated. Results of the social screening for phase 1 
show that there are some ethnic minority groups in the project area of Kon Tum province 
and some of them will be impacted on land acquisition. However, the impacts do not 
cause community-wide or severe socio-economic effects.   
 
Page  4
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environmental issues:  
 
Based on documentation furnished by Electricity of Vietnam (EVN) and their 
environmental assessment (EA) consultants during pre-appraisal and in the draft final EA 
reports, the Bank team has concluded that all of the proposed project investment 
components are clearly within the definition of Category B projects, as defined by 
paragraph 8(b) of OP 4.01 (i.e., they are of a type and scale whose potential adverse 
environmental impacts are less than those of Category A projects).  A careful review of 
these components by the environmental specialists on the project team found that these 
impacts are likely to be site-specific, not sensitive, or irreversible, and in every case, 
mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the negative impacts.  
 
(1) Environmental Assessment:  
 
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) reports for all subprojects were prepared by 
the Borrower for each of the Phase 1 subprojects. The EMPs comprise a short project 
description, environmental screening and EMP as guided by the Environmental 
Assessment Template for Power Transmission and Distribution Projects (the 
Environment Template) adopted by the government.  Due to the potentially more 
significant impacts of the construction of high- voltage transmission lines and substations 
more detailed EAs were prepared for the 500kV components.  
 
The Template will be used for the Phase 2 subprojects and the documents subsequently 
prepared will be included in the PIP as part of the project documents.  
 
(2) Natural Habitats  
Page  5
No Phase 1 projects have identified impacts on natural habitats.  For Phase 2, potential 
natural habitats will be assessed at subproject appraisal as set out in the Template  
 
(3) Cultural resources  
 
No cultural resources have been identified as impacted; chance find procedures, as set 
out in the Borrower's regulations have been instituted for Phase 1 projects.  Similar 
provisions will apply to Phase 2 projects.  
 
(4) Resettlement  
 
Phase 1 subprojects will impact 757 households comprising 3,179 people. Each of the 
subprojects will have low-intensity impacts involving some temporary or permanent loss 
of land to transmission tower foundations, substations and line stringing.  Rights of way 
will have limitations on land use to ensure safety. Most of impacts on land will be 
temporary.  In the rights of way land use will be limited to agricultural purposes; however 
most of the displaced persons will be affected only temporarily. Crop compensation will 
be delivered in cash at current market rates. Land and other assets will be compensated at 
substitution cost. Particular attention will be paid in assuring that compensation amounts 
indicated in government tariffs have been adjusted as to actually correspond to these 
rates. Displaced persons who have to reconstruct their houses will receive a special 
subsidy to cover livelihood losses in the house reconstruction period. All displaced 
persons will also be assisted with allowances in order to restore their livelihood at least as 
the same level of pre-project implementation. Impacts on houses will be mostly partial 
and generally will not require the relocation of families outside their residential plots.  
 
(5) Indigenous People  
 
No specific impacts on the ethnic minority communities is anticipated in Phase 1. Phase 
2
projects will be prepared and appraised according to the ethnic minorities development 
framework adopted by the government and appraised by IDA.  
 
Linkages to other projects  
 
IDA has also completed a due diligence review of safeguard procedures undertaken for 
the gas/oil fired O Mon power plant, which will be interconnected with the IDA-financed 
500 kV line in Phase 1.  It has also conducted a review of the coal-fired Quang Ninh 
power plant, which would be interconnected with a prospective Phase 2 investment.  The 
potential impacts include resettlement, construction impacts and environmental emissions 
during operation.  The review determined that national and regional emissions standards 
had been adhered to and that environmental and social impacts were being satisfactorily 
addressed.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The EA has shown that in general the potential impacts are minor, temporary and within 
the national environmental standards. These impacts will be mitigated and monitored as 
Page  6
provided in the EMPs.  Several actions have been proposed in the EMPs/EIAs and these 
include:  
 
(i) 
Construction of access roads, substations, and transmission/distribution lines, with 
associated tree cutting  
 
(ii) 
Increased levels of dust and noise from the use and movement of equipment  
 
(iii) 
Road damages and other transport disturbance due to the transportation of 
building materials.  
 
(iv) 
Impacts on forest, reserved land and biodiversity.  
 
(v) 
Soil erosion and landslide.  
 
(vi) 
Electromagnetic radiation and other health hazards.  
 
(vii) 
Unexploded ordnance.  
 
(viii)  PCB leakage or disposal.  
 
Successful appraisal of Phase 1 subprojects was conditional on preparation of EMPs and 
EAs and their implementation is a project covenant to ensure that the mitigation measures 
will be included in the technical design and bid specifications.  Phase 2 subprojects will 
require EMPs and EAs to be appraised, and implemented.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Alternatives have been analyzed in all individual EMPs/EIAs regarding the route 
alignments as to minimize impacts mainly on resettlement and in some circumstances on 
environment.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Borrower has provided EAs for the 500kV subprojects and EMPs and resettlement 
plans (RPs) for the 500kV and 220kV subprojects undertaken as part of Phase 1.  The 
Borrower has also prepared Environmental Guidelines, Resettlement Policy and Ethnic 
Minority Development Frameworks which have been adopted by the Government and 
Electricity of Vietnam.  For Phase 2 subprojects to be appraised successfully, EAs, EMPs 
and RPs and ethnic minority development plans (EMDPs) must be prepared and 
appraised by IDA.  The local Departments of Natural Resources and Environment 
(DONREs) have been fully involved in the process by providing environmental 
certificates for Phase 1 subprojects, as required by the Government. The 500 kV 
subprojects are subject to EIA clearance by MONRE.  
 
EVN has implemented a number of Bank credits (TD 1, SEIER, RE 1), and is 
experienced with IDA?s requirements regarding the preparation of RAPs, EIAs, EMPs, 
and EMDPs. However EVN capacity for implementing EMPs is limited. That includes 
ensuring the incorporation of mitigation measures in construction bidding documents, 
supervising the implementation of mitigation measures, as well as carrying out the 
monitoring program.  Ongoing training and supervision is undertaken to mitigate this 
risk.   
 
Page  7
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
EA Disclosure and Consultation: For Phase 1 projects, public consultation has been 
conducted effectively throughout the EIA process, including meetings with local 
authorities, and public meetings with project affected households.  Project stakeholders' 
concerns were incorporated into the project design and EMP. Draft EMP/EIA reports 
were locally disclosed from Feb 15, 2005 in accordance with the Bank's requirement. The 
EMP/EIA reports have been sent to the Infoshop on February 14, 2005.  
 
RAP Disclosure and Consultation:  consultation has been conducted effectively 
throughout the resettlement planning process, including inventory and socioeconomic 
surveys, interviews , and public meetings. The local people's participation process are 
provided in the RAPs.  All the RAPs have been locally disclosed in Vietnamese and 
publicly announced in local newspapers. The consolidated RAP and summary report have 
been sent to the Infoshop on February 14, 2005.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/24/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
12/24/2004 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
10/08/2004 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/15/2005 
 
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
02/14/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
02/15/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
02/28/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
Page  8
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OD 4.20 - Indigenous Peoples 
 
Has a separate indigenous people development plan been prepared in 
consultation with the Indigenous People? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review the plan? 
Yes 
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed 
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit? 
No 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
Page  9
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Richard Jeremy Spencer 
07/08/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr Phillip Brylski 
07/08/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Mr Phillip Brylski 
07/08/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Ms Junhui Wu 
07/08/2005 
Comments:   
