Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  05/10/2005 
Report No.:  AC1469
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Vietnam 
Project ID:  P079344 
Project Name:  Vietnam - ICT Development 
Task Team Leader:  Christine Zhen-Wei Qiang 
Estimated Appraisal Date: May 23, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: September 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  CITPO 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  Central government administration (43%);Sub-national government 
administration (35%);General industry and trade sector (22%) 
Theme:  Infrastructure services for private sector development (P);Administrative and 
civil service reform (P);Small and medium enterprise support (P);Regulation and 
competition policy (S);Other accountability/anti-corruption (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
93.72 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
13.25
13.25 
Environmental Category: C - Not Required 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objective of the proposed project is to accelerate the use of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) in Vietnam in order to: foster private sector 
development, improve the competitiveness of small-medium enterprises, improve the 
transparency and efficiency of public administration, and to increase accessibility to 
information by government, private sector and broader society.    
 
The proposed project will address the following sector-specific issues:  
 
(a) Government leadership of ICT development:  Technical assistance will focus on 
developing the institutional?including technical and regulatory capacity of the Ministry of 
Posts and Telematics (MPT) as it seeks to lead the effort of ICT diffusion in society and 
government.  Specific elements of assistance include developing and executing a training 
plan for ministry and departmental (ICT) staff, developing a chief information officer 
(CIO) position and function in the ministry, creating a center for training CIOs in other 
ministries, departments and state-owned enterprises, and developing a detailed 
implementation strategy for ICT diffusion in government and society.  
 
Page  2
(b) Access to information infrastructure: to be addressed indirectly through support for 
telecommunications regulatory reform that seeks to encourage a more competitive market 
environment and private sector participation.  Telecommunications reform and pricing, 
interconnection policy, tariff re-balancing and frequency management:  studies funded by 
other donors have reviewed these issues. The project will provide technical assistance to 
improve the regulatory environment and associated training for regulatory staff.  
 
(c) ICT usage in government:  Government online presence and content will be 
substantially increased at the national and municipal level, through interactive and 
dynamic portals at the MPT, and the People?s Committees of Hanoi, Danang, and 
HCMC.  The MPT and the previously mentioned municipal administrations will roll out 
e-government services to businesses in areas such as e-procurement and business/land 
registration.  The GSO will upgrade, streamline, and computerize its collection of 
economic statistics used in government decision-making.  It will create and install a Web 
site with extensive statistical information readily available to the public and regularly 
updated.  
 
(d) ICT industry and ICT-enabled business.  The project will support extensive training 
and awareness-raising efforts in three major cities to encourage the diffusion of ICTs.  In 
addition, MPT will administer an innovation fund to encourage domestic organizations, 
including businesses and academic entities to develop new ideas and concepts in e-
business and ICT sector development.   
 
3. Project Description 
The project comprises five subprojects in three areas:  (a) leadership in ICT and 
modernization of the Ministry of Post and Telematics (MPT); (b) modernization of the 
General Statistical Office (GSO), (c) and E-applications/e-government, for the 
municipalities of Hanoi, Danang and Ho Chi Minh City.  
 
Subproject 1: ICT Leadership and MPT Modernization ($21 million) will support 
national strategy development in the ICT arena, address telecommunications policy 
issues, and computerize and streamline the national ICT oversight and development 
functions of the MPT.  This subproject aims primarily to strengthen MPT?s institutional 
capacity.  Specific components will include the following: (1) Development of E-
Government in MPT; (2) Portal creation; (3) CIO Training; (4) ICT Policy and 
Regulation Training; (5) ICT and telecoms regulation; (6) and ICT budget for innovation 
initiatives.  
 
Subproject 2: GSO Modernization ($13.7 million) will support the implementation of 
the strategic plan for modernization of GSO, in particularly, improve the quality, 
transparency and timeliness of the social-economic and poverty related data and 
information to fully meet the demands of government agencies, research institutions, and 
other data users as the basis for policy planning and decision making; to modernize the 
system to reach an advanced level in the region; and to improve data flow, statistical 
analysis and dissemination of useful data and information.  The components to be 
undertaken under this subproject to contribute to these objectives include: (1) ICT 
Page  3
Infrastructure Upgrade at GSO; (1) Data Flow and Statistical Analysis Enhancement 
through ICT; and (3) GSO Portal and Intranet Creation.  
 
Subprojects 3, 4 and 5, E-Applications in Hanoi ($31.3 million), Danang ($17.3 
million), and HCMC ($10.6 million)  are broadly similar in scope, however, each project 
reflects the particular needs of the respective city, in terms of infrastructure, human 
resources development, administrative reform and private sector development.  These 
activities are designed to enhance the ICT environment in these cities, provide the basic 
foundation for deployment of e-government in the cities? district offices and 
departments; and development of various types of e-government services; promote e-
applications for businesses and develop ICT skills.  These activities are expected to have 
a
positive impact on government accountability, effectiveness, transparency, citizen and 
business access to information, citizen and business interaction, and public administration 
reform efforts.  E-procurement pilots will create a ?demand-pull? for SMEs to establish 
an online presence with the incentive of being able to supply goods and services to the 
municipal governments.  As a whole, the subproject will also improve the 
competitiveness of SMEs and have the positive spill-over effect of increasing their trade 
opportunities, creating employment and increasing income. The components to be 
undertaken under this subproject to contribute to these objectives include: (1) 
development of a strategy, roadmap and conceptual IT Architecture for the city?s e-
government development, (2) Local e-government enablement, including data center and 
ICT transaction center, (3) e-applications and e-commerce, and (4) ICT human resource 
development and awareness raising.  
 
Hanoi e-applications will include e-procurement, land registration and a population 
management system. Danang e-applications will include e-procurement, e-business and 
e-licensing applications. HCMC e-application will include e-procurement, vehicle 
registration and drivers license applications  
 
Project implementation support has been included in each subproject for all project 
implementing units and the project coordination unit which will be housed within MPT.  
This is to ensure that adequate technical support is available to the implementing 
agencies throughout the project implementation phase.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project location will include local government vicinities in Danang city, Hanoi city and 
Ho Chi Minh City.  
 
This is a policy-related project and, as such, the project has no issues related to 
resettlement or displacement of communities and indigenous people.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
Mr Glenn S. Morgan (EASES) 
 
Page  4
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
 X 
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
 X 
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
 X 
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Not applicable to this proposed project.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Not applicable to this proposed project.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Not applicable to this proposed project.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Not applicable to this proposed project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Not applicable to this proposed project.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, 
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 
Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Not applicable to this proposed project.   
Page  5
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Ms Christine Zhen-Wei Qiang 
05/05/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Ms Christine Zhen-Wei Qiang 
05/05/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms Christine Zhen-Wei Qiang 
05/05/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Sector Manager: 
Mr Pierre A. Guislain 
05/05/2005 
Comments:   
