INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: AC289
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: April 13, 2004
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country: West Bank and Gaza            Project ID: P083767
Project Name: WBG: Higher Education    Task Team Leader: Adriana Jaramillo
Project
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2004  Loan/Credit amount ($m.): 10
Estimated Board Date: May 2005
Managing Unit: MNSHD                   Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
Grant
Sector: Tertiary education (100%)      Theme: Education for the knowledge
economy (P)
Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: John B. Collier (Environment);
Meskerem Brhane (Social)
Other financing amounts by source:                                   ($m.)
SPECIAL FINANCING                                                     10
B. Project Objective
The overall objective of the proposed project would be to increase internal and external
efficiency of the system, as a first step towards seeking sustainability. In order to improve
efficiency, the role of the Ministry of Education and Higher Education (MOEHE) as a regulatory
body, defining policy, setting standards and enforcing them needs to be strengthened. In
addition, Higher Education (HE) institutions will need support in order to comply with standards.
The project will aim at strengthening the capacity of the MOEHE to function as a regulatory
agency; and provide support to HE institutions to improve their management and quality and
relevance of programs in order to meet the standards set by MOEHE.
C. Project Description
1. STRENGTHENING THE REGULATORY ROLE OF THE MINISTRY OF HIGHER
EDUCATION (US$ 1,5 million)
The objective of this component would be to strengthen the capacity of the MOEHE to set
policies and practices that will enable the HE institutions to provide the education programs that
meet the needs of the economic and social development of Palestine. The definition of policies,



and the incentive mechanisms to put them in practice will be oriented towards increasing
enrollments in community colleges, increase enrollment in priority area programs, control
admissions in programs where the job market demands are saturated, control admissions in
institutions and programs where quality of the programs offered are not relevant or do not meet
the standards set by the accreditation commission, and set fees and normative costs standards.
This component will provide technical assistance to enhance and reinforce the MOEHE's
existing capacity to set quality and management standards such as program standards,
student/teacher ratios according to program standards, qualifications and status of faculty
standards, student admission standards, student academic performance standards and monitor,
evaluate and enforce the capacity of institutions and programs to meet the set standards. This
component will support the existing independent accreditation and evaluation commission, and
provide support to set up evaluation teams and conduct the evaluation of priority areas programs.
It will also provide support to ensure that the HE Council will function as an objective and
informed body, representing the needs of the Universities, Community Colleges, Student
Organizations and Private Sector. This support will include the preparation of technical reports
documenting the quality and financial performance of the system on an annual basis.
2. CAPACITY BUILDING PROGRAM TO INCREASE INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL
EFFICIENCY IN THE MANAGEMENT AND DELIVERY OF EDUCATION SERVICES
IN THE TERTIARY EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS (US$ 2 million)
The objective of this component would be to improve the internal and external efficiency of the
Universities and Community Colleges. Based on the findings emerged from the financing
strategy, the MOEHE will develop a standard information collection and reporting system, and
will provide technical assistance and support to institutions to use the planning and budgeting
tools that were developed for preparing the strategy. Universities and Colleges will be able to use
standardized information processing, in order to report statistics, as well as prepare plans taking
into consideration student enrollments, types of programs offered, teaching and non-teaching
staff needs, improving efficiency while preserving quality, students capacity to pay for fees,
availability of student- aid programs, availability of financial resources other than PNA and
student fees. In addition, institutions will receive support to conduct self-evaluations, and support
on how to use and update the planning tools and set up Management Improvement Plans.
The MOEHE's capacity to update on a regular basis the information needed for keeping statistics
and monitoring the financial performance of the system will be enhanced by strengthening the
capacity of the Planning Unit, and recruitment of qualified staff with expertise in use of IT.
3. SUPPORT     TO    QUALITY      IMPROVEMENT        OF   HIGHER    EDUCATION
INSTITUTIONS (US$ 5,5 million)
The basis for a Quality Improvement Fund will be established. The main objective of the Fund
will be to provide support to improvement of quality of programs in particular to make them
competitive with international standards; improve relevance of the course offerings vis. a vis. the
job market and economic development of Palestine; and increase the capacity of tertiary
education institutions to develop income generating programs.



On a competitive basis, and based on the recommendations of the Accreditation and Evaluations
Commission, Universities and Colleges will apply for quality improvement grants. Priority will
be given to proposals that promote the following:
Development of partnership programs with local and foreign universities in order to
develop and improve new programs, programs in priority areas, promote student and staff
exchange, development of joint research, and expansion of alternative sources of finance;
articulate faculty development with program development;
improve and develop new programs in priority fields;
promote R&D linked to industry/ private sector development;
promote the shared use of library resources and information resources;
promote distance and e-learning;
enhance the capacity to seek alternative funding sources, such as provision of training,
consulting or research services for public/private sector institutions, in local or
international markets.
4. CAPACITY BUILDING TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND THE DEMAND SIDE
SUBSIDIES PROGRAM (US$ lmillion)
This component will provide technical assistance to improve the management of the current
student loans program, and will set the basis for expansion of the financial resources available
for funding the student aid programs. Selection criteria and verification of income and academic
performance will be strictly enforced as eligibility criteria for student aid programs. An analysis
of the gradual increase of fees for the period of 2004-2010 and the estimated student population
that will need loans in order to access tertiary education institutions will be done in order to
calculate the financial resources needed to provide student aide programs. Private sector
involvement in management and financing of the student loans programs will be implemented.
Mechanisms for payment schedules and procedures for loan beneficiaries will be set up with
commercial Banks.
D. Project location (if known)
West Bank and Gaza Strip
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity
[Guideline. Refer to Section 5 of PCN]
The MOEHE has started the implementation of some components of the higher education
financing strategy. However, Palestinian higher education institutions and the MOEHE both
lack the required implementation capacity to deal with the complexity of challenges that the
higher education sector faces. Measures will be included in the project to strengthen the capacity
of the Ministry as well as the capacity of higher education institutions. There is a low risk that



staff at the technical level, Director level and below, will change due to personnel changes at the
political level.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Applicable?  Safeguard Policy
Applicable?  If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
[NJ      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
[N]      Natural Habitats (2Q/BP 4.04)
[NJ      Pest Management (OP 4.09)
[NJ      Involuntary Resettlement (9P/BP 4.12)
[NJ      Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)
[NJ      Forests (CQjBP 4.36)
[NJ      Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)
[N]      Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)
[NJ      Projects in Disputed Areas (QP/BP/GP 7.60)
[NJ      Projects on International Waterways (BP/BP/GP 7.50)
Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ ] B [X] C [ ]FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)
Safeguard Policies Classification:
[ ] SI [ ] S2 [X] S3 [ SF [ ] TBD (to be determined)
III. ACTIONS DURING PROJECT PREPARATION
[Guideline: Refer to sections S and 6 of the PCN]
By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties' claims on the
disputed areas



A. What actions might be needed during project preparation to assess safeguard issues
and prepare to mitigate them? NA
B. How might consultation and disclosure requirements be addressed? NA
IV. AGREEMENTS REACHED ON SAFEGUARDS AT PCN REVIEW
[Guideline: Summarize the key agreements reached on follow-up actions to be taken regarding
safeguards during project preparation]
Agreed target date for Quality Enhancement Review: NA
Signed and submitted by:
Task Team Leader:                        Adriana Jaramillo        Q
Approved By:                                               f 
Safeguards Review 1:                     John B. Collier  4 / 
Safeguards Review 2:                     Meskerem B       r  haha
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:         Regina Bendokat      2?'CY4pQ
Comments
Sector Manager:                          Regina Bendokat 2l;&2-.Y@Y4Z
Comments
CG - wb86528
P:\!UNITS\MNSHD\celine\WBG Higher Ed ISDS PCN.doc
November 26, 2003 1:24 PM



