Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  04/15/2005 
Report No.:  AC1149
1. Project Statistics  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P085231 
Project Name:  Yemen Rural Access Program (APL Phase II) 
Task Team Leader:  Jean-Charles Crochet 
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 31, 
2005 
Estimated Board Date: July 14, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSIF 
Lending Instrument:  Adaptable Program 
Loan 
Sector:  Roads and highways (85%);General public administration sector (15%) 
Theme:  Rural services and infrastructure (P);Decentralization (S) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
30.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
7.52
7.52 
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [X] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [X] 
2. Project Objectives 
The long term objective of the Rural Access Program is an improved livelihood and 
reduced isolation for the rural population.  By the end of the Program, it is expected that, 
along project roads, transport rates, price of essential commodities, and travel time will 
be reduced by 30%, 15%, and 30% respectively. The project's specific development 
objective is to reduce isolation of the rural population.  By the end of the project, about 
200,000 people are expected to have gained reliable year-round road access.   
 
3. Project Description 
(i) Upgrading of at least 160 km of intermediate rural roads and at least 60 km of feeder 
roads (USD 24.14 million) in about fifteen to twenty separate contracts located 
throughout Yemen. Each road section will be selected through an established process 
based on environmental, social, and economic criteria. 
 
(ii) Institutional support to the road sector and development of the capability of public 
organizations as well as private contractors and consultants to manage and implement the 
national rural roads program (USD 4.14 million). 
 
(iii) Maintenance of about 750 km of roads through performance-based management 
and maintenance contracts and support to the Road Maintenance Fund (USD 9.27 
million). The road sections to be maintained will be agreed based on a study to start soon.   
Page  2
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
Project interventions will be nation-wide.  Governorate-level rural accessibility plans will 
provide a method for selecting priority rural roads to be improved. The physiographic 
characteristics of Yemen are very diverse and consist of high, steep mountains, 
escarpments, deserts, coastal plains and hundreds of streams (wadis) running between the 
mountains and through the coastal plains. Socotra is the largest of the 112 Yemeni islands 
scattered in the Red Sea. The majority of the population concentrates in the valleys and 
highland plateaus, performing agricultural activities, irrigating from the spare flow in the 
wadis in the rainy seasons, and from base flow and groundwater. The country is classified 
into five physical regions (Mountain Massif, Eastern Plateau, Desert Regions, Coastal 
Plans and Yemen Islands) and 16 sub-regions. There are 36 important ecological 
sensitive areas, two of which have been declared Protected Areas (Autma and Socotra); 
four were under declaration as at October 2003; and 30 proposed for declaration. 
Population density varies markedly across the country, ranging from 1 person per sq. km 
in the desert areas (such as Al-Mahrah Governorate) to 388 persons per sq. km in Ibb 
Governorate. Tribal tensions can be a source of social conflict in the selection and 
implementation of rural roads. Yemen is rich in cultural assets, which are scattered in 
urban and rural areas; however, there is currently no comprehensive inventory of cultural 
assets. The agricultural terracing system is widespread in the mountainous zones and is 
well known as an efficient method of water conservation.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Specialists on the Team 
Mr Robert Fishbein (AFTTR) 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
X
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Rural roads have a range of potentially positive and negative impacts, depending on their 
location within the country. Roads located in the escarpments are characterized by 
hairpin bends whereas in flat areas they follow rather straight alignments. These 
Page  3
geometric features affect the volumes of earthworks and consequent impacts on the 
environment. Water harvesting along and even on the road surface is routine practice and 
is a major consideration in rural road design, as is cross-drainage, discharge to adjacent 
lands, flood protection and wadi hydrology.  Slope stabilization is a key design issue in 
the mountainous zones. Traditionally, rural roads designs in Yemen have featured a 
roadbed of 8-meter width, with a road surface 6-meter wide and shoulders of 1.0 meter 
on each side. In the case of mountain roads, this design requires rather deep cuts into the 
mountainside to achieve the design width of the roadbed, leading to the erosion of 
exposed slope surfaces and possible to slides of slopes onto the road. In addition, such 
road widths may lead to land taking through populated or agricultural areas.  Narrower 
road widths reduce the need for land taking or excessive excavations.  Whenever 
necessary, project roads will use narrow width.  Consultations with the rural population 
revealed an overwhelming desire for improved access and willingness to collaborate with 
the Program.  Positive socio-economic impacts noted include reduced transport costs and 
travel time, improved comfort and safety, increased mobility, stimulus to economic 
development, improved community cohesion and intercommunity cooperation and 
improved accessibility to social services and markets. Increased road accidents and 
adverse impacts on water gathering patterns were identified during women's 
consultations as particular areas of social concern. Over the life of the program, the Bank 
financed RAP investments will cover about 2% of the entire rural roads network scattered 
among the 18 Governorates.  Impacts are expected to be localized and it is therefore 
reasonable to assume a negligible risk of cumulative negative impacts.  
 
Although Phase I purposefully avoided any roads with an involuntary resettlement issue, 
Phases II and III allow for the possibility of including roads with such issues.  These are 
cases where the proposed improvements involve unavoidable departure from the existing 
alignment and entail the taking of private assets and/or land.  Such potential issues will be 
identified during the initial screening of all project roads, and if applicable, the 
Resettlement Policy Framework developed for the Program will be triggered.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
Indirect impacts include induced development along the improved roads and at 
intersections, as well as an increased risk of traffic accidents due to higher speeds and 
heavier traffic.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
Analysis of alternatives for individual road projects are carried out during the preparation 
of the detailed design of each road with a view toward avoidance and/or mitigation of 
potential negative impacts, identified during project screening.   
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) consists of standard mitigation measures to 
be adapted to each individual road and institutional arrangements for ensuring consistent 
Page  4
implementation of the environmental and social management processes. Standard 
mitigation measures have been developed to address potential environmental impacts as 
they may occur during the design/construction and the operational (post-
construction/maintenance) phases. An EMP Table provides an overall summary of 
impacts, mitigation measures and monitoring responsibilities during implementation. The 
main mitigation measures include:  
 
-
Improved and environmentally-sound technical designs, tested during Phase I, 
especially: (i) narrower road design widths, ?pinch points? and other measures to avoid 
excessive mountain cuts or land taking; (ii) slope stabilization measures; (iii) flood 
protection in the wadis, incorporation of water harvesting measures, and reduction of 
cross-drainage effects and discharge to adjacent lands, with particular attention to 
agricultural terraces, graveyards and other sensitive areas.  
 
-
Measures related to the conduct of design/construction and maintenance activities, 
especially: (i) careful selection, management and rehabilitation of investigation sites, site 
compounds, borrow areas and diversion roads; (ii) controlled disposal of materials and 
surplus fill; (iii) avoidance of groundwater pollution through appropriate storage and use 
of petroleum products, paving materials and other hazardous items; (iv) limitation of 
effects on biological resources through identification and mitigation of impacts on critical 
vegetation, fauna and natural habitats affected by the roads; (v) separate men and 
women's consultations to avoid tribal conflicts, address potential permanent and 
temporary land acquisition needs, and address gender considerations; and (vi) cultural 
resource assessments, management plans and chance find procedures, as appropriate.  
 
-
Social Framework Agreements (SFA), developed during Phase 1, as the mechanism 
for reaffirming public agreements to the environmental and social mitigation measures, as 
discussed in the public consultations. The SFA also provides a framework for addressing 
unforeseen environmental and social issues that may arise during implementation.  
 
-
Policy Frameworks for Resettlement, Natural Habitats and Cultural Resources, which 
will be triggered when appropriate issues are identified during screening or based on 
chance finds during implementation.  
 
Implementation arrangements are based on a standard environmental and social 
management process developed during Phase 1. The process includes procedures and 
standard instruments for screening candidate sub-projects, categorization, environmental 
assessment, and project implementation.  It also includes prior review and approval by 
RAP and the World Bank following the screening and the environmental assessment 
steps. Environmental requirements are incorporated as an explicit annex into RAP?s 
standard contract documents for road works.  
 
Overall responsibility for the implementation of the above process will be with the RAP 
Central Management Office (CMO), through its Environmental and Social Unit (E&SU).  
The Unit is fully operational with two qualified staff.  However, in view of the increasing 
workload, this should be expanded.  Institutional strengthening should be carried out 
through: (i) increase of staff; (ii) training and in-house seminars at RAP CMO; and (iii) 
training sessions for engineering consultants and contractors. Two staff are currently 
being recruited.  From a sector-wide perspective, the RAP is introducing an operational 
approach to systematically address environmental and social issues on rural roads.  As 
Page  5
RAP CMO expands its operations and becomes ?mainstreamed? within the Ministry of 
Public Works and Highways, these processes will serve as a model for addressing similar 
issues in the road sector in general.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders include the populations living along and nearby the rural roads, 
local governments and the Ministry of Public Works and Highways.  
 
The Government of Yemen is making the SEA available to the public through: (i) the 
World Bank InfoShop; (ii) the RAP CMO in Sana?a and on the RAP CMO Website; (iii) 
the Ministry of Water and Environment and the EPA offices in Sana?a; and (iv) the RAP 
CMO Regional Offices.  
 
The Resettlement Policy Framework is part of the SEA and was also disclosed to the 
InfoShop as part of the SEA.  
 
As part of the Environmental & Social Review Management Process of each rural road 
sub-project (described in SEA), disclosure will be implemented as follows:  
 
-
Initial consultations will include a discussion of the environmental and social review 
process and preliminary observations on environmental and social issues with the 
concerned communities, local authorities and the Governor.  At that time, the Governor 
will be requested to oversee the creation of a Beneficiary Committee.  
 
-
The preparation of the Environmental Assessment (EA), including the Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP) will also include the drafting of the Social Framework 
Agreement (SFA), under the auspices of the Beneficiary Committee.  
 
-
The Draft SFA will be sent to the Beneficiary Committee and the Governor for their 
review and comment.  
 
-
Following this review and comment, the EMP will be finalized and the SFA will be 
signed by the Beneficiary Committee, the Governor and the RAP CMO.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
01/14/2005  
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
01/05/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
01/07/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
01/07/2005 
 
Page  6
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
Yes 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
No 
OPN 11.03 - Cultural Property 
 
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes 
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential 
adverse impacts on cultural property? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Page  7
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Jean-Charles Crochet 
 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong 
 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Hedi Larbi 
 
Comments:   
