                                                                                                                                                                                                            29738


Authorized
                                                                                                                                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                                                                                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
                                                                                                                                                                                        Report No.: AC771
          Disclosure


                    Public                                                                                  Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: July 15, 2004

                                                                                                            I. BASIC INFORMATION

                                                                                                            A. Basic Project Data

                                                                                                            Country: Yemen, Republic of                   Project ID: P086308
                          Authorized
                                                                                                            Project Name: RY-Second Vocational            Task Team Leader: Yasser El-Gammal
                                                                                                            Training Project
                                                                                                            Estimated Appraisal Date: February 2,         Estimated Board Date: April 2005
                                    Disclosure                                                              2005
                                                                                                            Managing Unit: MNSHD                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                              Public                                                                                                      Loan
                                                                                                            Sector: Vocational training (100%)            Theme: Other social protection and risk
                                                                                                                                                          management (P);Small and medium
                                                                                                                                                          enterprise support (P)
                                                                                                            Safeguard Policies Specialists in the task team: N/A
                                                                                                            Loan/Credit amount : IDA: $15 million
                                                    Authorized                                              Other financing amounts by source: $1.5 million

                                                                                                            B. Project Objectives

                                                              Disclosure
                                                                                                            Investments made in the first TVET project in Yemen have resulted in expansion of
                                                                                                            infrastructure and strengthening of the pedagogical aspects of training program design and
                                                                        Public
                                                                                                            delivery. The continuing development issue at the beneficiary level is to ensure increasing
                                                                                                            relevance, through the strengthening of linkages between training programs and employer
                                                                                                            defined skill requirements. At the policy and system management level, the development issue is
                                                                                                            to move decision making to an analytically informed basis, built on a solid base of information.
                                                                                                            This leads to the following two development objectives for the proposed project:

                                                                                                            (i)     Yemeni citizens undertaking technical and vocational training will have enhanced
                                                                              Authorized                            employment or income generating opportunity arising from programming driven by
                                                                                                                    employer defined skill requirements.
                                                                                                            (ii)    The effectiveness of policy formulation planning and management at MTVET will be
                                                                                                                    enhanced, through the development and implementation of a TVET Management
                                                                                        Disclosure
                                                                                                                    Information System, and a viable financing system.

                                                                                                  Public

C. Project Description

The proposed project would comprise the following five components:

(i) Improving Market Relevance: This component will establish mechanisms in selected pilot
areas to broadly profile the employer community in their catchment area, establish relevant
models of employer sector councils, mobilize employer groups to develop occupational skill
profiles, and collaborate with the program development unit to translate skill profiles into
curriculum, facilitate workplace based training opportunities, and other activities designed to
strengthen labor market linkages.
(ii) Instructor Development: This component will undertake a program designed to provide
instructional staff with occupational and pedagogical skill levels consistent with the delivery of
TEVT programming driven by employer defined graduate competencies. The component will
build on what the first VT project achieved and will support the operationalization of new
centers to be built by the Saudi Fund for Development in line with the VT strategy.
(iii) MIS: This component will support technical assistance and equipment for the design,
development, procurement and mobilization of a TVET management information system that
would serve management requirements at the ministry level and individual training center level.
The system will help the MTEVT have real time data, and the ability to undertake more
sophisticated analysis relating to the efficiency and effectiveness of the TEVT system as a
whole.
(vi) Sector Finance: This component will review the VT sector finance as a whole. It will
support a review of the effectiveness and efficiency of the Skills Development Fund (SDF). This
review will cover all legal, operational, and other issued related to the operation of the SDF. The
component will also undertake an analysis of system financing options designed to distribute
costs more equitably amongst stakeholders and beneficiaries.
(V) M&E and project management: This component will ensure that projects components are
progressing based on an agreed on implementation plan, help the MTEVT develop indicators to
monitor progress in the implementation of the VT strategy and will finance project management
expenses.

D. Project location (if known)

Capital city and other districts/governorates to be confirmed during project preparation.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies [from PCN]

Capacity is weak but the project will not have any major safeguard issues.



II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


                Safeguard Policy
Applicable?
                If Applicable, How Might It Apply?
    [NA]        Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

    [NA]            Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)

    [NA]            Pest Management (OP 4.09)

    [NA]            Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)

    [NA]            Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)

    [NA]            Forests (OP/BP 4.36)

    [NA]            Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

    [NA]            Cultural Property (draft OP 4.11 - OPN 11.03)

    [NA]            Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP/GP 7.60)*

    [NA]            Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP/GP 7.50)



Environmental Assessment Category:
[ ] A [ ] B [X] C [ ] FI [ ] TBD (to be determined)

If TBD, explain determinants of classification and give steps that will be taken to determine that
EA category (mandatory):

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
    would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
    ISDS: N/A

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
    The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: N/A




*
 By supporting the proposed project, the Bank does not intend to prejudice the final determination of the parties'claims on the
disputed areas
1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.

IV. APPROVALS


  Signed and submitted by:
  Task Team Leader:                           Yasser El-Gammal                  Date
  Approved by:
  Regional Safeguards Coordinator:            Sherif Kamel F. Arif              Date
     Comments
  Sector Manager:                             Regina Bendokat                   Date
     Comments



WB23256

P:\YEMEN\HD\86308\IDENT\Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet - Concept Stage.doc

April 21, 2004 2:09 PM

