Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (Updated)
Report No: AC481
Section I - Basic Information
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/05/2003
A. Basic Project Data (from PDS)
I.A. I. Project Statistics
Country: YEMEN, REPUBLIC OF                       Project ID: P074413
Project: Groundwater and Soil Conservation Project  Task Team Leader: Satoru Ueda
Authorized to Appraise Date: November 14, 2003    IBRD Amount ($m):
Bank Approval: February 26, 2004                 IDA Amount ($m): 36.50
Managing Unit: MNSRE                              Sector: Irrigation and drainage (100%)
Lending Instrument: Specific Investment Loan (SIL)  Theme: Water resource management (P); Other
Status: Lending                                   environment and natural resources management (P)
I.A.2. Project Objectives (From PDS):
The Groundwater and Soil Conservation Project (GSCP) is designed to address the critical groundwater
problem in Yemen. The problem of unsustainable groundwater extraction has been caused by the rapid
spread of groundwater irrigation, combined with dwindling rates of recharge. The root cause is weak
management framework ill adapted to ensuring sustainable extraction levels, efficient water use, and
watersheds protection.
Yemen is a predominantly rural country with 64 percent of its total population of 18.4 million living in
rural areas. Irrigated agriculture remains the main economic activity and source of income and employment
in rural areas. The depletion of groundwater directly impacts poverty, employment, and social order and the
protection of the groundwater resource and of the watersheds that replenish the resource is of paramount
importance.
The objective of the proposed project is to conserve water in farming areas, especially groundwater,
improve recharge and protect watersheds by: (i) improving water use efficiency and increasing fanner
returns to water, so creating the conditions that would allow farmers to reduce pumping of groundwater
from aquifers towards sustainable levels; (ii) increasing surface and groundwater availability through
watershed management and groundwater recharge by supporting the rehabilitation of small to medium
spate irrigation schemes, bank protection works, water harvesting structures, and the rehabilitation of
terraces and other soil and water conservation investments; and (iii) supporting a groundwater management
framework and institutions that will have the incentive and capacity to manage local water resources in a
sustainable manner.
The project builds on the positive and negative lessons of the recently closed Land and Water Conservation
Project (LWCP, 2000) and on recent institutional and legislative changes by Government. It will scale up
(from eleven govemorates to fifteen) the successful groundwater efficiency improvement components of the
predecessor project and add further measures to improve the water balance.
I.A.3. Project Description (From PDS):
The proposed project would consist of the following components:



2
ISDS
A. Modernization and Improvement of Groundwater Irrigation Systems (Base cost US$14.03
million)
This component would provide for the supply and installation of buried PVC pipes and overground
galvanized iron (GI) pipes to improve water conveyance and distribution efficiency and reduce conveyance
losses from existing tubewells to and on existing farms. It would also provide localized on-farm irrigation
systems (drip, bubbler or sprinkler) for a part of the project area to further reduce on-farm water losses.
Specifically, this component would involve:
(a) improvement of groundwater conveyance efficiency for irrigation on about 27,000 ha; and
(b) improvement of on-farm irrigation efficiency by introduction of localized on-farm irrigation
systems on about 1,400 ha.
The physical investments would form part of a farm management plan that would also include
improvements in on-farm soil and water management and in crop husbandry through establishment of a
post-installation Irrigation Advisory Service (IAS).
B. Water Harvesting, Groundwater Rechargze and Soil Conservation (Base cost US$10.82 million)
This component would provide gabion baskets and other materials for the selective improvement of
traditional spate schemes within identified wadis to improve spate conveyance and diversion efficiency,
including wadi bank protection for villages. It would also involve rehabilitation of terraces to conserve
soils from water erosion and water harvesting structures to recharge the groundwater. This would
specifically involve:
(a) Small and medium-scale spate irrigation improvement and rehabilitation:
(i) small spate scheme irrigation improvement and rehabilitation (510 ha);
(ii) medium spate scheme irrigation improvement and rehabilitation (1050 ha);
(iii) construction or rehabilitation of canal structures (about 130 structures benefiting about 1,200
ha); and
(iv) construction or rehabilitation of wadi bank protection works (at about 105 locations benefiting
about 700 ha).
(b) Water harvesting and soil conservation works:
(i) rehabilitation of existing terrace walls and water harvesting structures in the uplands (550 ha);
(ii) wadi bank protection (440 ha);
(iii) soil conservation and erosion control structures (180 ha); and
(iv) on-farm water storage (165,000 cubic meters) and open pits for recharge (630,000 m3).



3
ISDS
C. Proiect Implementation, Monitoring & Evaluation and Institutional Strengthening of Water
Institutions (Base cost US$14.81 million)
This component would provide project implementation support, monitoring and evaluation activities, and
institutional and capacity building support in the form of training, and facilities to institutions involved in
the project. The components are:
(a) capacity building for public institutions (equipment, vehicles, materials, technical assistance,
training, project management cost, incremental operating costs) for project implementation, for
resource monitoring and for project monitoring and evaluation, for the following institutions:
(i) the project coordination unit (PCU) within MAI;
(ii) field units (FUs) within 10 MAI provincial offices for implementation of physical works;
(iii) central MAI units (GDI, CWMU) responsible for supervising water and irrigation monitoring
under the project;
(iv) NWRA for water resource monitoring; and
(v) MWE for monitoring progress and policy formulation in integrated resource management.
(b) capacity building and technical assistance for local communities in project areas:
(i) establishment of IAS within 10 MAI provincial offices for advising on on-farm water, soil and
crop management; and
(ii) capacity building and support for local water users groups (WUGs) and associations for
community based water monitoring and management.
I.A.4. Project Location: (Geographic location, information about the key environmental and social
characteristics of the area and population likely to be affected, and proximity to any protected areas, or sites or
critical natural habitats, or any other culturally or socially sensitive areas.)
The project will be implemented nationally in 15 govemorates through 10 field units located in Sana'a,
Hodeidah, Dhamar, Taiz, Sabir, Giar, Beihan, Haija, Al-Delah, and Seyoun. Yemen is a water-scarce
country and groundwater resources are declining rapidly. The project will target farmers utilizing
groundwater for irrigation in rural communities where critical groundwater depletion is occurring and
where there is urgent national priority to mitigate these adverse development. The project is not expected to
impact critical natural habitats.
B. Check Environmental Classification: B (Partial Assessment)
Comments: The proposed project is a conservation project and is expected to have significant positive
environmental impacts, in particular in terms of conservation of water, resulting in significant water savings,
and soils, with only relative minor negative impacts.



4
ISDS
C. Safeguard Policies Triggered (from PDS)
(click on (5 for a detailed desciption or click on the policy number for a brief description)
Policy                                  Triggered
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01, BP 4.01, GP 4.01)        0 Yes 0 No
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04, BP 4.04, GP 4.04)                0 Yes 0 No
Forestry (OP 4.36, GP 4.36)                                 0 Yes * No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   0 Yes 0 No
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03)                               0 Yes 0 No
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20)                                0 Yes 0 No
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       0 Yes * No
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37, BP 4.37)                           0 Yes * No
Projects in International Waters (OP 7.50, BP 7.50, GP 7.50)  0 Yes * No
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60, BP 7.60, GP 7.60)*     0 Yes 0 No
Section II - Key Safeguard Issues and Their Management
D. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues. Please fill in all relevant questions. If information is not available,
describe steps to be taken to obtain necessary data.
II.D. I a. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
No significant, irreversible negative impacts are expected. The project triggers two safeguard policies. An
EMP will be implemented and an environmental review system will be adopted for selected sub-projects to
ensure that all environmental impacts are mitigated to the maximum extent possible. Procurement of pesticides
is not envisaged under the project. However, as a result of the GSCP irrigation modernization efforts, farming
could intensify and change cropping patterns, which in turn could increase the use of agro-chemicals. A
mechanism will be put in place to demonstrate Integrated Pest Management procedures and to develop a
fanner education program that stresses good and safe practices for storage and application of pesticides as
planned in the EMP.
II.D. lb. Describe any potential cumulative impacts due to application of more than one safeguard policy or
due to multiple project component.
None
II.D. I c Describe any potential long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
Potential change in pesticide use as described in II.D. Ia
II.D.2. In light of 1, describe the proposed treatment of altematives (if required)
Measures in the EMP including educational program.
II.D.3. Describe arrangement for the borrower to address safeguard issues
Of the ten Safeguard Policies, the project triggers only two and the issues are modest in size i.e.,



5
ISDS
environmental assessment and pest management, all of which will be mitigated through measures in the
EMP (available upon request). There will be no land acquisitions or involuntary displacement. The project
is target free and will aim at reaching all categories of rural and farming communities. Hence, OD 4.20
and OP/BP 4.12 will not be triggered.
II.D.4. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard
policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders and beneficiaries, as well as their socio-economic profile, have been identified during
the project preparation process. These include well owners, sharecroppers, land owners, landless laborers,
field technicians, local councils, local natural leaders, and key players in the line ministries. During the
preparation period, consultation meetings have been carried out through direct field visits and meetings
with farmer groups and relevant governmental agencies, and the preliminary findings of the environmental
assessment were discussed. Institutional arrangements for establishment of public/community partnerships
and guiding principles for public awareness and monitoring functions have been prepared in the EMP.
Given that the Water Resources Law would have been in effect for a short time by the time this project is
implemented, it is unlikely that any legal water user entry with water rights and autonomous
decision-making authority at the community level would be formed during the Program.  The project
design would have to allow for this evolving process.
E. Safeguards Classification (select in SAP). Category is determined by the highest impact in any policy. Or
on basis of cumulative impacts from multiple safeguards. Whenever an individual safeguard policy is
triggered the provisions of that policy apply.
SI. - Significant, cumulative and/or irreversible impacts; or significant technical and institutional risks in
management of one or more safeguard areas
[X] S2. - One or more safeguard policies are triggered, but effects are limited in their impact and are
technically and institutionally manageable
] S3. - No safeguard issues
[  SF. - Financial intermediary projects, social development funds, community driven development or similar
projects which require a safeguard framework or programmatic approach to address safeguard
issues.
F. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Analysis/Management Plan:          Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                3/5/2003      3/5/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            3/5/2003      3/5/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                             3/19/2003     3/19/2003
Date of distributing the Exec. Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors (For category A projects)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework:                         Expected      Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework:             Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                            Not Applicable Not Applicable



6
ISDS
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
Pest Management Plan:                                       Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 3/5/2003      3/5/2003
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             3/5/2003      3/5/2003
Date of submission to InfoShop                              3/19/2003     3/19/2003
Dam Safety Management Plan:                                 Expected       Actual
Date of receipt by the Bank                                 Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of "in-country" disclosure                             Not Applicable Not Applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                              Not Applicable Not Applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why.
Sig-ned and submitted by      Name                                        Date
Task Team Leader:             Satoru Ueda                                 12/2/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 1:  Hocine Chalal                          12/4/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 2:  John Keith Rennie                      12/2/2003
Project Safeguards Specialists 3:
Approved by:                  Name                                        Date
Regional Safeguards Coordinator' Sherif Kamel F. Arif                     12/2/2003
Sector Manager                Vijay Jagannathan                           12/5/2003



