Page  1
INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET 
APPRAISAL STAGE 
 
I.  Basic Information
 
Date prepared/updated:  09/12/2005 
Report No.:  AC1618
1. Basic Project Data  
 
Country:  Yemen, Republic of 
Project ID:  P086886 
Project Name:  Fisheries Resource Management and Conservation 
Task Team Leader:  Trayambkeshwar P. N. Sinh 
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2005 
Estimated Board Date: November 15, 2005 
Managing Unit:  MNSRE 
Lending Instrument:  Specific Investment 
Loan 
Sector:  General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%) 
Theme:  Other rural development (P) 
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
IDA Amount (US$m.): 
25.00 
GEF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
PCF Amount (US$m.): 
0.00 
Other financing amounts by source:  
 BORROWER/RECIPIENT 
2.30 
 
EC: EUROPEAN COMMISSION 
7.20
9.50 
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment 
Simplified Processing 
Simple [] 
Repeater [] 
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) 
Yes [ ] 
No [ ] 
2. Project Objectives 
The objectives of the proposed project are to achieve sustainable use of marine resources 
and to increase the household income of fishing communities through improved fish 
preservation, quality and marketing. The proposed project would also support the 
Government's initiative to strengthen its capacity in key public functions such as research 
and regulation in the fisheries sector. To achieve these objectives, the project aims to: (i) 
provide policy and institutional support; (ii) promote and strengthen local fishermen's 
cooperatives to be engaged in the management of fish landing sites, marketing, 
monitoring, control and stock assessment; and (iii) raise quality standards to meet 
international criteria and, as such, promote fish exports and health safety.   
 
3. Project Description 
The proposed project consists of the four following components:  
 
a) 
Strengthening of fisheries resources management. Under this component, the 
proposed project would support specific research activities such as trawl surveys and data 
collection from artisanal fisheries to enable early assessment of key fish resources. This 
component would also include the development of a monitoring, control and surveillance 
system (MCS) to help the country: (i) closely monitor and enforce industrial fishing 
Page  2
activities; (ii) control and monitor artisanal and industrial fish landings; and (iii) control 
artisanal fishing gear and practices;  
 
b)
Fish quality improvement. This component would provide facilities at existing 
fish landing sites and will be limited to maintenance and minor improvements. Any 
dredging for maintenance in existing fisheries ports will be done only in areas that have 
been dredged before and only after a site-specific EIA has been prepared, as specified in 
the OAD and the DCA. In addition, support will be provided for training of Ministry of 
Fish Wealth (MFW) staff in enforcing quality control guidelines on board of fishing 
vessels and at fish landing places. The project will also promote the creation of a quality 
control system that would satisfy international requirements;  
 
c) 
Cooperative Development and Income Generation for Fishing Communities. The 
project would: (i) strengthen the operational capacity of cooperatives and (ii) provide 
support in generating income for associated fishing communities; and  
 
d)
Implementation support and preparation of a follow-up project: This component 
would provide MFW with support for project implementation, and would assist MFW in 
the design and preparation of tender documents for the rehabilitation of fish landing sites 
at Al Haima, Qusayir and Hodeidah (including all engineering and associated 
environmental studies prepared in an integrated manner), second phase activities at Al 
Khorbah, the creation and management of marine parks and other no-take zones along the 
coast, and an extension of the Quality Improvement Fund.   
 
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis 
The project will support the efforts of GOY to improve resource management and fish 
quality along both the Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Coast.   
 
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists 
 
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered
 
Yes No 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) 
X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) 
X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36) 
 X 
Pest Management (OP 4.09) 
 X 
Cultural Property (OPN 11.03) 
 X 
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20) 
 X 
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) 
X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) 
 X 
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
 
7.50) 
 X 
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60) 
 X 
Page  3
II.  Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. 
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Program Environmental Impact: The project aims to support conservation and sustainable 
management of Yemen's fisheries resources through policy and institutional support for 
better monitoring and control and surveillance (MCS) over fishing effort and provides for 
increases in income of poor artisanal fishers by improved fish quality and better prices.  
Compared to the "do nothing" scenario, it will contribute to more sustainable use of 
marine resources while strengthening the sector and improving the socio-economic 
conditions of the fishermen in the project areas.  In order to achieve the desired 
environmental impact of the project, it will be critical that all measures to improve the 
local management of fish resources, control future fishing efforts and strengthen local 
MCS particularly for small-scale fisheries are implemented in an integrated manner.  
 
In addition to the Environment Assessment (OP/BP/GP 4.04), the team has triggered the 
Natural Habitats Safeguard Policy (OP/BP 4. 05) since the major outputs of the project 
include Fisheries Management Plans for each of the governorates concerned.  These 
Plans will outline targeted catches for specific species and include management measures 
at the local and national level.  
 
The team has also triggered the involuntary resettlement policy. The fisher community 
in Al-khoba, is losing land and houses due to erosion of the shore. Therefore, the 
community itself has requested shore protection structures where a few houses may need 
to be relocated as requested by the community. A Resettlement Policy Framework has 
been prepared.   
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities in the project area: 
The main emphasis of the project is on strengthening institutions at both beneficiary and 
regulatory levels to assure that their capacity is improved prior to making larger 
investments.   
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize 
adverse impacts. 
A
detailed technical review of the project proposals was carried out during a review 
mission in March 2005.  The program proposed by MFW was ambitious.  For several 
sites the proposals were for new fisheries infrastructure for which more detailed 
engineering analysis including and siltation studies, environment impact analysis, and 
evaluation of alternative designs were needed.  As these take time, it was agreed that 
these would only be considered in a second phase investment, though the preparatory 
design and EIA work for those sights could be financed under this investment.  
 
The project will address those fisheries landing sites that require rehabilitation for just a 
few critical infrastructures, which are limited in nature, will be included. Dredging for 
maintenance of fisheries ports will be done only in areas that have been dredged before.   
Page  4
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide 
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
In order to assure proper attention to safeguard issues for the minor construction and 
landing sight rehabilitation planned under the project, during the appraisal mission, the 
GOY agreed that the Development Credit Agreement will require that disbursement 
against planned infrastructure for fisheries sites be contingent on receipt and acceptance 
by the Bank of the following:  
 
1) 
Both conceptual and detailed engineering designs.  It should be noted that 
conceptual designs for the larger sites were reviewed during the appraisal mission;  
 
2)
Techno-economic feasibility studies;  
 
3)
A
site-specific Environmental Impact Assessment  (EIA) or Environmental 
Management Plan (EMP), as appropriate (see below);  
 
4)
A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or Resettlement Action Framework (RAF), as 
appropriate; and  
 
5)
Bidding documents that include the site-specific EMP.  
 
The two-phase approach provides the appropriate instrument for phasing-in investments 
in line with the advancement or lack thereof of the program's institutional capacity-
building component. Thus, this project makes specific invests in improved landing sites 
and data monitoring that will be carried out and continuously analyzed throughout the 
program's span, closely monitored by a dedicated M&E officer in the MOF's Project 
Service Center (PSC) and the Fisheries Authorities (FAs) in governorates. It also funds 
the preparation of larger scale fisheries infrastructure for the follow-on phase.  The 
Project's Mid-Term Review will further perform an in-depth analysis of the alignment 
between the local resource management plans maturity and the state of the MSC 
development on the one hand and the implementation of other investments in quality 
improvement. The MTR report would be reviewed by IDA and actions agreed to remedy 
and deficiency. A resettlement policy framework paper has been prepared as a 
precautionary measure to address potential issues, although given the rehabilitation and 
maintenance approach of the project little if any potential issue is anticipated.  Relocation 
in Al-Khoba will only occur if requested by the community and in full consultation with 
them. Training for implementation of safeguards is included in the project.   
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and 
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Two studies were carried out as a part of project preparation to assess social issues in the 
fisheries sector.  This included a social assessment and an evaluation of cooperatives.  
The Assessment used Participatory Rapid Appraisal methods which included focus group 
discussions, case studies and key informant interviews generated both qualitative and 
quantitative information. Secondary data and research were also used.  These studies 
have shown that fishing communities are characterized by high levels of poverty and 
political marginalization and there is very limited government investment or NGO 
presence creating a deep sense of isolation.  Fisher cooperatives exist and these will be 
further strengthened in order to provide assistance to fishers and also to facilitate 
Page  5
consultation with them.  The key stakeholders, who are artisanal fishers, will be 
continuously consulted through these cooperatives.  Consultation will also be carried out 
with other stakeholders such as fish processors and exporters through the newly 
established Fisheries exporters association.  As stated in RFP, further consultation will be 
conducted if there is any involuntary resettlement.   
 
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2005 
 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors 
 
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: 
Date of receipt by the Bank 
06/25/2005 
 
Date of "in-country" disclosure 
06/25/2005 
 
Date of submission to InfoShop 
06/30/2005 
 
*
If the project triggers the Pest Management, Cultural Property and/or the Safety 
of Dams policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of 
the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please 
explain why: 
Public disclosure was done on June 25, 2005.  GOY has been informed that public 
disclosure has to be done prior to the start of appraisal, which is scheduled for July 3, 
2005.   
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the 
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting) 
 
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
 
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
No 
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit review and approve the EA 
report? 
No 
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the 
credit/loan? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
 
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of 
critical natural habitats? 
No 
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other 
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures 
acceptable to the Bank? 
Yes 
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 
 
Has a resettlement plan, abbreviated plan, or process framework (as 
Yes 
Page  6
appropriate) been prepared? 
If yes, then did the Regional Social Development Unit review and approve 
the plan / policy framework / policy process? 
Yes 
BP 17.50 - Public Disclosure 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's 
Infoshop? 
Yes 
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a 
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected 
groups and local NGOs? 
Yes 
All Safeguard Policies 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities 
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard 
policies? 
Yes 
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project 
cost? 
Yes 
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the 
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the 
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal 
documents? 
Yes 
D. Approvals 
 
Signed and submitted by: 
Name 
Date 
Task Team Leader: 
Mr Trayambkeshwar P. N. Sinha 
09/08/2005 
Environmental Specialist: 
Mr John Bryant Collier 
09/08/2005 
Social Development Specialist 
Ms M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong 
09/07/2005 
Additional Environmental and/or 
Social Development Specialist(s): 
Mr Lidvard Gronnevet 
 
Approved by: 
 
Regional Safeguards Coordinator: 
Mr Sherif Kamel F. Arif 
09/08/2005 
Comments:   
Sector Manager: 
Mr Luis F. Constantino 
09/08/2005 
Comments:   
