                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/04/2015                                      Report No.: AC7160
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P129663                    Original Project Name: Afghanistan:
                                                System Enhancement for Health Action in
                                                Transition Project
Country: Afghanistan                            Project ID: P152122
Project Name: SEHAT Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Mohammad Tawab Hashemi
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 9, 2015      Estimated Board Date: May 26, 2015
Managing Unit: GHNDR                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Health (75%);Public administration- Health (25%)
Theme: Health system performance (40%);Nutrition and food security (20%);Population
and reproductive health (15%);Other communicable diseases (15%);Child health (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                      0.00
         Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                      248.00
                                                                    248.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The project development objectives are to expand the scope, quality and coverage of
health services provided to the population, particularly for the poor, in the project area
and to enhance the stewardship functions of the Ministry of Public Health (MOPH).

3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) will enhance the project scope to provide
coverage of BPHS/EPHS service delivery to the remaining 13 provinces of the country,
enhance nutrition services and strengthen the national health system and MOPH's
capacity at central and provincial levels. The proposed changes under each component of
the SEHAT project are summarized below.

  Component 1: Sustaining and improving BPHS and EPHS services: Currently SEHAT
is financing health services in 21 out of 34 provinces. The AF will support the extension
of BPHS in 13 additional provinces and EPHS in 5 additional provincial hospitals
through performance-based contracts between MOPH and NGOs. The AF will also
finance Community Midwifery Education (CME) and Community Health Nursing
Education (CHNE) programs in the 13 provinces and enhancing nutrition interventions in
BPHS/EPHS by financing in-service training and establishing an innovation fund to
increase access and quality of nutrition services through innovative approaches.

 Component 2: Building the stewardship capacity of MOPH and system development:
The AF will further support building the stewardship capacity of MOPH and system
strengthening with a focus on the ten thematic areas already identified under SEHAT.
The second component of the project remains as originally envisaged and the AF for this
component will shift EU/USAID resources from off-budget support to on-budget support.

 Component 3: Strengthening program management: The AF will support strengthening
program management and by financing Incremental Operating Costs of MOPH including
remuneration of additional contracted staff of the ministry.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The proposed AF will finance costs associated with the provision of the BPHS to 13
additional provinces currently financed by USAID and the EPHS in 5 provinces. The
new provinces have geographical variations with mostly mountainous hard to reach
terrain and population density varies across the provinces. Disposal of medical waste,
which would be the prime focus from the environmental safeguards perspective, could
therefore have implications both from geographical variation and population density.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GENDR)
   Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori (GSURR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                               X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                         X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                   X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The SEHAT project was designated as a "Category B" and triggered OP/BP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment). With no new construction or land acquisition and only
minor rehabilitation civil works, the project was not expected to cause any significant
negative environmental or social impacts. An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) was prepared to provide guidelines for avoiding, reducing or
mitigating negative impacts. The ESMF was disclosed in-country on November 28, 2012
and at the World Bank Info Shop on November 30, 2012. Likewise, SEHAT was not
expected to entail significant negative environmental impacts related to health care waste.

 During appraisal of the original SEHAT project, a Health Care Waste Management Plan
(HCWMP) was drafted (basically a revised version of the HCWMP under the previous
SHARP project) which was reviewed by the Bank and agreed as an interim HCWMP.
The interim HCWMP was disclosed in-country on November 28, 2012 and at the World
Bank Info Shop on November 30, 2012. The plan was finalized during implementation
of the SEHAT project and was disclosed in-country on November 20, 2014 and at the
World Bank Info Shop on November 6, 2014. The implementation of the revised final
HCWMP is at its initial stages.

 The proposed AF is a scale up of existing activities under SEHAT. It is not envisaged to
cause any significant negative environmental or social impacts. There will be no new
construction or land acquisition. Hence the AF is designated as a "Category B" project
and OP/BP 4.01 remains triggered. The existing ESMF and HWCMP currently under
implementation in SEHAT will also apply to the proposed AF and in all new provinces.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The AF will finance minor civil works, such as modification or rehabilitation of existing
healthcare infrastructure. The proposed work is not anticipated to cause significant
adverse social or environmental impacts. The identified potential adverse impacts would
be localized in spatial extent and short in duration, and would be manageable by
implementing proper mitigation measures as outlined in the ESMF and HCWMP
currently under implementation in SEHAT.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No alternatives were considered as adverse impact was considered negligible.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The overall responsibility of the safeguards implementation rests with the MOPH and
within the Ministry, the Environmental Health Department (EHD) is the implementing
department. The EHD has focal officers with relevant terms of reference in the Ministry
as well as at the health facility levels. The Environmental and Social Focal Officers at
the Ministry level work closely with the Service Procurement and Contract Management
Department with responsibility for fulfilling safeguard requirements of the proposed AF.
The Environmental and Safeguard Focal Officers also conduct orientation for the relevant
staff of MOPH and contractors on implementation of the ESMF. The project will finance
additional TA for the MOPH if deemed necessary for satisfactory implementation of
HCWMP.

 The comprehensive implementation-stage HCWMP for SEHAT was prepared by
MOPH and disclosed in November 2014. The MOPH hired an international TA who
conducted an in-depth review of HWCM in Afghanistan and the lessons learned to-date.
Based on this review identified gaps in HCWMP implementation and provides
recommendations for strengthening its implementation. The plan is at the initial stage of
implementation stage.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Public Health, Ministry of Finance, National
Environmental Protection Agency (NEPA), provincial Departments of Health, contracted
NGOs/MOPH-SM and the local communities and their Shura-e Sehi/Health Shuras.

 The ESMF and draft preliminary HCWMP for the original parent (SEHAT) project
were disclosed in November 2012. The HCWMP was widely disseminated to all relevant
stakeholder groups across medical facilities in the format and languages that suit the
stakeholders. The approved comprehensive implementation-stage HCWMP was
disclosed in all the relevant locations and on the MOPH website in English, Dari and
Pashto on November 20, 2014 and in the World Bank Info Shop on November 6, 2014.

 The Ministry of Public Health (MOPH) has a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) in
place, but the GRM systems at HQ level are limited in scope and reach and mainly focus
on complaints related to ministry staff. At the health facility level, the grievance system
consists mainly of complainant boxes that are being used by healthcare users. A GRM
committee at the healthcare facility comprises representatives from Shura-e Sehee (or
Health Council) and relevant health officials, who are responsible to address grievances
related to healthcare services.

 The MOPH and its BPHS/EPHS implementing partners are committed to strengthening
the functionality of grievance handling at the national and sub national levels including
health facilities. MOPH has initiated the establishment of a GRM unit at central level
which will be comprised of GRM unit manager, GRM Analysis Officer, and GRM IT
Officer. Likewise, MOPH is exploring options to setting up a citizens' feedback
mechanism along the lines of the Punjab Model of Proactive Governances. MOPH is also
exploring options to implement a community score cards approach to enable citizens to
assess the quality of healthcare services.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/18/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/20/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               11/06/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Mohammad Tawab Hashemi                    03/01/2015
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli                      03/01/2015
Social Development Specialist       Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori                      03/01/2015
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Albertus Voetberg                         03/04/2015
  Comments:
