                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/04/2013                                     Report No.: AC7053
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P119047                 Original Project Name: Financial Sector
                                             Rapid Response Project
Country: Afghanistan                         Project ID: P147624
Project Name: Additional Financing to Financial Sector Rapid Response Project
Task Team Leader: Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin
Estimated Appraisal Date: October 15,        Estimated Board Date: November 26, 2013
2013
Managing Unit: SASFP                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Payments, settlements, and remittance systems (43%);Banking (36%);Public
administration- Financial Sector (12%);Credit Reporting and Secured Transactions (9%)
Theme: International financial standards and systems (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):              6.7
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The revised PDO is to assist DAB to develop action plans for improved banking
supervision and to establish key building blocks of financial sector infrastructure:
payment system, movable collateral registry and public credit registry.

3. Project Description
The following changes are proposed in project components and financing:
  •      Component 1. Strengthening of DAB's capacity (Additional Financing of US$4.5
million): The Component 1 would focus on targeted activities to strengthen DAB's
capacity: (i) stock taking on capacity building efforts on financial supervision over the
last ten years and development and implementation of a capacity building plan to
sustainably strengthen the Financial Supervision Department, (ii) review of banking
regulation framework, and (iii) development and implementation of action plans
following the ten audits of commercial banks financed by the Financial Sector Rapid
Response Project (FSRRP). These activities will be undertaken by a firm with recognized
financial sector expertise, through Quality Based Selection (QBS). Draft Terms of
Reference are available and the procurement process will be initiated in October 2013.
  •     Component 2. Development of the financial sector infrastructure (Additional
Financing of US$2.2 million): The revised Component would cover broader activities to
support the development of financial sector infrastructure, including support to the
development of the Collateral Registry (CR) and to the establishment of the Public Credit
Registry (PCR), activities initiated under the Financial Sector Strengthening Project
(FSSP). The Collateral Registry is now fully operational but further technical assistance
is needed to maximize its use by financial institutions. The contract for the establishment
of the PCR was signed in February 2013 under FSSP. This contract will therefore be
transferred to the Additional Financing of FSSRP. The PCR should be operational by end
2013.
  •     Component 3. Technical assistance and training for project implementation:
Within the current project cost (US$3 million), Component 3 will also include support to
the establishment of the PCR and CR. In addition, this Component will cover pending
payments on a contract for assessment of IT requirement, design, implementation and
supervision of IT Installation at DAB, signed under FSSP. The amount of final payments
is being finalized between DAB and the firm.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Kabul - The project finances payment systems, PCR and CR, and technical assistance.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Asta Olesen (SASDS)
   Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Not applicable
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Not applicable

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
  explain why:
  Not applicable


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       N/A
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             N/A
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Guillemette Sidonie Jaffrin               10/15/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli                      10/15/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Asta Olesen                               10/15/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:  Mr Francis V. Fragano                          10/21/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                   Mr Vincent Palmade                             10/22/2013
  Comments: Acting Sector Manager
