                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                        DRAFT APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 5-Mar-2014                                     Report No.: 86529
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Africa (Regional project)          Project ID: P149269
Project Name: Support to TerrAfrica Secretariat
Task Team Leader: Anna Corsi
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 5, 2014     Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: AFTN3                           Lending Instrument: Child Trust Fund
                                               Grant
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme: Land administration and management (50%); Environmental policies and
institutions (20%); Climate change (20%);Water resource management (10%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        0.425
         Trust Funds                                                     2.00
                                                                         2.425
Environmental Category: C - Not Required
Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of this child trust fund (CTF) project under the TerrAfrica Leveraging
Fund (TLF) is to strengthen capacity at NEPAD Agency to support TerrAfrica member
countries on knowledge management and actions for scaling up Sustainable Land and
Water Management (SLWM). The project will support capacity enhancement to maintain
and strengthen the regional coalition on sustainable land management, manage
knowledge and information, carry out communications and outreach, monitor progress,
and facilitate the development of participating countries’ sustainable land management
investment frameworks.

3. Project Description
The Project has three components with a total investment cost of $2.425 million to be
financed by the TerrAfrica Leveraging Fund in the amount of US$2,0M and US$0.425 of
in-kind resources for staffing and overheads by NEPAD Agency.

Component 1. Support for regional coalition building (US$1.1M CTF support). The
objective of this component is to support the NEPAD Agency to reinforce the regional
coalition that aligns assistance to countries on SLWM and related issues. The project will
finance SLM coordination mechanisms, including the integration of SLM in CAADP
processes and investment planning and other key programs and plans; technical staff and
training to strengthen management of the TerrAfrica Secretariat; and communication
activities to reinforce policy advocacy and technical outreach.

Component 2. Support for mutual learning among countries (US$0.5M CTF
support). The objective of this component is to support the NEPAD Agency in its
mandate to meet country demand for knowledge and best practice tools to improve land
management and climate resilience while maintaining natural capital. These tools and
services would reinforce on-going investment operations in countries, as well as national
and sector development planning.

Component 3. Support for countries’ SLM investment planning (US$0.4M CTF
support). The objective of this component is to strengthen the NEPAD Agency’s role in
meeting country demand for expertise and tools to develop and implement SLM work
programs and national SLM investment frameworks.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project will fund activities to be carried out at NEPAD Agency headquarters in
Midrand, South Africa, and at regional and national levels region-wide. No on-the-
ground investments are included in the grant.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   N/A

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                     X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                     X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The activities to be funded by the project are limited to the mandate and functional
responsibilities of the recipient, NEPAD Agency, in supporting the TerrAfrica processes
as described in section 3 and 4 above. The project will not fund any civil works
whatsoever, either at NEPAD Agency or in member countries, or their engineering
design (detailed or even schematic) or even their feasibility study. In addition, the
knowledge and information services to be provided by NEPAD Agency are essentially to
promote environmental sustainability among sectors and themes including agriculture,
forest, and water resources. Moreover, NEPAD Agency through this project may provide
consultant services to participating countries to strengthen their environmental and
natural resource planning and project management systems. Participating countries will
therefore be in a better position to improve their respective systems. In conclusion, there
will be no adverse environmental and social impacts associated with this project; indirect
environmental and social impacts of the grant should be overwhelmingly positive.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
N/A

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

The recipient does not have experience in using and applying Bank safeguard policies
given the nature of their work to date. However, this is not a concern as, as previously
mentioned, this project will not finance directly or indirectly any civil works, engineering
designs (either detailed or schematic) or feasibility studies for such works.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                      N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                      N/A
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                    N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
This small child trust fund project is only funding capacity building work of a regional
institution with no works on the ground in any country.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       N/A
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    N/A
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   N/A
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           N/A
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals


Task Team Leader:     Anna Corsi           March 5, 2014

Approved by:                                    Date
Regional Safeguards   Alexandra Bezeredi    April 4, 2014
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:       Ms Magda Lovei       March 11, 2014
