                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 07/17/2014                                  Report No.: AC7133
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P129408                   Original Project Name: Regional Pastoral
                                               Livelihoods Resilience Project
Country: Africa                                Project ID: P150006
Project Name: Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience
Task Team Leader: Stephane Forman
Estimated Appraisal Date: June 30, 2014        Estimated Board Date: October 21, 2014
Managing Unit: GFADR                           Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                               Financing
Sector: Animal production (60%);Agricultural extension and research (15%);Public
administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (15%);Agro-industry, marketing, and
trade (10%)
Theme: Other rural development (45%);Rural services and infrastructure (8%);Rural
markets (25%);Regional integration (9%);Natural disaster management (13%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             75
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
                                                                          0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                          Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
To enhance livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in cross-
border drought prone areas of Selected Countries and improve the capacity of the
Selected Countries' governments to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis
or Emergency.

3. Project Description
The five components of the first phase of the RPLRP (Natural Resources Management,
Market Access and Trade, Livelihood Support, Pastoral Risk Management, and Project
Management and Institutional Support) remain unchanged. The additional financing will
carry out in Ethiopia the same set of activities already under implementation in Kenya
and Uganda with some additions; and, activities implemented by IGAD under the IDA
Grant received in phase 1 will be expanded to cover Ethiopia.
 The activities will increase the outputs delivered by RPLRP.

  •     Under the subcomponent 1.1 (Water Resources Development), the new financing
will support the design, construction, and/or rehabilitation of additional water resources
access facilities within Ethiopia (ponds with capacity above 10,000m3 , community water
catchments, small sand dams, boreholes, etc.) strategically placed along trans-boundary
livestock movement routes.
  •     Under the subcomponent 1.2 (Sustainable Land Management in pastoral and
agro-pastoral areas), the AF will add 1,060 ha. in Ethiopia to the 3,420 ha. in Kenya and
Uganda with rangelands rehabilitation and management improvement, including area
closure, control of invasive plants, reseeding of degraded areas with forage grasses, dry
land forest development, and physical and biological soil conservation (eye-row, bunds,
micro-basin, check-dam, etc.).
  •     Under the subcomponent 2.1 (Market Support Infrastructure and Information
Systems), the RPLRP in Ethiopia will add 20 primary market infrastructure (such as
holding/auction grounds, border check-points, and one satellite laboratory) and
strengthen 12 existing market centers along trade routes and build capacity on market
management including livestock certification.
  •     Under the subcomponent 2.2 (Livestock Value-Chain Support and Improving
Livestock Mobility and Trade), the RPLRP will seek to improve trade regulation systems
affecting livestock trade from the Ethiopian ASALs, strengthen selected livestock-related
cross-border value chains related to the Ethiopian ASALs, and introduce two additional
pilots in livestock identification and traceability.
  •     Under the subcomponent 3.1 (Livestock Production and Health to enhance animal
health services), RPLRP will strengthen national veterinary systems and laboratory
networks, promote the production of vaccines for selected trans-boundary livestock
diseases, identify and help address gaps in private veterinary service provision and, where
applicable, support Community Animal Health Worker (CAHW) networks through
training, supply of equipment, and assistance to link them with the public and private
veterinary service providers and drug suppliers as well as through a revolving fund.
  •     Under the subcomponent 3.2 (Food and Feed Production), the RPLRP will
promote increased food and feed production among agro-pastoralists in the Ethiopian
ASALs through the introduction of drought tolerant food crop and fodder species in agro-
pastoral areas and expansion of small scale irrigation.
  •     Under the subcomponent 3.3 (Livelihoods Diversification), the RPLRP, will
promote viable livelihoods for pastoralist drop outs i Ethiopia and encourage the
emergence of cooperatives around alternative livelihoods, providing financial support
through a revolving fund.
  •     Under the sub-component 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 RPLRP will enhance the capacity of
Ethiopian actors, in addition to stakeholders in Kenya and Uganda, to respond to drought
related risks faced by pastoralists in a timely and appropriate manner.
  •     Under the sub-component 5.1 and 5.2, RPLRP will enhance the capacity of
relevant institutions to deliver the project in Ethiopia
4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The AF will target 21 woredas (districts) of the Oromiya, the Southern Nations
Nationalities and Peoples (SNNPR) National Regional States bordering Kenya, as well as
of Somali and Afar National Regional States in Eastern Ethiopia.

  The project will finance small infrastructure activities including: designing, building and
rehabilitating water resources access facilities (ponds, boreholes, community water
catchments, establishing small-scale irrigation schemes), as well as identifying and
promoting appropriate water harvesting technologies; development and rehabilitation of
pasture land; construction/rehabilitation of livestock markets, border checkpoints,
holding/auction grounds, slaughter facilities, rehabilitation of veterinary laboratories;
building and rehabilitation of storage and post-harvest facilities adapted to pastoral
conditions and agricultural production and region-wide harmonized vaccination
campaigns for priority diseases. The environmental and social mitigation measures will
be undertaken to preclude any safeguards risk to humans and environment. More
importantly, the participating woredas were selected with the objective of targeting
particular areas and people to have the greatest geographical and social impact. Criteria
used for woredas selection included :(i) vulnerability to recurrent droughts, (ii) cross-
border/trans-boundary resource-based conflicts prone areas, (iii) trans-boundary livestock
trade routes; and (iv) clustering around common geographic, geo-political or socio-
cultural issues.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Nyambura Githagui (GSURR)
   Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour (GENDR)
   Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
As for the parent project, overall, the AF will have significant socio-economic benefits to
Ethiopian communities in the project area and will promote sustainable use of resources
in the target project areas. The AF is classified as Environment Assessment (EA)
Category B because the anticipated environmental impacts are not major, mostly site
specific and can easily be avoided and/or managed. RPLRP AF triggers OP 4.01 –
Environmental Assessment, as the program will support local and community
investments, including some with trans-border dimensions, which might have
environmental and social impacts.

  The project triggers the following Policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01),
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources
(OP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Project on International Waterways
(OP 7.50). The project takes a framework approach to safeguards, since the specific
activities have not been identified during the project preparation. However, as activities
(including their scope and nature) become clearly defined and their specific spatial
dimensions are known, the project will undertake supplemental safeguard studies (e.g.,
ESIA, RAP, IPMP, etc.) that may be deemed relevant and appropriate, in accordance
with the World Bank safeguard policies and guidelines.

 The important environmental issues are associated with among others the following
proposed project activities: designing, building and rehabilitating water resources access
facilities (ponds, small sand dams, boreholes, community water catchments, establishing
small-scale irrigation schemes), as well as identifying and promoting appropriate water
harvesting technologies; development and rehabilitation of pasture land;
construction/rehabilitation of livestock markets, border checkpoints, holding/auction
grounds, slaughter facilities, rehabilitation of veterinary laboratories; building and
rehabilitation of storage and post-harvest facilities adapted to pastoral conditions and
agricultural production and region-wide harmonized vaccination campaigns for priority
diseases such as PPR, FMD, CBPP, CCPP, RVF and Newcastle Disease (ND). RPLRP
AF is expected to have a positive impact on environment by enhancing the capacities of
relevant stakeholders to sustainably manage natural resources, especially rangelands and
water, and by rehabilitating or developing water and pasture related infrastructure and
ecosystems.

 The project is expected to benefit many communities that live on the margins through
extending social benefits that go directly to improving their livelihoods. Their
participation is however very critical particularly among those that are considered as
vulnerable and underserved. The RPLRP AF demand driven approach (so-called
Community Level Participatory Planning- CLPP in Ethiopia) will therefore enable
priority setting by communities and responses to communities' needs.
 Activities planned under the RPLR Project AF will vary in scale. Consequently, the
significance of the direct negative environmental and social impacts is likely to be
moderate. The RPLRP country level implementation team will oversee the design of
subprojects on a national scale and the appropriate environmental assessment process,
including mitigation measures and coordination among the relevant stakeholders during
subproject preparation and implementation.

 In addition to the policies triggered by the parent project, the AF triggers OP 7.50
because it will finance small-scale irrigation investments in Ethiopia along international
waterways. Riparian notifications were sent by the World Bank to the governments of
Kenya, Djibouti, Sudan, South Sudan, Egypt and Somalia on behalf of the GoE in
December 2013. Bank staff have assessed that the Project will not cause appreciable
harm to these riparian countries. The Government of Egypt responded by a letter dated
January 27, 2014, giving its "no objection" for the project preparation and
implementation. No other comments have been received from any of the other notified
countries.

 The project intervention is not envisaged to lead to acquisition of private land or denial
and/or restriction of access to communal natural resources. However, for precautionary
measures, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared, consulted upon
and disclosed to ensure that appropriate measures are in place to address any issues which
might arise from restriction of access to communal natural resources under the Project
and the client will prepare a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) if needed. Further, based on
the screening conducted by the World Bank, the majority of the target population meet
the criteria for OP4.10 and, therefore, the project has triggered OP/BP 4.10 and an
enhanced social assessment (SA) was conducted to complement the RPF and to identify
social issues. Key stakeholders were consulted upon in the Woredas, Kebeles and
communities, including identified vulnerable and undeserved groups to seek their broad
support for the project. The findings of the enhanced social assessment and extensive
consultations, including measures to ensure that the project involves and benefits
appropriately the various groups has been fully reflected in the project design.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
No long-term impacts are anticipated. Generally, the AF is expected to have positive
impacts on the environment by enhancing the capacities of relevant Ethiopian
stakeholders to sustainably manage natural resources, especially rangelands and water,
and by rehabilitating or developing water and pasture related infrastructure and
ecosystems.

  Furthermore, RPLRP AF activities will contribute to building the resilience of pastoral
and agro-pastoral communities in the ASALs regions of Ethiopia by addressing some of
the factors that undermine households' resilience through positively impacting on
livestock assets, incomes and diversifying income sources.
 Indirect negative impacts may include increased use of pesticides (Veterinary drugs) in
the project areas of intervention. Such impacts will be mitigated by implementation of
integrated pest management solutions presented in the project ESMF and IPMF, and
other supplemental safeguard instruments.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Each subproject, which would require development of an ESIA, RAP, IPMP, etc., will
analyze the project alternatives as part of subproject preparation.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project Ethiopian team developed a set of safeguards instruments to guide the
preparation of mitigation measures for sub-projects once they are identified. These are
ESMF and IPMF, RPF and a comprehensive Social Assessment.

 Environmental safeguards: To satisfy the requirements of OP 4.01, Ethiopia has
prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). It describes the
process of environmental and social assessment, which will help the implementing
agencies identify, assess and avoid or mitigate the potential negative impacts of the
proposed interventions. The ESMF defines screening mechanisms and monitoring
procedures for identification and management of potential adverse environmental and
social impacts. The Project will collaborate with the local authorities to assist the project
in monitoring project activities in the vicinity of any natural habitats in the sub-project
areas. Aside the RPF, the ESMF report provides Grievance Redress Mechanism with
guidance on the reception, recording, handling, and reporting of complaints that may be
encountered during project implementation. A stand-alone Integrated Pest Management
Framework (IPMF) has also been prepared which will guide activities, involving
handling veterinary drugs, laboratory waste, etc. The IPMF helps screen the pesticide use,
guide their safe handling, storage and disposal, and include training and capacity building
activities for farmers and other stakeholders. As for Physical Cultural Resources, the
ESMF includes a chance find procedure, which will be used by the project team during
subprojects that involve civil works and will be included into contracts as a requirement.

 During project implementation and based on the environmental and social screening
process provided in the ESMF, ESIAs/ESMPs shall be developed and relevant
environmental assessments undertaken where necessary. Monitoring and reporting
formats have been provided in the ESMF report and shall be customized to the respective
sub-projects in each identified subproject. The ESMF report has gone through public
consultations during its preparation and was disclosed locally and in the Bank Info Shop
prior to project appraisal in November 2013.

 Social safeguards: The project has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
which will provide guidance during implementation (and prior to any civil works) for
determining the necessity of RAPs for sub-projects and the procedures for their
preparation, including consultations with potentially affected individuals and households
in the target of project areas.

 For application of OP 4.10, the project AF is following the recommendations of the
screening conducted by the World Bank and reinforced by the constitution of Ethiopia,
which indicates that vast majority of the target population identify themselves as having
the characteristics defined under OP 4.10. A comprehensive Social Assessment has
therefore been prepared and disclosed, which involved extensive consultation with
potential project beneficiaries and project affected peoples in the targeted woredas,
including those identified as vulnerable and historically underserved groups to seek broad
support from these groups. The recommendations of the Social Assessment form the
basis of the action plan for addressing the requirements of OP 4.10, including mitigating
any adverse impacts, culturally appropriate benefit-sharing, an ongoing process of free,
prior, and informed consultations leading to broad community support for the project, and
grievance redress mechanism.

 These safeguards instruments were prepared to clarify principles, mitigation measures,
and the appropriate organizational arrangements for each implementation agency that
would ensure that those affected by implementation of the project positively or
negatively, have a voice and a mechanism of influencing project outcomes in line with
World Bank safeguard policies.

 The AF will have substantial positive social impact livelihoods of communities in the
project areas of Ethiopia, as the parent project has in Kenya and Uganda. The project
design includes mechanisms for ensuring that participation of communities in
management of resources, particularly natural resources, is enhanced. Previous Bank-
funded projects in similar areas and communities have helped the anticipation of the
project social impacts, especially in regard to underserved groups, women and young
people. The RPLRP and AF's demand driven approach will therefore enable priority
setting by communities and respond to communities' needs.

 Capacity Building: As part of the parent project, a regional coordination unit is placed
under IGAD Steering Committee and the Committee of Directors. The core functions of
this Platform include: coordination of resources mobilization, regional programming and
M&E services, regional knowledge management, and regional capacity development.
The RPLRP Unit will coordinate the implementation of the cross-boundary interventions;
provide a platform for technical assistance, and support policy dialogue with countries.

  In Ethiopia, the project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA).
Currently, the capacity for implementation of safeguards related issues remains limited
among the implementing agencies of RPLRP. However, the Ethiopia project team has
committed to hiring dedicated staff to manage the environmental and social aspects of
project implementation. These staff, together with other project stakeholders will benefit
from the comprehensive capacity building and training programs presented in the ESMF
and RPF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As well as in Kenya and Uganda for the parent project, communities in Ethiopia and their
local level institutions are the key project stakeholders for this AF. They have been
involved in the project preparation and consulted on environmental and social
documentation for the key safeguard policies applicable to this project. Consultations
with underserved groups were conducted in the free, prior and informed manner. The
project stakeholders will be an integral part of development of Action Plans during
implementation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  11/19/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              11/26/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               05/28/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  11/13/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              12/05/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               12/05/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  07/11/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              07/11/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               07/11/2014
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                             N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                              N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
For RPF, the document has been disclosed as part of the parent project preparation
(P129408).
 For application of OP 4.10, the project AF is following the recommendations of the
screening conducted by the World Bank and reinforced by the constitution of Ethiopia,
which indicates that vast majority of the target population identify themselves as having
the characteristics defined under OP 4.10. A comprehensive Social Assessment has
therefore been prepared and disclosed in-country and on Infoshop but no specific IPPF or
VGMF.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    No
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?             Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential           Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                   N/A
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector         N/A
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed    N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process               Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
  Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         Yes
  If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           N/A
  requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
  to the RVP prepared and sent?
  Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                 Name                      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Stephane Forman                           06/20/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Edward Felix Dwumfour                     06/25/2014
Social Development Specialist       Mr Chukwudi H. Okafor                        07/30/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     07/14/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Tijan M. Sallah                           07/15/2014
  Comments:
