                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                    ADDITIONAL FINANCE
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                   Report No.: 87772

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        April 23, 2014


I. BASIC INFORMATION


  1. Basic Project Data
  Country:                Africa                               Project ID:        P147218 (Additional
                                                                                  Financing)
                                                                                  P130694 (original)
  Project Name:           Additional Financing (P147218) for Nile Cooperation for Results Project
                          (P130694)
  Task Team Leader:       Eileen Burke
  Estimated Appraisal     April 25, 2014                       Estimated Bank May 15, 2014
  Date:                                                        Approval Date:
  Managing Unit:          AFTN2                                Lending            TAL
                                                               Instrument:
  Sector(s):              General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (84%), Public
                          administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (16%)
  Theme(s):               Water resource management (74%), Environmental policies and institutions
                          (16%), Participation and civic engagement (10%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00 No
  (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
                                                            Total Bank
  Total Project Cost:   17.5                                                      17.5
                                                            Financing:
  Financing Gap:        0.00
      Financing Source                                                                          Amount
      Borrower                                                                                      0.00
      Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                               13.00
      Nile Basin Initiative Trust Fund                                                              4.50
      Total                                                                                       17.50
  Environmental           A - Full Assessment
  Category:
Is this a Repeater        No
project?
Is this a Transferred     No
project?


2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective for the project is “to facilitate cooperative water resource management and
development in the Nile Basin.? This is being achieved through the provision of targeted technical
assistance to the NBI member countries and broader stakeholders, to facilitate cooperative activities,
improve integrated water resources planning and management, and identify and prepare studies of
potential investments of regional significance.

By increasing understanding of regional hydro variability and climatic conditions, and through
cooperative preparation of development projects of regional significance, the project will contribute to
sustainable, climate resilient growth in the region. However, due to the technical assistance nature of this
project and, as no works will be undertaken on the ground during the implementation of this project,
these benefits will not accrue during the three year project life. As such, it will not be possible to
measure these impacts during the life of this project.

This project was initially prepared and approved for $15.3 million, for some of the activities described
below. An Additional Financing is now being considered and the potential project including the
additional financing is described below. The project’s development objective and implementation
structure would remain unchanged with the Additional Financing, but the project’s scope would be
expanded to include activities that would increase development effectiveness and results of the project.

3. Project Description
1.1      Description. The Project intends to provide customized support to facilitate activities in each
of the three operational NBI institutions – the Nile Secretariat (Nile-SEC), the Nile Equatorial Lakes
Subsidiary Action Program Coordination Unit (NELSAP-CU), and the Eastern Nile Technical Regional
Office (ENTRO). The support takes into account the historical evolution, comparative advantage,
strategic plans and mandates of each of these organizations, and strategic changes in the basin. The
recent induction of South Sudan into the NBI provides the institution with an opportunity to support
South Sudan with mainstreaming transboundary development planning and management into its water
sector.

The components and sub-components are described as follows:

Component 1: Advancing Nile Basin-Wide Cooperation and Analysis. This Component will support
Nile-SEC in its two core functions of facilitating cooperation and water resources management. The
activities proposed have been prioritized in line with the NBI Strategic Plan and available resources for
the Project, and aim to sustain, enhance, and apply the work and products supported through previous
NBI activities in all its centers. Component 1 proposes targeted technical assistance and operational
support aimed at strengthening basin cooperation and the provision of tools, knowledge products and
analysis to increase a shared understanding of the Nile River system. It has two sub-components as
noted below:

•       Sub-component 1.a: Strengthening the platform for basin-wide cooperation for sustainable
water resources management and development. This sub-component aims to facilitate basin-wide
cooperative activities. This includes technical assistance and operational support to the Nile-SEC for
evidence-based analysis to illustrate the benefits of cooperation, information and events for governance
bodies and to strengthen stakeholder engagement to facilitate riparian awareness-building, dialogue,
cooperation, and resource mobilization. Targeted communications packages will be produced to assist
different networks of NBI stakeholders utilize the NBI’s extensive knowledge base and analytical tools
for decision making within the basin. Efforts will be made to account for recent strategic changes in the
basin as the NBI improves linkages to relevant national and other regional/international-level
institutions, including government agencies, academia, Community Social Organizations (CSOs),
media, private sector, development partners, and the general public. Nile-SEC will also take the lead in
ensuring that NBI center activities produce coherent and meaningful results through strengthened
cross-center coordination.

•       Sub-component 1.b: Enhancing capacity and understanding for cooperative management and
development of water resources in the Nile Basin. This sub-component aims to improve the knowledge
and analytical foundation for developing a shared understanding of Nile Basin issues, and of cooperative
water resources development and management options in the Basin. This includes technical and
operational support for the enhanced application of analytical resources including the Nile Basin
Decision Support System (DSS) and other tools, as well as to expand the systems’ capabilities and
improve accessibility. Efforts will also be made to strengthen technical Help Desk services and DSS
user community and broader facilitation to improve the relevance of NBI activities at National-level.
Enhanced public access to information is a key feature of the proposed sub-component, with the
publication of a series of technical briefs, and an upgraded web portal that includes a basin-wide
real-time hydromet monitoring visualization system that would facilitate integration of earth
observation products and incentives for sharing ground-based hydromet data. Towards this end,
Nile-SEC will work in conjunction with other centers to assist South Sudan in designing a Hydro-met
Information System, as well as to provide relevant training for use of this system in the country’s water
sector.

Component 2: Promotion of Sustainable Development and Planning in the Nile Equatorial Lakes
Region. This Component will support NELSAP-CU in its efforts to identify and prepare potential,
strategic cooperative investment opportunities. This will help undertake preparatory work and
resource mobilization to catalyze transformative investments on the ground that can be enabled by, and
contribute to, regional cooperation. The NEL region countries have a demonstrated track-record for
preparation and implementation of multi-sectoral regional cooperative analysis of transboundary
opportunities for investments. This Component will help provide support for further critical future
investments of regional significance.

•        Subcomponent 2-a: Identifying and promoting strategic opportunities to advance cooperative
water resource management and development. This sub-component aims to support development of
“project profiles? of regionally-significant water resources investments in the NEL region to facilitate
resource mobilization, some of which would be for projects that have already been identified through
other high-level scoping studies. This component will also include the production and dissemination of
technical briefing notes to highlight analysis emerging from earlier studies and analysis, and other
updates to these studies to increase awareness of hydrological issues in the NEL region. Activities under
this sub-component also include strengthening the center’s knowledge base and outreach with basin
partners by providing training for countries in NELSAP tools and knowledge products. It will be
providing training to its member states, and with additional attention to South Sudan, in understanding
sectoral trade-offs in its development planning using tools developed by NELSAP-CU

•       Subcomponent 2-b: Preparing transformative investment projects of regional significance. This
sub-component aims to undertake feasibility level studies related to potential cooperative
water-resources development investments in the NEL region. This includes investments related to
hydropower, irrigation and watershed management.

NELSAP is undertaking a least cost generation expansion study in South Sudan, with focus on regional
water resource issues, to help Sudan plan its integration in the East African power market.

One feasibility study is near commencement: the Muvumba Irrigation Development and Watershed
Management project. Located in the Eastern Province in Rwanda, the project proposes a multipurpose
dam that would generate up to 3 MW, expand existing irrigation area by 13,000 ha, regulate flow for
flood and drought control, restore degraded upstream catchments, and provide water supply to more
than 188,000 people. The TORs for this feasibility study and ESIA was disclosed on March 13, 2014,
through the NBI website and in the NELSAP-CU office.

The additional locations and associated civil works of the projects to be prepared (including feasibility
study and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, but not implemented) under this project have
not yet been determined, but several are under consideration, including:

 Location                           Country(s)                       Benefits
 Ruvyironza                         Burundi                          Irrigating 14,674 ha; hydropower
                                                                     of 22 MW; storage 372.6 MCM
 Ngono Valley                       Tanzania                         Irrigating 11,342 ha; hydropower
                                                                     of 14.5 GWh/yr
 Mara Valley                        Tanzania                         Irrigating 8,340 ha; hydropower
                                                                     of 6 MW; storage: 30MCM
 Kabuyanda                          Uganda                           Irrigation 4,300 ha; hydropower
                                                                     0.1 MW
 Sio-Sanga                          Kenya                            Irrigation 1,790 ha; hydropower
                                                                     0.05 MW; storage 6.2 MCM
 Nyabanja                           Uganda                           Irrigation 5,500ha; hydropower
                                                                     47 kW; Storage of 170 MCM
                                                                     (Water Supply for 12,000 people)




These technical studies will be accompanied by environmental and social assessments, to the degree
appropriate (e.g. strategic environmental and social assessment for a pre-feasibility study; and an
environmental and social impact assessment for a feasibility study). Final selections of sites will be
based on previous selection criteria following work undertaken by NBI/NELSAP and guidance from
NEL riparian countries.

Component 3: Promotion of Sustainable Development and Planning in the Eastern Nile Region. This
Component is intended to support ENTRO in promoting cooperation among Eastern Nile riparian
countries in a challenging hydro-political environment. It builds on ENTRO’s current activities and
achievements, and seeks to focus on both knowledge and analysis activities in which ENTRO has
recently made significant progress, as well as on investment facilitation, where ENTRO has
demonstrated successful interfacing of regional and national-level activities.

•       Sub-component 3.a: Strengthening the knowledge base and analytical framework for Eastern
Nile climate-resilient water resources planning and management. This sub-component aims to
improve public domain access to the Eastern Nile knowledge base by populating ENTRO’s web portal
with knowledge products and tools developed by the center, including a portal for climate change
analysis. Activities also include expansion of analytical and forecasting tools for investment preparation
and flood and drought management; enhancing knowledge partnerships and strengthening
communications with stakeholder networks including government, power utilities, academia, etc.;
promoting regional cooperation activities; and expanding analysis on hydropower and environmental
aspects of flagship studies, including the EN Multi-sectoral Investment Opportunities Analysis.

•        Sub-component 3.b: Promoting sustainable development and growth in the Eastern Nile. This
sub-component aims to prepare studies on cooperative investments (initially focused on watershed
management activities) as well as promote more holistic approaches to preparing and operating possible
water investments, that better take into consideration environmental and social issues. ENTRO is
providing capacity building in improving dam safety in the Eastern Nile, including development of a
regional dam safety framework, a set of guidelines, a course module, and training materials. Networks
of environmental and social specialists that have been assisting ENTRO will also be strengthened
through training. In addition, ENTRO is expected to deliver on mainstreaming environmental and
social issues into development planning in South Sudan. Under this sub-component, ENTRO will be
helping the governments of Ethiopia and Sudan to prepare new watershed management investments. In
Ethiopia, the new investments to be prepared through this project are to be located on the Blue Nile, in
the Fincha’a watershed (which includes the Fincha’a, Nedi and Mita sub-watersheds), and the Chemoga
watershed (which includes the Chemoga, Tesher and Yeda tributaries). In Sudan, ENTRO will be
working with the government to design and prepare new watershed management interventions in
Kassala State in the Northern part of the Telkuk locality; and in the Karib lands in Gedaref State, along
the upper Atbara River.


4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project is primarily technical assistance and will be implemented by NBI offices in three countries:
•       Uganda, Entebbe – location of NBI Secretariat
•       Ethiopia, Addis Ababa – location of ENTRO
•       Rwanda, Kigali – location of NELSAP-CU

The project is designed to complement ongoing NBI operations, to provide targeted services to NBI
stakeholders and to assist in the identification of possible future investments through feasibility studies,
of potential upstream investments. Under the first phase of the project, therefore, no planned physical
investments (such as civil works) are included for financing. Instead preparation studies are envisaged.
The locations of the potential future investments being studied through this project are provided in
Section 3 – Project Components.

Anticipating that the above activities would entail reviews of the environmental and social impacts,
including for feasibility studies on sites being considered and activities, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, and disclosed in July 2012. The amended
version of the ESMF has been prepared and disclosed in on the NBI websites and in the NBI offices on
March 13, 2014. This ESMF for the NCORE Project has been prepared by all three NBI organizations
and contains an environmental and social screening tool. This screening tool has been used by NBI
projects in the past, including sub-projects preparation and planning. The ESMF responds to the need for
identifying and developing appropriate mitigating measures for any potential environmental and social
impacts.
Moreover, through the NBI Institutional Strengthening Project (ISP - P110616), another report, the
Environmental and Social Management Guidelines for Nile Basin Initiative Projects, was developed in
December 2012, and adopted by NBI and participating countries, so as such applies to all NBI projects.
These guidelines are consistent with the project’s ESMF. These two documents, the strategy and the
guidelines, will also constitute the environmental and social safeguards framework instruments that
would be applicable for this project (specifically covering some guidelines as covered in an ESMF, RPF,
IPPF or PF (Process Framework) and other appropriate safeguards instruments that may be needed in
the future).

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Afshan Khawaja, Constance Nekessa-Ouma ( AFTCS )
Hocine Chalal ( AFTN1 )

6. Safeguard Policies           Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment        Yes                           The NCORE Project is primarily a
OP/BP 4.01                                                    technical assistance project. Even
                                                              though there will be no civil works or
                                                              construction, the NBI has adopted an
                                                              ESMF to address any possible social and
                                                              environmental impacts of potential
                                                              activities and which was disclosed in
                                                              July 2012.

                                                              Through the NBI’s Institutional
                                                              Strengthening Project (P110616),
                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                              Guidelines for NBI projects have been
                                                              finalized. The Guidelines are
                                                              consistent with the ESMF and will apply
                                                              to all NBI projects.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes                           Although this project is primarily
                                                              technical assistance including
                                                              identification and preparation of
                                                              possible future investments, and does
                                                              not include any physical works, OP4.04
                                                              is triggered because it is anticipated that
                                                              most of the investment opportunities
                                                              being studied through this project may
                                                              possibly overlap with significant natural
                                                              habitats. The NBI ESMF covers specific
                                                              policies and actions needed to ensure
                                                              compliance with the policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36              Yes                           The project does not involve actual
                                                              physical interventions in forests, but will
                                                              involve the feasibility study of potential
                                                              investments that, if implemented, could
                                                              affect forests. Any potential
                                    forest-related issue linked to the project
                                    will be addressed on a due diligence
                                    basis in the ESMF mentioned above,
                                    including through ESIAs for any
                                    feasibility studies.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The project does not involve actual use
                                    of pesticides or agro-chemicals.
                                    However, as the potential investments
                                    being studied to feasibility level under
                                    this project include multipurpose storage
                                    reservoirs and irrigation components,
                                    any potential pest management related
                                    issue for these potential investment will
                                    be addressed on a due diligence basis in
                                    line with the project ESMF, including
                                    through ESIAs for any feasibility
                                    studies.
Physical Cultural Resources   YES   The project does not involve the
OP/BP 4.11                          construction of any physical works, but
                                    will involve preparation of potential
                                    investments that, if implemented, might
                                    be in area involving physical cultural
                                    resources. A Draft Chance Finds
                                    procedure has been developed as part of
                                    the ESMF. Any potential issue linked
                                    to the project will be addressed in-line
                                    with the ESMF mentioned above,
                                    including through ESIAs for any
                                    feasibility studies.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      YES   The presence of Indigenous Peoples is
4.10                                not anticipated in any of the sub-project
                                    areas being studied to feasibility level,
                                    expect possibly in Kenya. In view of
                                    this, the OP is triggered. An Indigenous
                                    Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) –
                                    also referred to as Vulnerable and
                                    Marginalized        Groups    Framework
                                    (VGMF) - is being prepared for Kenya,
                                    where the presence of Indigenous
                                    Peoples (vulnerable and marginalized
                                    groups) is a possibility.
                                    Any potential investment project being
                                    studied to feasibility level through this
                                    project will include further examination
                                    of this issue through an ESIA. The IPPF
                                    provides the overarching principles and
                                    guidelines to facilitate the preparation of
                                    Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) as
                                   required.
Involuntary Resettlement     Yes   The ESMF provides overarching
OP/BP 4.12                         principles, guidelines and procedures in
                                   the event that future activities being
                                   studied through this project involve any
                                   acquisition of land, involuntary
                                   resettlement or restriction of access to
                                   legally designated parks or protected
                                   areas after this project is completed.
                                   These aspects of the ESMF are
                                   especially relevant for to potential
                                   investments in regional transmission
                                   interconnections, multipurpose WRD
                                   activities, hydropower projects, and
                                   watershed management activities. A
                                   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                   has been prepared in the event
                                   interventions on sites which may be
                                   selected result in the physical and/or
                                   economic displacement of people. Once
                                   specific sites are selected and future
                                   investment opportunities are identified,
                                   the appropriate social safeguards
                                   instruments such as Resettlement Action
                                   Plans or a Process Framework will be
                                   prepared, as required.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    Yes   The project involves no physical works
                                   involving the construction of new dams,
                                   nor does the project rely on the outputs
                                   of an existing dam. However, the
                                   project does involve the study and
                                   design of multipurpose infrastructure, to
                                   be built outside the scope of this project.
                                   As such, an independent Panel of
                                   Experts is being established for the
                                   review of Dam Safety issues.
Projects on International    Yes   While OP 7.50 is triggered by the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50               project, the project is exempt from the
                                   notification requirement, as studies
                                   proposed under the project are upstream
                                   in nature and do not involve studies
                                   beyond feasibility studies. However,
                                   such studies must include “in the terms
                                   of reference for the activities an
                                   examination of any potential riparian
                                   issues".
Projects in Disputed Areas   No    Project activities are not expected to take
OP/BP 7.60                         place in contested or disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is essentially a Technical Assistance project which aims at supporting Nile Basin entities in
the preparation of the next generation of cooperative initiatives between Nile Basin countries. The
overall purpose of the project can be viewed as supporting the creation and dissemination of knowledge,
supporting the establishment of strong collaborative networks and identifying and initiating the
preparation of potential transformative investment opportunities. Consequently no major direct impacts
are expected from the project.

The sites of some possible investments to be studied through this project have been decided. Given the
nature of possible investments, based on the feasibility studies for activities related to hydropower and
transmission, agriculture and irrigation and water and watershed management, there is a potential for
adverse environmental and social impacts. In view of which the ESMF details the principles, guidelines
and procedures for identifying and mitigating any potential impacts. Should the screening results
indicate the possibility of any planned sub-projects leading to issues of water pollution, ecosystem
damage, land acquisition, loss of livelihoods, and the presence of indigenous populations the project will
be required to prepare relevant safeguard instruments as ESIAs or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs),
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) and Process Frameworks (PFs).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Beyond the technical assistance nature of the project, it is anticipated that the feasibility studies may
identify follow-on preparation of some significant infrastructure projects in the water and energy
sectors. Some of the activities identified in these studies might require environmental and social
mitigation measures. The ESMF defines the procedures and specific guidelines for determining the
environmental and social (and cumulative) impacts and for developing appropriate mitigation measures.
Specific safeguards instruments, such as the ESIA, RAP of PF may be developed in the future, on an as
needed basis.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In order to address environmental and social policy issues, the project will ensure that the pre-feasibility,
feasibility and other preparation studies (if undertaken by the project) take into account the lessons
learned from projects in the context of basin-wide conditions. In particular, the NBI decision to adopt a
set of selection criteria, including avoiding areas of global significance, or territories occupied by
indigenous communities, or sites with cultural or historical artifacts, indicates sensitivities to Bank
safeguards concerns. In addition, the following actions will be undertaken to ensure that environmental
and social impacts are taken into account in the preparation of potential activities. These include: (i)
enhancement of the Decision Support System (DSS) database to include gender-disaggregated and
site-specific information on vulnerable communities and environmentally sensitive areas; (ii)
development of terms of reference for the studies that include specified activities for addressing
environmental and social vulnerability and mitigation responses that will be applicable even at the
community level, including cumulative impacts; (iii) provisions for a separate program to support the
NBD and strengthen the role of civil society groups and support women’s entrepreneurship, by
providing more effective consultative and participatory processes; and (iv) provisions for capacity
building, including hiring of additional environment, social, community liaison and communications
specialists in the NBI institutions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project beneficiaries are the riparian countries of the Nile Basin. In particular, the directly affected
stakeholders are the riparian communities in and around the Nile Basin that are at-risk for extreme
climatic changes (e.g. resulting in drought or flooding). Additionally, the active stakeholders who have
participated in meetings and consultations are the civil society groups who are members of the Nile
Basin Discourse (NBD). The NBD is a network of civil society organizations which form a portion of
the basin stakeholders and representatives of the affected people. Throughout consultations with the
NBD a key concern has been finalizing an approach and a set of procedures for mainstreaming of the
environment and social issues into project designs. When specific activities have been identified for
future investment, the project will ensure that environmental and social impact assessments are carried
out collaboratively with a broad spectrum of stakeholders, especially at the community level.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                          12-March-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                       24-April-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to N/A
the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Africa                                                                                               12-March-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                                          14-Apr-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                                       24-Apr-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Africa                                                                                               24-Apr-2014
Comments:
Technical Assistance Project
For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please indicate type of document
disclosed, if any.

An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was prepared and was disclosed in July
2012. An updated version was disclosed by the NBI in March 2014 and by the World Bank in April
2014.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [      ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [      ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [      ]   No [     ]   NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [ X]       No [     ]   NA []
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X]        No [     ]   NA []
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [      ]   No [ X ]     NA [    ]

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the        Yes [ X ]        No [     ]   NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [ X ]      No [ ]       NA [    ]

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X ]           No [     ]   NA [    ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [ X ]      No [     ]   NA [    ]
public place in a form and language that are understandable
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [ X ]      No [     ]   NA [    ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been             Yes [ X ]      No [     ]   NA [    ]
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [ X ]      No [     ]   NA [    ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X ]         No [      ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:        Name: Eileen Rose Burke
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards      Name: Alexandra Bezeredi              Date: April 23, 2014
Advisor:
Sector Manager:          Name: Jonathan Kamkwalala             Date: April 24, 2014
