                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA2422

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:       7-Dec-2013


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                   Africa                Project ID:             P131323/P131353
 Project Name:              Senegal River Basin Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development
                            Project 2 (P131323); Senegal River Basin Climate Change Resilience
                            Development Project (P131353)
 Task Team Leader:          Shelley Mcmillan
 Estimated Appraisal        14-Sept-2013          Estimated Board         4-Dec-2013
 Date:                                            Date:
 Managing Unit:             AFTN2                 Lending Instrument:     Investment Project
                                                                          Financing
 GEF Focal Area:            Multi-focal area
 Sector(s):                 General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%), Irrigation and
                            drainage (25%), Health (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry
                            sector (15%), General public administration sector (10%)
 Theme(s):                  Water resource management (40%), Regional integration (30%), Malaria
                            (15%), Climate change (10%), Gender (5%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00          No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                             Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:     240.50                   Total Bank Financing:    221.50
 Total Cofinancing:                               Financing Gap:           0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          12.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                212.50
     IDA Grant                                                                                    0.00
     Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                            4.00
     Least Developed Countries TF for Climate Change Activities                                  12.00
     Total                                                                                      240.50
 Environmental              A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a Repeater           No
project?
Is this a Transferred        No
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
A. Project Development Objective(s)
The overall Program Development Objective is: to enhance regional integration among the riparian
countries of the Senegal River Basin through OMVS for multi-purpose water resources development
to foster improved community livelihoods.

The MWRD2 Project Development Objective is: to improve coordinated management of water
resources for socially, environmentally and economically sustainable development in the Senegal
River Basin.

Responding to the needs of OMVS and the riparian states, MWRD2 will have broadly similar
components to MWRD1 as follows: (i) consolidating and further strengthening the institutional, legal
and technical framework of the Senegal River Basin to better serve all four riparian countries, (ii)
expanding the scope and coverage of concrete water resources development activities at the local level
that generate significant income to reduce poverty, and (iii) supporting water resources development
and planning, both by developing and maintaining water infrastructure, and in supporting future
planning within the basin. MWRD2 activities will primarily be located in the priority zones defined by
studies in MWRD1. Each component will scale-up activities started under MWRD1, incorporating
lessons learnt and taking forward successful elements for further development. Climate resilience will
also be strengthened through the activities supported by GEF funding.
B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
Strengthen trans-boundary water resources management in the Senegal River Basin including climate
change adaptation and implementation of priority actions of the Strategic Action Plan.

3. Project Description
Overview of the program design:

The project design aims to simultaneously increase the productive uses of water and enable
macro-economic growth while safeguarding the health and livelihoods of vulnerable communities in
the river basin. The regional integration process establishes the inter-related parameters for sustainable
water resources development across all sectors and the project components provide mutually
reinforcing interventions at regional, local and national levels.

Specifically, MWRD2 will support the update the partition of costs; improve the knowledge base in
the Senegal River Basin; and build capacity at OMVS, national cellules, national executing agencies
and local community organizations for sustainable management of water infrastructure. MWRD2 will
also support interventions to raise household income, safeguard the existing hydropower supply
through essential maintenance works and build a pipeline of water infrastructure investments for future
financing. With GEF financing, climate resilience in the Senegal River Basin will be improved.
Building on the achievements from MWRD1, support will be provided under MWRD2 to initiate
fisheries activities in Guinea and scale-up in the remaining states, incorporating new elements of
aquaculture. MWRD2 will continue to address the public health risks from water related diseases,
incorporating treatment for new NTDs. The treatment of the 5 critical NTDs will be incorporated into
the health sub-component of the project. In addition, the project will continue to contribute to
achievement of universal LLIN coverage and improved malaria control in the river basin. Following
the increased and visible impacts of climate change, MWRD2 also incorporates additional measures to
improve planning for climate resilience in the future.

The focus for increasing resilience to climate risks is on improving the knowledge base and future
planning including identifying the climate resilience needs, how these should be factored into future
planning and identifying methods to make local livelihoods more climate resilient. Resilience to
climate risks is supported through improved monitoring of flows; an update of the water resources
model to take into account climate variability; and piloting projects for climate resilience.

MWRD2 builds on several regional to local level experiences in addition to consolidating thirty years
of cooperation and joint development in the Senegal River Basin, including; (i) the successful
completion of MWRD1; (ii) the development of jointly-owned energy infrastructure in the Manantali
and Diama dams; (iii) the Inclusive Framework that encouraged the full involvement of Guinea in the
joint management of the Senegal River Basin; (iv) the GEF-funded Senegal River Basin Water and
Environmental Management Project which laid the foundation for more integrated land, water and
environmental management in the Basin; (v) the ongoing Felou Hydropower Project; and (vi) the
Bank’s current and previous experience internationally in transboundary river basins. MWRD2 is also
closely linked to the national sector level interventions in the member states, especially the agriculture
interventions. In Mali, Mauritania and Senegal the project will coordinate with the Sahel and West
Africa World Bank/GEF Program in support of the Great Green Wall Initiative.

Lessons and experiences from the above, coupled with the Bank’s long standing involvement in the
Senegal River Basin, clearly demonstrate that regional integration fosters more effective sustainable
development and multi-sectoral investments. Therefore, the Project provides a unique comparative
advantage to mainstream close collaboration between institutions working on water resources
management of the Senegal River Basin at regional, national and local levels while consolidating
donor interventions through a coherent framework of actions.

A.      Project Components

The project will have three inter-related components supporting the project development objective: (1)
Institutional development; (2) Multi-purpose water resources development and (3) Infrastructure
management and planning.

Component 1: Institutional Development (USD$19.11 million)

The overall objective of Component 1 is to build capacity for cooperative management. This first
component will support both institutional development and project implementation through the
following sub-components:
(a)     1.1 - Updating the Inclusive Framework and strengthening the role of Guinea within OMVS
(b)     1.2 - Modernizing and reinforcing the institutional capacities of OMVS and related agencies
(c)     1.3 - Strengthening the capacity of OMVS and national agencies to lead climate adaptation
        efforts in the region [GEF funded]
(d)     1.4 - Strategic management of the project
Component 2: Multi-Purpose Water Resources Development (USD$174.23 million)

The overall objective of this component is to promote income-generating activities and to improve
livelihoods for the basin population. This component includes a number of core multi-sectoral
activities related to the development of water resources in some sub-basins. Sub-components are:
(a)      2.1 - Hydro-agricultural development and water resources protection
(b)      2.2 - Sustainable fisheries management and aquaculture
(c)      2.3 - Reduction of the incidence of water-borne diseases
(d)      2.4 - Pilot Approaches to improve climate resilience [GEF funded]

Component 3: Infrastructure Management and Planning (USD$29.62 million)

68.    The overall objective of Component 3 is to advance climate resilient water resources planning
and development in the region. There are three main sub-components:
(a)    3.1 - Dam management and hydropower development
(b)    3.2 - Planning for climate resilience
(c)    3.3 - Development of navigation along the Senegal River Basin

Project Financing

Project financing in the amount of US$212.5 million will be provided by IDA and US$16 million
provided from the GEF and LDCF (Least Developed Countries Fund). Counterpart funding of US$12
million will be provided to support the implementation of discrete activities which are high priorities
for member states. As such, and as agreed with member states, the counterpart funding is allocated to
increase the coverage of interventions to reduce the incidence of water-related diseases, development
of sustainable fisheries and aquaculture, in addition to some project management costs.

In line with OMVS and member state priorities, approximately 40% of the IDA financing will go
towards infrastructure; around 20% to design and supervision; approximately 20% to institutional
strengthening; and approximately 20% to the purchase of goods and equipment. At mid-term, the
project will assess the extent to which activities are adequately implemented and make needed
adjustments.

OMVS has previous experience working with the GEF and the activities supported by GEF/LDCF will
build upon previous engagement and will be complementary to the IDA-funded activities.

The Dutch Government is planning to finance a parallel project to MWRD2 with OMVS. Proposed
activities include addressing the problems of invasive aquatic species and support for water users
associations. The Agence Française de Développement (AFD) has also expressed interest to provide
parallel financing to support OMVS in activities related to further development of the Schéma
d'Aménagement et de Gestion des Eaux (Comprehensive Senegal River Basin Master Plan - SDAGE),
such as development of country level planning tools and for sanitation improvements in the basin.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The proposed Project involves all the riparian countries (Guinea, Mali, Mauritania and Senegal) of the
Senegal River basin. The Senegal River basin covers a surface area of about 300,000 km2. The high
plateau in northern Guinea represent 31,000 km2 (11 percent of the basin), 155,000 km2 are situated
in western Mali (53 percent of the basin), 75,500 km2 are in southern Mauritania (26 percent of the
basin) and 27,500 km2 are in northern Senegal (10 percent of the basin). The basin has three distinct
parts: the upper basin, which is mountainous, the valley (itself divided into high, middle and lower)
and the delta, which is a source of biological diversity and wetlands. Topographical, hydrographic and
climatic conditions are very different in these three regions and seasonal temperature variations are
extensive.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Robert A. Robelus ( AFTA1 )
Salamata Bal ( AFTCS )


6. Safeguard Policies                   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP          Yes            The MWRD2 involves a significant number of
4.01                                                   construction and environmental and social
                                                       management activities related to the
                                                       sub-projects.

                                                       These subprojects cover rehabilitation of
                                                       irrigated areas for rice production and
                                                       vegetable farming for women groups, a health
                                                       component financing pesticide impregnated
                                                       mosquito nets and medicines to control 5
                                                       neglected tropical diseases, including
                                                       Schistosomiasis and an inland small-scale
                                                       fisheries component.

                                                       The environmental and social management
                                                       activities of the fisheries and irrigation
                                                       sub-components include environmental and
                                                       social management actions, which also would
                                                       trigger OP/BP 4.01.

                                                       An evaluation will be carried out with regard
                                                       to the environmental and social dimensions of
                                                       the Balassa dam. An Environmental and Social
                                                       Advisory Panel will be established to provide
                                                       advice on the TORs and environmental and
                                                       social studies to be carried out.

                                                       MWRD2 has prepared an ESIA, instead of an
                                                       ESMF, since most sub-projects have already
                                                       been identified.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             Yes            Stocking of natural water bodies with
                                                       indigenous fish species might be one of the
                                                       sub-project activities. This activity could upset
                                                       the natural balance in existing fish stocks if
                                                       not done according ecological principles. This
                                                       potential activity triggers OP/BP 4.04 and is
                                            addressed in the ESIA.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    Yes   OP/BP 4.36 is triggered by the reforestation
                                            activities carried out in the Fouta Djallon, a
                                            very sensitive ecological area in the
                                            headwaters of the Senegal River, which has
                                            been and is subject to significant deforestation
                                            as a consequence of agricultural expansion.
                                            The ESIA includes measures for addressing
                                            the reforestation activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09               Yes   The Pest and Pesticide Management Plan
                                            (PPMP) was not implemented under MWRD1,
                                            since there was no production in the
                                            rehabilitated irrigation systems. Presently the
                                            rehabilitation is being finalized and production
                                            will start during the implementation of
                                            MWRD2. The updated PPMP will be
                                            implemented during MWRD2. Intensification
                                            of irrigated agricultural production, as
                                            envisaged during MWRD2 might increase the
                                            use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers. The
                                            implementation of the updated PPMP will
                                            mitigate the health and environmental impacts
                                            of the increased use of pesticides and chemical
                                            fertilizers. MWRD2 will not finance the
                                            procurement of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP     Yes   OP/BP 4.11 is triggered by the feasibility
4.11                                        studies for the new Balassa dam and by the
                                            construction activities associated with the
                                            sub-projects. An archaeological survey will be
                                            carried out in the reservoir and dam areas for
                                            the new dam. This is addressed in the ESIA; a
                                            Chance Find Procedure will be included in all
                                            Contractor Contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    There are no indigenous people in the Senegal
                                            River Basin as defined by OP/BP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes   No physical resettlement is anticipated due to
                                            the nature of the intended rehabilitation works
                                            to be carried out under the various
                                            sub-projects. There might be a need to
                                            compensate for the loss of crops, trees or
                                            property caused by the rehabilitation of the
                                            irrigation schemes. The lack of definition
                                            around specific subprojects will be addressed
                                            through the preparation and disclosure of the
                                            updated Resettlement Policy Framework
                                            (RPF).

                                            OP/BP 4.12 might be potentially triggered as a
                                             consequence of the restriction of access to
                                             certain fishing grounds needed as spawning
                                             areas, temporary closure of fishing areas for
                                             biological recovery of fish stocks. It is not yet
                                             certain that these activities will be carried out.
                                             In case OP/BP 4.12 will be triggered a Process
                                             Framework (PF) will be prepared, disclosed
                                             and implemented.

                                             Any sub-project, including construction, can
                                             only start if Project Affected People (PAPs)
                                             have been compensated in compliance with
                                             OP/BP 4.12. The eventual RAPs or PFs
                                             prepared for subprojects will need to be
                                             cleared by the Bank and consulted upon with
                                             stakeholders. These RAPs and PFs also will be
                                             disclosed in-country and in the World Bank’s
                                             Infoshop prior to the start of any subproject
                                             construction activity.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             Yes    OP/BP 4.37 is triggered by the feasibility and
                                             environmental and social studies for the new
                                             Balassa dam.

                                             This policy is also triggered by the fact that the
                                             irrigated agricultural subprojects are dependent
                                             for their water from the Manantali and Diama
                                             Dams. The dam safety reports for the
                                             Manantali and Diama Dams have been
                                             recently reviewed by the World Bank and no
                                             dam safety issues have been identified.

                                             A Dam Safety Advisory Panel will be
                                             established to manage the dam safety aspects
                                             of the MWRD2.
Projects on International Waterways   Yes    The governments of the four riparian countries
OP/BP 7.50                                   were notified of the Project through the
                                             OMVS, in which all four countries are
                                             represented. A letter regarding this notification
                                             has been sent to the Bank.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No     There are no Disputed Areas in the Senegal
                                             River Basin. Therefore OP/BP 7.60 is not
                                             triggered. OMVS has the mandate to
                                             implement and manage sub-projects in the
                                             Senegal River Basin with the support of the
                                             four riparian countries.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The program (MWRD1 and MWRD2) is classified as category A in the Environmental Assessment
classification of the World Bank, the main reason being that MWRD2 finances preparatory studies for
Balassa dam and rehabilitation for Diama dam in the Senegal River Basin. An independent dam safety
panel will be formed to review these studies and the works at Diama dam. The TORs will be prepared
before project effectiveness.

MWRD2 covers a similar range of activities as MWRD1 over an extended geographical area, the
Senegal River Basin in four countries, and therefore requires a substantive level of due diligence. The
table above gives details on the safeguards issues associated with the project.

MWRD2 sub-projects: rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, health component and fisheries and
aquaculture component will have very limited environmental and social impacts, similar in nature as
the impacts under MWRD1. These impacts and mitigation measures have been described in the ESIA
prepared for MWRD2.

MWRD2 will also finance the rehabilitation of existing or development of new small-scale fish farms
and hatcheries for the production of juvenile fish, which will be used to stock natural water bodies.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The capacity of OMVS and the member states for environmental and social management has been
strengthened under the Senegal River Basin Water and Environmental Management GEF Project and
even more so under the MWRD1 project. This included building a core group of transboundary
environmental management expertise.

During the preparation of MWRD1, OMVS prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Pest and Pesticide Management
Plan (PPMP) in compliance with the requirements of the World Bank Safeguard Policies. These
instruments have been reviewed and updated for use in MWRD2. MWRD2 has prepared an ESIA,
instead of an ESMF, since the most of the project activities to be financed are known. The RPF and
PPMP have been updated. The updated ESIA, PPMP and RPF have been consulted upon and disclosed
in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.

At the start of the implementation of MWRD1, the ESMF was used to screen all sub-projects. The
majority of sub-projects were found to pose very low environmental and social risks, mostly related to
environmental and social management during construction. One of the reasons for this low risk was
that irrigated agriculture sub-projects involved rehabilitation of irrigation systems rather than new
construction. For these low risk sub-projects only an Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP) was prepared and implemented, which was based on the ESMP in the ESMF. An
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was only prepared and implemented for those
sub-projects with potentially high impacts. The only sub-project for which a specific ESIA and
associated ESMP and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) were prepared and implemented was the
construction of the Krankaye canal, a new main irrigation water supply canal, in the Senegal River
Delta. The Krankaye sub-project did not physically displace any households, but did have an impact
on property. Project Affected People (PAPs) have been compensated in compliance with OP/BP 4.12.
Community level measures taken to mitigate or compensate for impacts in the Krankaye sub-project
included flood protection, foot bridges for continued access to irrigation schemes at the other side of
the canal and a siphon to continue to supply water to private irrigated areas. None of the other
sub-projects triggered OP 4.12.

The various ESMPs for sub-projects included a wide range of mitigation measures. These mitigation
measures included among others social compensation measures, for example the construction of
laundry and bathing areas, ramps for cattle to have access to water, foot bridges to provide access to
irrigation areas and so on. All the ESMPs included construction related environmental and social
management measures, including prevention and management of hydrocarbon spills and health and
safety measures during construction. Component specific measures were also taken, for example
improving hygiene and solid waste management at the new fish markets financed under MWRD1.

The Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP) was not implemented during MWRD1, since the
rehabilitation of all the irrigation systems financed under MWRD1 is only now being finalized. There
was no increased agricultural production under MWRD1. The updated PPMP will be implemented
under MWRD2.

MWRD2 has prepared an ESIA, since most sub-projects have already been defined, and updated the
RPF and the PPMP from MWRD1. It is not expected that OP 4.12 will be triggered during the
implementation of MWRD2, but if there is any involuntary resettlement, a RAP will be prepared,
consulted upon, and disclosed in-country and in the World Bank Infoshop. RAPs will need to be
cleared by the Bank. Construction can only start after Project Affected People (PAP) have been
compensated in compliance with OP/BP 4.12. The ESIA and the RAP were consulted upon by
February 2013. The ESIA and PPMP have been disclosed in-country and in the World Bank Infoshop
on 26 March 2013. The RPF was finalized and cleared for disclosure on 10 June 2013. These
instruments will be implemented and monitored by the Safeguard Specialist at the PCU as was done
for MWRD1. Executing agencies will also be responsible for implementing and monitoring safeguards
for specific activities and for oversight of contractors.

The main area of institutional support, which OMVS will require during the implementation of
MWRD2 is in advancing the feasibility studies of the new Balassa dam and the evaluation of the
environmental and social dimensions of this new dam. It has been agreed with OMVS that a Dam
Safety and an Environmental and Social Advisory panel will be established as needed, so that the
panel can provide advice on the TORs for the feasibility studies and the environmental and social
studies and on these studies themselves. The TOR for the ESIA of the new dam will need to be cleared
by the Bank’s Regional Safeguard Coordinator for the Africa Region.

There are no other environmental and social risks, which are outside the scope of the World Bank’s
safeguard policies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The principal stakeholders of this Project are identifiable at three levels-regional, national, and local:
The regional stakeholders are the institutions involved in managing the Senegal River (the OMVS) and
its infrastructure (SOGENAV, SOGEM and SOGED). These stakeholders have defined the project in
discussion with national counterparts.

Nationally, the principal stakeholders are the four national governments and the four national OMVS
cellules. Through performance management contracts, four executing agencies: Société
d’Aménagement des Terres du Delta (SAED, Senegal), Société Nationale de Développement Rural
(SONADER, Mauritania), Direction Nationale du Génie Rural (DNGR, Guinea), and L'Agence de
Developpement Rural de la Vallee du fleuve Sénégal (ADRS, Mali) will implement the agriculture and
related sub-components. It is important to note that all four governments have endorsed the Project.
OMVS has demonstrated a continued interest in applying a participatory approach to the Project
design. National Project Planning Committees (NPPCs) were established in each riparian country and
these committees have participated actively in Project preparation. National officials also provide
continual assistance and participate in national and regional workshops, steering committees and other
stakeholder consultations during project preparation.

At the local level, the stakeholders include the local government, local decision-makers, rural
communities, women’s groups, and schools. Local level consultations were held by OMVS in
December 2012 for all locally implemented activities; including fisheries improvements, agroforestry,
river bank protection and development or rehabilitation of irrigated areas. Meetings were held in each
zone of intervention and facilitated by local committees. Photographs and meeting records were
provided by OMVS.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                            Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               18-Mar-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            26-Mar-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of    23-Apr-2013
the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Guinea                                                                    28-Feb-2013
Comment:
Mali                                                                      28-Feb-2013
Comment:
Mauritania                                                                28-Feb-2013
Comment:
                                                                          28-Feb-2013
Comment:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                            Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                           28-Mar-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                        14-Jun-2013
"In country" Disclosure
Guinea                                                                28-Feb-2013
Comments:
Mali                                                                  28-Feb-2013
Comments:
Mauritania                                                            28-Feb-2013
Comments:
Senegal                                                               28-Feb-2013
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                           18-Mar-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                        26-Mar-2013
"In country" Disclosure
Guinea                                                                28-Feb-2013
Comments:
Mali                                                                  28-Feb-2013
Comments:
Mauritania                                                            28-Feb-2013
Comments:
Senegal                                                               28-Feb-2013
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [ X ]     No [     ]   NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector      Yes [ X ]     No [ ]       NA [   ]
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [ X ]      No [ ]        NA [   ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [ ]        No [X ]       NA [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [ ]        No [X ]       NA [ ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [ ]        No [ X]       NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [X ]       No [ ]        NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [X ]       No [ ]        NA [ ]
safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [ X ]      No [      ]   NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [      ]   No [      ]   NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                    Yes [ X ]      No [      ]   NA [   ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [ X ]      No [      ]   NA [   ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [      ]   No [      ]   NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [      ]   No [      ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does    Yes [      ]   No [ X ]      NA [   ]
it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [      ]   No [      ]   NA [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [      ]   No [ X ]      NA [   ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [      ]   No [      ]   NA [ X ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?              Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]

If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department,
and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the
project legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Shelley Mcmillan
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards            Name: Alexandra C. Berezedi               Date: June 10, 2013
Advisor:
Sector Manager:                Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala              Date: June 6, 2013
