                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                          Report No.: 92345
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        29-Jul-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Western Africa         Project ID:              P149969
 Project Name:                Volta River Basin Strategic Action Programme Implementation
                              (P149969)
 Task Team Leader:            Shelley McMillan
 Estimated Board Date:        21-May-2015
 Managing Unit:               AFTN2
 GEF Focal Area:              International waters
 Sector(s):                   General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), General public
                              administration sector (20%), General water, sanitation and flood
                              protection sector (40%)
 Theme(s):                    Regional integration (20%), Environmental policies and institutions
                              (30%), Water resource management (50%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00               No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       10.20                     Total Bank Financing:      0.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     Borrower                                                                                       0.00
     Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                              7.20
     Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA)                                           3.00
     Total                                                                                        10.20
 Environmental Category       B – Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Development Objective(s)/Global Environmental Objective(s)
 1. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed development objective is to strengthen transboundary water resources
management in the Volta River Basin through institutional development and implementation of
priority actions of the Strategic Action Programme.
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
Same as above.

C. Project Description

Description. The project is the first support provided to the VBA by the World Bank. It is
expected to be implemented over four years with implementation from October 2014 to
September 2018. The project will be financed by a $7.2 million grant from the GEF and $3
million grant from CIWA, and will consist of four components: (i) Water Charter development
for the Volta River Basin; (ii) Facilitating Dialogue, Monitoring and Project Development; and
(iii) Implementation of SAP Actions. A fourth component allocates funding related to the
Project Management Cost. A parallel, bank-executed activity will be conducted for an
institutional assessment of the VBA, and will be financed by an additional $0.5 million from
CIWA. This activity is bank-executed so as to have an independent assessment.
GEF Incrementality. The Global Environmental Objective of the project is “to strengthen
transboundary water resources management in the Volta River Basin through the VBA,
including implementation of priority actions of the Strategic Action Programme.? The
proposed GEF funding will further support the baseline development objective provided above
and components being supported by CIWA funding. In addition, it will increase the
sustainability of and the resilience of the Volta Basin Authority in the face of multiple
challenges to the institutional landscape of the basin and improve environmental management
practices in the VRB. The proposed project would, among other things, identify and address
environmental measures in line with SAP and TDA findings as well as other related needs
identified through the VBA Strategic Plan.
The Project components have been designed to capture both the additionality and
incrementality in an integrated and cohesive manner, as described below.
Component 1: Water Charter Development (US$1,487,000). The aim of this first
component is to develop a Water Charter which specifies roles and responsibilities of riparian
countries with regard to water resources use, strengthens the underpinning of VBA to promote
coordinated and harmonized water policies in the Basin and defines guiding principles for
improved water resources development and management for the basin such as better integration
of IWRM where transboundary resources are concerned. The Water Charter has the objective
to: (i) facilitate dialogue and cooperation between member States in the planning and
implementation of programs and projects that affect water resources; (ii) strengthen solidarity
and promote sub-regional integration and economic cooperation between Member States; (iii)
specify the regulations for utilization of water resources of the basin by determining the
modalities of allocation of water resources between the different sectors and associated
beneficiaries; (iv) specify the regulations on the preservation and protection of the
environment, especially those relating to water quality; (v) strengthen collaboration on flood
management and defining the modalities for exchanging hydro-meteorological data and flood
information; and (vi) define the modalities for participation of water users in decision making
on management of the water resources of the Volta basin.
Activities in the development of the Water Charter would include: a stakeholder assessment, a
legal and diagnostic study, preparation of and consultation on the draft charter and
dissemination of the signed document. The communication of the final Water Charter to ensure
that all stakeholders are aware of their rights and responsibilities links into the Communication
Plan under Component 2.
The Water Charter is one of measures identified under the SAP (Component D). GEF funding
to this component will contribute to consultations, legal assessments, stakeholder workshops
related to development of the Water Charter and other items necessary to ensuring that the
Charter is developed in an inclusive way such that there is sufficient ownership from the
relevant stakeholders and that the institutional role of VBA related to management of
transboundary waters is sufficiently understood and rendered effective.
Component 2. Facilitating Dialogue, Monitoring and Project Development
(US$1,260,000). In order to effectively carry out its coordination role, the Strategic Plan for the
period 2010 -2014 recommends that VBA establish a Basin Management and Regulation
Committee that will be responsible, among others, for sharing information on current and
planned projects in the Member States and generally, improving coordination and monitoring
of projects basin-wide. This activity will ultimately strengthen the sustainable management of
water resources of the Volta Basin through: (i) acceleration of dialogue, transfer and sharing of
knowledge; (ii) effective dissemination of information on ongoing and planned initiatives in the
Volta basin for coordination and monitoring purposes; (iii) identification of future collaborative
projects; (iv) promotion of dialogue with stakeholders on emerging water-related issues within
the basin and the expected role of VBA; (v) facilitation of information sharing, and (vi)
increased dissemination and use of project results by policy and decision makers through joint
efforts.
The main activities under this component would include: development and signature of
collaboration agreements; support to initial meetings and technical forums, and development
and implementation of a communication plan. This component aims to bring into reality
the clear requirement from the VBA Convention and Statutes that all functions of the Authority
have strong communication and knowledge dissemination elements. The ultimate goal is to
make more fluid interactions between VBA, riparian countries and the Basin water resources
community including water-related ministries civil society, academia, NGOs, and development
partners.
Based on the principles of transparency and partnership with stakeholders, adhered to in
previous GEF projects, GEF incremental support to this component will ensure that the results
of the SAP actions are communicated to relevant stakeholders based on the statutes of the
Communications Plan. This component will also include provisions for participation of the
VBA and other relevant stakeholders to GEF IW-Learn activities. The TDA states that the
VBA’s mandate is based on core values, among which is a commitment to gender and social
equity. As such, a special focus will be made to include women, often the most vulnerable
group.
Component 3: Implementation of SAP Actions (US$6,898,000). This component represents
implementation of SAP measures through priority projects. It will support the development of
projects that lead to improvements in water quality, flows and ecosystem services. These
projects will be designed based on measures identified in the SAP and in consultation with
VBA and the riparians. Criteria for choosing the actions have been established, and an initial
list for potential actions tentatively proposed (See Annex 4). The criteria ensure that projects
being chosen are transboundary in nature. The tentative list includes actions across the four
components of the SAP, integrating measures that directly address physical stresses, to those
related to human capacity and knowledge for maintaining the environment to governance and
institutional capacity for its management.
Although the priority action projects have yet to be determined, they will likely include
watershed management, alleviation of water pollution in pollution hotspots, increasing and
sharing environmental information, wetland restoration efforts, coastal bank restoration and
others. Furthermore, according to the TDA, women are unequally affected by reduction in
water availability. This is then further exacerbated by the limited recognition of gender aspects
in the national governance structures. The project will therefore aim to support women through
targeted interventions, such as the development of small fields/gardens using drip irrigation
systems. Additional measures will be taken to the extent possible to enhance the overall social
impact of the project, namely through the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF).
Component 4: Project Management (US$555,000). This component will finance project
management costs relating to fiduciary management, monitoring and evaluation, technical
reporting and audits as well as any operating costs for project management. This component
will support the establishment and implementation of procedures for internal
regulations. The objective of this component is to strengthen VBA’s capacity to effectively
assume its mandate through the update and finalization of: (i) Manual of Administrative and
Financial Procedures; and (ii) establishment and implementation of VBA Focal Structures in
Member States.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The first two components of the project will comprise of technical assistance activities for the
VBA, to take place at the implementing agency, located in Burkina Faso. The project may also
include installation of office and communication equipment such as servers and computers for
the VBA to deliver its mandated services.

The project also includes implementation of priority action projects based on Strategic Action
Programme measures, details and locations of which will be determined during appraisal. The
measures will take place within the six countries of the Volta (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali and Togo). The measures will target areas with environmental and water
resources concerns as defined in the SAP such as concentrated coastal erosion, flood inundation
impact areas, degraded ecosystems and watershed, areas where there is proliferation of invasive
creatures, tributaries with increased sedimentation, and areas in which climate adaptation
techniques are impactful.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The VBA has not yet been involved in any World Bank-financed operations to date and thus has
limited familiarity with the World Bank’s safeguard policies. However, an assessment of the
capacity for handling environmental and social safeguards will be undertaken during
pre-appraisal and adequate measures will be put in place to ensure full safeguards compliance.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Environmental safeguards specialist: Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)
 Social safeguards specialist: Salamata Bal (AFTCS)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
          Safeguard Policies        Triggered?             Explanation (Optional)
 OP/BP 4.01:Environmental          Yes           Among all the components, only
 Assessment                                      component 3 is likely to have potential
                                                 environmental adverse impacts because it
                                                 contains activities developed from the SAP
                                                 priority actions. These activities comprise
                                                 watershed management, alleviation of
                                                 water pollution in pollution hotspots,
                                                 wetland restoration efforts, coastal bank
                                                 restoration and others. However, the exact
                                                 locations where these actions will be
                                                 implemented are not yet known.
                                                 Consequently, the relevant safeguard
                                                 instrument to be prepared is an
                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                 Framework (ESMF). This safeguard
                                                 document will be reviewed, consulted
                                                 upon and disclosed within the six riparian
                                                 countries and at InfoShop prior to
                                                 appraisal.
 OP/BP 4.04:Natural Habitats       Yes           OP4.04 is triggered because it is
                                                 anticipated that some of the SAP actions
                                                 may overlap with natural habitats. The
                                                 ESMF will cover the actions needed to
                                                 ensure compliance with the policy.
 OP/BP 4.36:Forests                Yes           One of the environmental measures of the
                                                 SAP is to restore the vegetative cover of
                                                 two forested areas within the Volta basin
                                                 (Samory and Segue forests). If a SAP
                                                 project is selected in line with this
                                                 measure, then measures will be taken to
                                                 ensure effective forest management
                                                 planning. In addition, the triggering of the
                                                 policy would pay particular attention on
                                                 forest resources during the project
                                                 preparation and its implementation. These
                                                 aspects will be covered by the ESMF.
 OP 4.09:Pest Management           Yes           This policy is triggered for SAP actions
                                                 which may involve agricultural activities.
                                                     A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will
                                                     therefore be prepared. Furthermore since
                                                     water pollution due to the growing use of
                                                     pesticides was identified in SAP as one of
                                                     the main challenges in the basin, this Plan
                                                     will also serve as a step for VBA to address
                                                     larger issues beyond the purposes of this
                                                     project. As the ESMF, this safeguard
                                                     instrument will also be reviewed,
                                                     consulted upon and disclosed publicly
                                                     within the six concerned countries prior to
                                                     appraisal.
 OP/BP 4.11:Physical Cultural           No           It is not anticipated that the project will
 Resources                                           impact any physical cultural resources in
                                                     the Volta River Basin.
 OP/BP 4.10:Indigenous Peoples          No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the
                                                     project area.
 OP/BP 4.12:Involuntary Resettlement Yes             The areas for implementation of the SAP
                                                     Actions have not yet been identified. It is not
                                                     anticipated that sites involving resettlement
                                                     will be selected. Nevertheless, a Resettlement
                                                     Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to
                                                     ensure that preventive measures are in place,
                                                     should any resettlement take place. This RPF
                                                     will also be reviewed, consulted upon,
                                                     disclosed in the six riparian countries which
                                                     host the project and at InfoShop before
                                                     appraisal.
 OP/BP 4.37:Safety of Dams              No           The project will not partake in any part of
                                                     dam project preparation, rehabilitation or
                                                     construction. As such, this policy will not
                                                     be triggered. The SAP priority actions will
                                                     not have any relation to any dams.
 OP/BP 7.50:Projects on International   Yes          While OP 7.50 is triggered by the project, it is
 Waterways                                           expected since the VBA will be implementing
                                                     the project on behalf of the 6 riparian countries,
                                                     notifications will not be required. However
                                                     VBA will officially inform the Bank in this
                                                     regard.
 OP/BP 7.60:Projects in Disputed Areas No            There are no disputed areas in the Volta
                                                     basin.

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A.   Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
         It is anticipated that the PAD stage ISDS will be completed by June 12, 2014.
B.       Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
         The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
         It is anticipated that the ESMF, PMP and RPF will be completed by May 16, 2014

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:                     Name: Shelley Mcmillan
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards                   Name: Alexandra Bezeredi                                Date: July 29, 2014
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:                       Name: Jonathan Kamkwalala                               Date: April 11, 2014



     1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.
