                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/17/2014                                 Report No.: AC7094
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P130174                 Original Project Name: First Part of the
                                             Second Phase of the Niger Basin Water
                                             Resources Development and Sustainable
                                             Ecosystems Management Program - APL
                                             2A
Country: Africa                              Project ID: P148972
Project Name: AF - Kandadji Niger Basin Water Resources Program APL2A
Task Team Leader: Catherine Signe Tovey
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 13, 2014 Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTN2                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (25%);Sub-national government administration
(25%);Hydropower (25%);Other social services (15%);Agricultural extension and
research (10%)
Theme: Regional integration (30%);Water resource management (30%);Rural services
and infrastructure (20%);Municipal governance and institution building (10%);Social
Inclusion (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             55
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              0.00
                                                                         0.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
1.      The program objective of the Water Resources Development and Sustainable
Ecosystems Management APL is to enhance regional cooperation, development, and
sustainability of water resources management in the Niger River Basin. The development
objective (WRD-SEM APL 2A) is to increase access to water for agriculture
development and capacity for energy generation in the Recipient's part of the Niger
Basin.
3. Project Description
2.      The First Part of the Second Phase of the Niger Basin Water Resources
Development and Ecosystems Management Program (APL 2A) was approved by the
World Bank Board on October 2, 2012 and became effective on March 13, 2013. IDA
financing consisted of a US$ 200 million credit to the Republic of Niger and a US$ 3
million grant to the Niger Basin Authority, contributing to a project of US$ 785 million
that included co-financing from several partners and the Government of Niger.

  3.   The original project consists of three components:
  • Component 1: Institutional Strengthening of the NBA (US$ 3 million, fully IDA
financed)
  • Component 2: Kandadji Project Energy Infrastructure (US$ 498.1 million, of which
US$ 140 million is IDA financed)
  • Component 3: Environmental and Social Safeguards Measures and Promotion of
growth-pole through irrigation and local community development (US$ 283.94 million,
of which US$ 60 million is IDA financed).

 4.    Component 1 is implemented by the Niger Basin Authority (NBA) and
Component 2 and 3 are implemented by the Haut Commissariat a l'Aménagement de la
Vallée du Niger (HCAVN)

 5.    With the proposed additional financing, the scope and design of the project
remains broadly unchanged. The additional financing of US$55 million will focus on
Component 2, and will be used to provide additional funds to three existing activities to
help cover a US$ 259.5 million financing gap in the overall Kandadji Project This would
increase the size of IDA's financing of Component 2 from US$ 140 million to US$ 195
million, and IDA's financing to the overall project from US$ 203 million to US$ 258
million.

  6.    First, US$ 40 million will directly finance the power plant. The need for this
financing arose from the cancellation of the Kandadji dam civil works contract.
Following consultations with the Government of Niger and the development partners
involved in the project, it is proposed that the World Bank uses IDA funds to cover most
of AfDB's US$60 million portion of the power plant contract, allowing the AfDB to
reallocate these resources to civil works and resettlement (which the World Bank is not
involved in). The size and scope of the power plant contract therefore remains
unchanged.

 7.     Second, US$ 10 million will strengthen existing project implementation,
coordination and oversight arrangements through two large international technical
assistance packages, including comprehensive implementation support for HCAVN and
third-party monitoring and evaluation. More resources for both technical assistance
packages are required, since latest market testing revealed initial allocated funds were
insufficient to attract international firms to Niger (particularly given that the
implementation support team will be based at the dam site, with entails additional safety
and logistical challenges).
 8.     Third, US$ 5 million will contribute to the expanded supervising engineer
contract. The role and mandate of the supervising engineer has changed in two ways, as
per the recommendations of the technical and financial audit. Firstly, the supervising
engineer will be responsible for supervising all the civil and power plant construction
works, to reduce interface risks (this had not been previously possible due to
unsynchronized works schedules and lack of financing). Secondly, the engineer will have
a better defined mandate, with fully delegated powers from HCAVN to oversee works on
the ground (including signing off on execution plans and clearances of invoices). There
are also changes to the financing arrangements. This contract had originally been
envisaged as 100 percent IDA financed, while the new contract will be co-financed with
the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the Islamic Development Bank (IsDB). Both
the AfDB and IsDB have indicated their readiness to follow Bank procurement and
anticorruption guidelines.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
9.       The site for the Kandadji Dam is near the small town of Kandadji, Niger, about
180 km northwest of the capital Niamey and about 60 km from the Malian Border. The
irrigation and the local development will be upstream and downstream of the Kandadji
Dam site. The reservoir for the Kandadji Dam is expected to have an optimal operating
level of 228 meters above mean sea level, with reservoir storage of about 1.56 billion
cubic meters, surface area of about 282 square kilometer, and about 26 maximum height.
About 38,000 people are expected to be displaced and resettled.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja (AFTCS)
   Mr Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSN)
   Mr Abdoul Wahabi Seini (AFTSG)
   Mr Ayouba Moussa (AFTA1)
   Mr Medou Lo (AFTN2)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes        No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                       X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                               X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                        X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                    X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                        X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                 X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
10.     The additional financing will not change the scope of the Kandadji Project, and
consequently there will be no new impacts as a result of the additional resources.

 11. Given its complexity, the Kandadji Project will have significant environmental
and social impacts. The Kandadji reservoir would create (at the optimal operating level of
228 meters above sea level) a reservoir with an area of 282 square kilometers, resulting in
the displacement of about 38,000 people.

 12. The project will affect natural habitats, both during construction and operation of
the dam. The main impact would be the flooding of a considerable area. Although wood
salvage and the control of induced impacts at the periphery of the reservoir will need to
be considered, forestry impacts are likely to remain limited, since the Kandadji Project is
located on the edge of the Sahara Desert, so the area affected by the flooding is mostly
covered by shrubs.

 13. The project will have two major environmental impacts. First, there will be a loss
of mostly aquatic natural habitat due to flooding and infrastructure footprint. However,
the ESIA indicates that none of the flooded terrestrial and aquatic natural habitat is
critical. Nevertheless, an Environmental Offset in the form of a new protected area to
better protect manatees, hippos and migratory birds is part of the project design. Second,
the construction and operation of any large infrastructure in a high area will create
environmental, human and health risks.

 14. Moreover, the planned development of new irrigation, about 45,000 ha, is likely
to lead to potentially harmful, quantities of pesticides and other biocide products being
utilized for the control of disease vectors in the irrigated areas. As a first step to mitigate
these effects, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been prepared and disclosed to
Infoshop on February 13, 2012 and in-country on February 23, 2012.

  15. Moving forward, the weak capacity of the implementing agency (the HCAVN)
will be addressed to improve project implementation. More specifically, an international
firm is being hired to provide technical and implementation support to HCAVN. This
technical assistance component will help HCAVN interface with multiple stakeholders
(donor coordination, supervising engineer(s), multiple large contractors etc.). Short-term
technical assistance is also being provided in the interim, prior to this firm being
mobilized around mid-2014. The bank safeguards staff will continue to provide close
monitoring and support to the client in terms of guidance and capacity enhancement on
safeguards.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
16.      The Kandadji Project will have long term impacts on biodiversity and on human
settlements. This project will be implemented under Part A of the APL 2 (the WRDSEM
APL 2A), while other sub-projects will be implemented under Part B of the APL.
Although many of the future sub-projects are expected to have low environmental and
social impacts, their cumulative impacts may be substantial. Therefore the individual and
cumulative impacts of sub-projects will be assessed in compliance with the rules,
principles, processes and standards described in the ESMF and in the ESIA/ESMP.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
17.     An Analysis of Alternatives, prepared as part of project preparation, indicated that
the present chosen site is the best alternative from an environmental, social, technical,
economical and financial perspective. The project site and design were selected based on
conclusions from several studies both at the regional level (under the NBA) and at the
national level (under the HCDNV) of alternative locations for reservoirs, considering
costs, benefits and the fact that only two sites in Niger are suitable for storage. The
storage of water in these tributaries could be increased but evaporative losses
significantly reduce the volume of water stored and would not be enough for the water
needs of Niamey in 2025. In addition, the hydroelectric potential of these tributaries is
limited or even nonexistent.

 18. The dam project of Dyodyonga on the Mékrou river is one alternative that was
studied for years. However, this site, because of its location in the extreme south of Niger
would only be beneficial to hydropower generation and not for large-scale irrigation. The
Gambou site is located 125 km south of Niamey. The dam would have a reservoir of
about 0.430 billion m3 (i.e., about 3.5 time smaller than Kandadji reservoir) and produce
between 236 and 291 GWh/year (compared to 600 GWh/year from the Kandadji Project).
Despite the production of electricity, this project would not meet the needs of irrigation
across the country as it is located significantly downstream to the site needed by people
to irrigate and it would not guarantee a minimum flow in Niamey since it is located
downstream.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
19.     The implementation arrangements for the WRD-SEM APL 2 are the following:
The NBA will be responsible for the implementation of Component 1 and the HCAVN
will be responsible for the implementation of Components 2 and 3.

 20. The NBA has some experience in implementing the Bank's safeguards policies in
the WRD-SEM APL 1 of activities. However, not all institutional arrangements for the
NBA that are provided for under the Water Charter are in place. The NBA has adopted a
phased approach, having created (on a priority basis) an Environmental and Social
Advisory Panel of experts and a permanent technical committee, including a Dam Safety
Panel, and is planning for the establishment of a regional group and sub-basin committee
in the future. The capacity of NBA environmental and social focal points still needs to be
strengthened in all riparian countries to ensure the consistency of overall safeguards.

  21. In Niger, the HCDNV has historically had limited on-the-ground experience with
large-scale technical projects, coordinating several independent government agencies and
ministries, and with managing a resettlement program of this scale. This, combined with
a lack of cross sector coordination and capacity, could threaten timely and effective
implementation of safeguard policies. To improve project implementation, the following
measures to address the weak capacity of implementing agency (the HCAVN) are being
put in place.
  -     Continued intensive supervision by Bank safeguards staff in order to provide
close monitoring and support to the client in terms of guidance and capacity enhancement
on safeguards.
  -     Hiring of an international firm to provide technical and implementation support to
HCAVN. This technical assistance component will help HCAVN interface with multiple
stakeholders (donor coordination, supervising engineer(s), multiple large contractors
etc.).
  -     Interim provision of short-term technical assistance, prior to this technical
assistance firm being mobilized around mid-2014.
  -     Recruitment of a supervising engineer, with a team that includes experts to
supervise implementation of contractual clauses on environmental and social safeguards,
namely overseeing the implementation of environmental and social management plans;
  -     Third-party monitoring and evaluation to be carried out by an independent firm,
including compliance with safeguards requirements. The preparation plan to reinforce its
technical staff mainly in link with the sites activities to ensure close environmental and
social M&E;
  -     Recruitment of staff at the commune level to support the communities on the
overall consultation on the resettlement and compensation process
  -     Establishment at village level of the committee PKRESMIN mainly composed
with the PAPs and their representatives to ensure day-to- day consultation on PAPs'
grievance issues.

  22. The resettlement is being implemented in two phases. The first phase involves
774 households (5410 people). A RAP was prepared in 2006 and updated in 2009 to
reflect changes that occurred since 2006 and to take into account the Bank's requirements
on involuntary resettlement. So far, during the first phase of resettlement, 180 households
have been resettled with the remaining households expected to be resettled in June 2014.
The conflict resolution scheme, which builds on existing local / traditional conciliatory
chief / village based systems, has been tested during the first phase of resettlement and
has functioned satisfactorily. However, delays in the census (which was recently
launched) for the larger second resettlement phase (due to problems hiring and
mobilizing consultants) could jeopardize the overall resettlement schedule and delay
implementation of the dam energy infrastructure (initial IDA power plant disbursements
are tied to the completion of the census).
  23. The second phase of resettlement will involve around 32,500 persons and will
take place before the impoundment of the reservoir now scheduled for mid-2018. A first
draft of the ToR for the updating the second RAP (which was originally prepared in
2006) has been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in October 2013. The update of
the RAP of the second phase of resettlement is expected to be finalized in January 2015,
and will incorporate lessons learned from the first phase.



 24. Institutional arrangements for ESMP implementation are very clearly spelled out,
including the responsibilities of all the stakeholders involved. Additional oversight is
provided by the Panel of Independent Environmental and Social Experts, the Dam Safety
Panel and regular supervision by experts from donors' institutions.

 Status of environmental and social safeguard measures

 25. Environmental and social clauses are included in bidding documents to ensure
that contractors budget for and prepare Environmental and Social Management Plans for
their activities. The ToRs of the supervising engineer include supervision of the
implementation of each contractor's ESMP.

  26. The process of creating the compensatory protected area is underway. Technical
Committees to oversee creation of the Kandadji Protected Area at national, regional and
local level have been established, although the process of public consultations is a few
months behind schedule. Preparatory activities for the clearing of the reservoir area and
the management of wood removal have been completed as follows:
  -     the inventory of timber standing in the future reservoir and an assessment of the
fuelwood and construction wood needs of the affected population have been completed
by the DGEEF (General Directorate for Environment, Water and Forests);
  -     an NGO has been recruited for the establishment and capacity building of Local
Management Committees in the affected villages to oversee the management and
distribution to local populations of wood cut from the reservoir;
  -     cutting and removal of wood has been completed from the first 800 ha of irrigated
land prepared under the project;
  27. The next step is the detailed planning of all logging to be carried out within the
future reservoir area. A contractor is being procured for the creation of three nurseries as
part of the re-vegetation program. Two further nurseries are planned, in addition the
departmental nursery at Tera, and four further nurseries in the Kandadji area will be
rehabilitated. This will be financed under the first phase of Bank support for the NBA.

 28. Mapping and characterization of degraded areas in the watershed upstream of the
dam were carried out jointly by the HCAVN and DGEF. Procurement is well advanced
for activities planned in 2013 to recover 2,711 ha of degraded land, including 1,311 ha of
bunds, 600 ha of half-moons, 400 ha of dune fixation, and 400 ha of enclosures.
 29. The program of archaeological excavations carried out by the Institute for
Research in Humanities (IRSH) at the University of Niamey is scheduled to restart by
mid-2014, based on revised contractual arrangements between the HCAVN and IRSH.

  30. Under the health and sanitation activities of the Local Development Plan, two
health posts and a health center for resettled communities have been constructed, and
medical supplies have been purchased. However, reception of the new facilities by
Ministry of Health is lagging. To address this situation, HCAVN will finalize an MoU
with the Ministry of Health (MOH) by the end of April 2014. Installation of a water
supply system for the resettlement sites began in July 2013, with completion planned for
May 2014. In the interim, resettled households are being supplied drinking water by
tanker. For the monitoring of surface and groundwater quality, the HCAVN will
establish agreements with the General Directorate of Hydraulics, and the Laboratory of
Life Sciences of the University of Niamey.

 31. Preparation of the operating manual for the dam has been initiated, to cover
aspects including monitoring, maintenance and emergency planning, and a separate study
on the management of invasive aquatic plants has also started. The ESIA and the RAP for
the road are ongoing. The contract for the topographic study to determine the boundaries
of the reservoir is expected to be signed by the end of March.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
32.     The key stakeholders identified are the state of Niger, industry, local NGOs,
farmers, local fishermen and herders. Extensive consultations with stakeholders were
held as part of each of the major safeguards documents (ESIA, ESMP, RAPs, ESMF, and
RPFs). These consultations concluded well in advance of project appraisal, with final
reports for most safeguards documents disclosed to Infoshop by February 13, 2012 and
in–country by February 23, 2012. Consultations on various aspects of the project are
ongoing.

 33. Moving forward, a comprehensive communication strategy has been developed to
explain its approach to water / sector interventions and its support to preparatory
activities for the project to civil society, NGOs and other stakeholders. The
communication to date has focused mainly on in-country stakeholders and to some extent
on international NGOs who have followed the proposed project. The following
communication actions have already been undertaken:
 -       Support for the preparation and dissemination of analytical work on political
economy issues around the project;
 -       Promotion of proactive, open consultation with stakeholders including CSOs and
NGOs, including regular meetings at the Bank office in Niamey with CSOs to discuss the
Bank's work in the region.
 -       Communications on World Bank safeguard policies, including environmental and
social standards as well as procedures for public consultation and disclosure of
information.
 34. At present, HCDNV has reinforced its communication unit to strengthen its
broad communication capacity expertise, and has opened a local office close to the
project site. The HCDNV is also updating its communication strategy and will continue
to plan upcoming information and coordination meetings to be held in the framework of
the ESIA process. In addition, the hiring of a communications firm is underway, and it is
anticipated that this communications firms will look at the potential for establishing rapid
complaints systems, and help build the capacity of dedicated community liaison officers
or community development agents who have been identified by the project for
deployment in all villages.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/07/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/23/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/13/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                               06/28/2012
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/07/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/23/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/13/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/07/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/23/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/13/2012
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
N/A


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of          Yes
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other     Yes
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                        Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                       Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or      Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   N/A
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           N/A
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        No
provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                              Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts         Yes
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements           Yes
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                            Yes
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification              N/A
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                           N/A
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Catherine Signe Tovey                     03/11/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Paul Jonathan Martin                      03/11/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Zarafshan H. Khawaja
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Abdoul Wahabi Seini                       03/11/2014
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi                     03/13/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Jonathan S. Kamkwalala                    03/14/2014
  Comments:
