                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                   ADDITIONAL FINANCING

                                                                           Report No.: 83922

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        06~Jan.-20 14

I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Africa                Project ID:               Pl47508
                                                   Parent Project ID:        Pl21908
 Project Name:               CAADP MDTF: CAADP MDTP: African Union Commission (AU C)
                             Child Trust Fund Additional Financing
 Parent Project Name:        CAADP MDTF: CAADP MDTF: Ati"ican Union Commission Child
                             Trust Fund
 Task Team Leader:           David Nielson
 Estimated Board Date:      31-Jan.-20 14
 Managing Unit:             AFTA2
 Sector(s):                 Agricultural extension and research (20%), Crops (20%), Animal
                            production (20%), Forestry (20%), Gen. agriculture, fishing, and forestry
                            (20%)
 Thcme(s):                  Analysis of economic growth (20%), Rural markets (20%), Rural policies
                            and institutions (20%), Climate change (20%), Environmental policies
                            and institutions (20%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:     2.00                      Total Bank Financing:     12 00
 Financing Gap:          0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                   0.00
    CAADP MDTF                                                                                  2.00
    Total                                                                                       2.00
 Environmental Catcgm-y:    C- Not Required
 Is this a Repeater project? Yes
Is this a Transferred       No
project'!
2. Project Development Objective(s)
  A. Current Project Development Objectives- Parent
  The CTF's current PDO is to improve alignment of agricultural policies and increased
  political commitment to CAADP in Member States through support ofAUC-DREA.

  B. Proposed Project Development Objectives -Additional Financing (AF)
  The proposed revised PDO is improved enabling environment for Afhcan agricultural
  programs and policies at national, regional and continental level.


3. Project Description


The proposed additional financing (AF) will cover the costs associated with AU C-OREA's
mandate, outlined in the African Union Commission Strategic Plan 2014-2017, to support the
implementation ofCAADP. This will include generating policy briefs and statements that will
inform and influence the policy debates on the key challenges facing African agriculture,
supporting events and processes that raise political profile of these challenges, ensuring there
are systems in place that allow a robust monitoring of CAADP impacts and finally investing in
strategies that will enable African partners to communicate the policy positions and results of
CAADP across Africa and internationally.
The expected outcomes of the additional financing will be an improved and more inclusive
policy design and implementation at cotmtry level; strengthened capacity of African member
states and institutions in delivery of agricultural services; support to more efficient and stronger
institutions; more inclusive evidence~based agricultural planning; stronger political
engagement in support of CAADP implementation; a strengthened CAADP analytical system
with AU support including supporting ReSAKSS and Country Joint Sector Reviews etc. The
outcomes generated through AUC-DREA's leadership will be especially critical in catalyzing
CAADP implementation in pre-CAADP countries, galvanizing stalled CAADP processes and,
generally, ensuring countries remain focused on achieving their specific goals under CAADP


The proposed AF will support the following:
   •   Support to CAADP 's new agenda. As a framework CAADP has evolved over time and
       in 2012 stakeholders launched the Sustaining CAADP momentum initiative which
       presents the new policy vision for CAADP over the coming decade. The initiative has
       been formally endorsed by the political processes within AU. The initiative expands
       CAADP's scope by encouraging stronger engagement in key areas such as policy
       reform, private sector investment, and results. AF to CTFs will ensure CTF recipients
       are able to play a central role in effectively delivering this new initiative.

   •   Consolidating on going refOrm processes. Over the past year CAADP has established
       a number of strategic initiatives, including establishing a results framework for lhe
       entire CAADP process, establishing processes that will lead regional investment plans,
          and a new structure for delivering African-led approaches to knowledge information
          and skills into the CAADP process. All these processes are enabling CAADP to become
          more effective and sustainable. The AF would allow the organizations to continue to
          mainstream these initiatives into CAADP.

      •   Strengthening the deliverv o( current CAADP commitments. CAADP represents an
          ambitious agenda. Building the capacity of organizations to take on this agenda has
          taken time. AF would enable these organizations to further expand the number of
          countries going through the basic elements of CAADP planning processes. It would
          enable the strengthening of processes seeking to strengthen regional integration


4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The proposed AF will fund activities implemented at AUC Secretariat, based in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia and continent-wide

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
NIA

6. Safeguard Policies                                Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  No
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                          No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                                   No
Pest Management OP 4.09                              No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11               No
[ndigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                            No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50       No
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Lfsues
I. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project IdentifY and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No new World Bank Safeguard policies are triggered by the proposed additional financing
(AF). The proposed AF is rated category C (not required) which is in line with the ratings of the
original CTF (Pl2!908).
The activities funded by the CTF will be limited the above areas and the CTF cannot and will
not fund any on the ground agricultural activities or civil works, their engineering design (either
detailed or schematic) or their feasibility study either at AUC level or in Member States. There
will therefore be no adverse environmental or social impacts associated with the CTF
implementation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NJA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
AUC has complied with World Bank safeguard policies since the CTF became effective in
2011; however as a category C no safeguards policies were triggered. The Bank Task Team will
continue to work closely with AUC as it has been doing during CTF implementation to ensure
that the processes that the proposed AF will support includes evaluating member countries
envirorunental and social management systems ..
5. Identify the l<ey stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A

B. Disclosure Requiremeuts
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/o1· EMI>.
N/A
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A

C. Comp!imtce Monitoring Indicators at the Corpomte Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnfonnation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Ye' [        l   No   [   l NA [X]
Bank's Infoshop?
I-I ave relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [   l   No [     l NA [X]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project~affected gl"Oups and local NGOs?

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [     l   No [ l NA [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [   ]   No [   ] NA [ X]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [   ]   No [   ] NA [X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [   ]   No [   J NA [X J
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


Ill. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: David Nielson
Approved IJy:
Regional Safeguards Adv isor:
Sector Manager:
