                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 86100
Date prepared/updated: February 6, 2014

I. Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Armenia                                 Project ID: P149463
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Promoting Youth Inclusion in Armenia
Task Team Leader: Sarah Michael
Estimated Appraisal Date: n/a (small grant       Estimated Board Date: n/a
processing)
Managing Unit: ECSSO                             Lending Instrument: Recipient-Executed TF
Sector: ECSSD
Theme: Social Inclusion (50%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (30%),
Participation and civic engagement (20%),
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: State and Peace-Building Fund: US$1,000,000
Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                            Simple [X ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises         Yes [ ]       No [X ]
and Emergencies)

B. Project Objectives: The objective of this project is to promote the social and economic
inclusion of vulnerable youth in border regions of Armenia through increased access to
opportunities for leadership and livelihood development.

C. Project Description: The project will have three components:

Component 1: Strengthening Youth Leadership. This component will support the social
inclusion of vulnerable young people in the target regions by building their leadership skills,
networks and self-confidence, by creating opportunities for them to use their voice and time to
better their communities, and by finding ways to motivate and empower them to move from a
state of idleness to one of constructive engagement. This component will also support
opportunities for young people to work collaboratively with their community councils and heads
of community to develop new activities for young people in the locality. The specific activities
of this component will evolve over the course of the project, but will include:
 Leadership skills trainings and other leadership learning events and exchanges
 Youth discussion groups (both in person and virtual)
 Social inclusion through culture and sports activities
 Promotion of youth volunteerism

                                                1
   Development of a youth information portal, including crowd-sourcing local opportunities
   Government-Youth discussion forums
   Small grants for innovative youth development projects planned in collaboration between
    youth leaders and local authorities

Component 2: Promoting Youth Livelihoods. This component will focus on promoting youth
livelihoods in border areas where youth unemployment is high and few current employment
opportunities exist. The component will have a twofold approach; (i) Increasing access to
information on livelihoods among vulnerable youth in border areas, and (ii) Improving
employability of vulnerable youth in border areas. The specific activities of this component will
evolve over the course of the project, but would be expected to include:
     Trainings on youth unemployment related issues for local authorities (e.g. local
        administrations, Integrated Social Protection Center staff, social workers, teachers etc.)
     Regional livelihood conferences with e.g. job fairs, CV workshops, eLearning courses
        and ICT skills development
     Support programs for youth entrepreneurs
     Business opportunities training for youth
     Micro-grants for youth entrepreneurs

Component 3: Project Management. This component will finance the operational costs of the
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within the Ministry of Labour and Social Issues for technical
aspects of the project implementation and management, including consultant costs, field visits
for supervision and oversight, project monitoring and evaluation activities, project
communications activities and overheads (office costs, consumables, utilities etc.). This
component will also finance FM and procurement functions for the project via the Foreign
Financial Management Centre (FFPMC) under the Ministry of Finance and will fund the project
audit.

D. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The project will work in five marzes within the country: Shirak, Tavush, Gegharkunik, Vayots
Dzor and Syunik.

The Grant will mainly finance training and workshops and consultant services. It will not
finance civil works and is not expected to have adverse environmental or social impacts. The
two grants programs under the project (Small grants for innovative youth development projects
and Micro-grants for youth entrepreneurs) will exclude civil works and activities with potential
negative environmental risks (e.g. chemical production, use of forest resources etc.) or social
risks (e.g. alcohol/tobacco-related activities) or which involve land acquisition. The small grants
for innovative youth development projects are expected to have a size of USD 500-4000 each.
The micro-grants for youth entrepreneurs are expected to have a maximum size of USD 3000.
Operations Manuals (OMs) will be developed for each set of grants following Project
effectiveness, and will detail specific eligibility criteria and a screening checklist for grants.
These Operations Manuals, acceptable to the Bank, will be developed before the grants’
implementation and would be a disbursement condition for the grants.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

                                                2
The Government counterpart for the Project is the Ministry of Labor and Social Issues. A PCU
will be responsible for project oversight, quality control and coordination. The PCU will be the
same as for the pipeline SPAP II. With respect to safeguards, the PCU will include a specialist
responsible for safeguards management, including supporting and overseeing implementation of
the SPAP II, its adherence to the Environmental and Social management Framework,
Resettlement Policy Framework and site-specific Environmental Action Plans. As part of the
SPAP II, this person will access available safeguards trainings and resources and receive support
from Bank safeguards specialists. As such, the PCU is expected to have sufficient capacity to
ensure that all Safeguards policies are respected throughout implementation of this Category C
project.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Darejan Kapanadze (Sr. Environmental Specialist)
Sarah Michael (Sr. Social Development Specialist)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies                                      Triggered ?           Explanation
                                                                               (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                          No
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                                           No
Pest Management OP 4.09                                      No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11                       No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                          No
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50               No
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                        No

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Tentative target date for preparing the updated PAD stage ISDS:
     N/A
B.   Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
     needed.
     N/A

IV. APPROVALS


                                               3
Signed and submitted by:                           Name                         Date
Task Team Leader and Social        Sarah Michael, Sr. Social Development   January 14, 2014
Development Specialist:            Specialist, ECSSO
Environmental Specialist:          Darejan Kapanadze, Sr. Environmental    February 6, 2014
                                   Specialist, ECSEN
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Nicolas Perrin, Acting Regional         February 6, 2014
                                   Safeguards Coordinator; on behalf of
                                   Agi Kiss, Lead Ecologist and Regional
                                   Safeguards Coordinator, ECSOQ,
                                   Europe and Central Asia
Sector Manager:                    Elisabeth Huybens, ECSSO, Sector        February 6, 2014
                                   Manager




                                              4
