                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: December 20, 2013

I. Basic Information
A. Basic Project Data
Country: Armenia                                  Project ID: P146199
                                                  Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Grant for Preparation of Electricity Transmission Network Improvement Project
Task Team Leader: Artur Kochnakyan
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 27, 2013 Estimated Board Date: January 30, 2014
Managing Unit: ECSEG                              Lending Instrument: TA
Sector: ECSSD
Theme: Power Transmission and Distribution (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
ECA Regional Capacity Development Trust Fund: US$670,000
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing                             Simple [X ]               Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises          Yes [ ]       No [X ]
and Emergencies)
This ISDS is for the small REFT grant, which will support preparation activities and studies for
the Electricity Transmission Network Improvement Project (ETNIP).

B. Project Objectives: The development objectives of the proposed grant are to enhance the
readiness of the High Voltage Electric Networks (HVEN) and Yerevan Thermal Power Plant
(TPP) to implement ETNIP, and to strengthen the capacity of HVEN and Yerevan TPP.

C. Project Description: The project will have the following key components:

Component 1: Preparation of Investment Scope of the ETNIP and Technical Grid Studies. This
component will support the following key activities: (a) Identification of investment needs for
the proposed substations, power transmission lines, and, possibly, assets of the Electric Power
System Operator. This will also include economic and financial justification of the proposed
investments based on the comprehensive economic and financial analysis; (b) Preparation of
technical specifications, preliminary designs, and bidding documents for the supply and
installation works under ETNIP; (c) Preparation of a detailed implementation schedule to ensure
timely implementation of investments under the ETNIP; (d) Conducting technical studies to
improve reliability, safety and security of the power system.

Component 2: Preparation of Safeguards Documents and Operational Manuals. This component
will help the implementing entities to prepare, disclose, and discuss (through consultations) the
relevant environmental and social documents to ensure that ensure that all project activities are
screened to identify their likely social and environmental impacts, the nature and scope of these
impacts are analyzed, and measures for their mitigation are worked out. ETNIP triggers OP/BP
4.01 Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement, while relevance of
triggering any other safeguards policies will be determined as the ETNIP scope is finalized.
Additionally, this component will help identify gender impacts, if any, and design relevant
mitigation measures. This component will also support update of the existing Operational
Manual (OM) for HVEN and preparation of an OM for Yerevan TPP, covering the respective
implementation aspects of the ETNIP for each implementing entity.

Component 3: Training. This component will provide training to HVEN and Yerevan TPP on
technical, fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project preparation and implementation.

Component 4: Financial audit. This component will finance financial audit of the use of the
funds under the grant at the end of the grant. The audit will be performed by a qualified auditing
firm acceptable to the Bank.

Grant activities, which consist of studies, analyses, preparation of project documents, training
and other capacity building, are not expected have any direct environmental or social impacts.
However, their results will influence future project investments and play an important role in
determining social and environmental aspects of ETNIP. Therefore, as relevant, Grant activities
will include attention to environmental and social risks and mitigation options, and consideration
of social and environmental issues will be included in all relevant TORs.

D. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The Grant will not finance physical works. Carrying out scoping for the future investments,
development of the technical specifications, preliminary designs, and environmental and social
studies will imply field work at the proposed sites of the ETNIP intervention. These sites are
located in the Yerevan, Aragatsotn, and Lori provinces of Armenia.

E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
The Grant will be implemented and monitored by HVEN. Specifically, the existing designated
team will implement the grant activities under the project, including activities that will benefit
Yerevan TPP (related to substation at Yerevan TPP) and Electric Power System Operator
(technical grid studies). The designated project team at HVEN is comprised of a project
coordinator, a procurement specialist and a financial management specialist, who will be
responsible in day-to-day management of the grant activities. The grant implementation activities
at HVEN will be supervised by its Management Board.

HVEN has implemented a number of donor-funded projects and is currently implementing the
World Bank financed Electricity Supply Reliability Project (ESRP). However, the
implementation arrangements under those projects had limited responsibility for HVEN related to
procurement of consultants, contractors, contract administration, financial reporting, and
safeguards. Under the ongoing ESRP, HVEN has gained some experience in the World Bank
fiduciary and safeguards policies and operating procedures, however, further capacity building is
required, and that is a part of the Grant financed activities.

                                                2
Currently, HVEN relies on an implementation support consultant to supervise safeguards aspects
of the project. It is expected that a permanent staff member(s) will be recruited by HVEN to
oversee safeguards issues in this Grant, the ongoing energy project and the preparations of
ETNIP. Under this grant, this new staff member will receive capacity-building support on
Bank’s safeguard policies.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Darejan Kapanadze (Sr. Environmental Specialist)
Sarah G. Michael (Sr. Social Development Specialist)




                                             3
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                    Triggered ? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes           Although the Grant proceeds will not
                                                   be used for any physical works, the
                                                   Grant financed project implementation
                                                   will imply development of an
                                                   Environmental          and        Social
                                                   Management Framework (ESMF) for
                                                   the investments to be made under the
                                                   ETNIP. This would imply outlining of
                                                   the potential environmental and social
                                                   risks of the ETNIP interventions,
                                                   providing guidelines for classification
                                                   of the proposed investments according
                                                   to such risks, and suggesting a generic
                                                   set of measures for mitigation of the
                                                   possible risks. ESMF will also provide
                                                   a blueprint of action for the site-
                                                   specific environmental work to be
                                                   undertaken once the scope and
                                                   preliminary designs of investments are
                                                   available. Furthermore, the Grant
                                                   proceeds will be used for the
                                                   preparation        of       site-specific
                                                   environmental        documents        for
                                                   investments into a number of
                                                   infrastructural elements. Therefore, the
                                                   Grant financed project triggers OP/BP
                                                   4.01.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
 Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
 Pest Management OP 4.09               No
 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes         Because the Grant resources will not
                                                   be used for any type of physical works,
                                                   the Grant-financed activities can not
                                                   cause resettlement. However, the Grant
                                                   proceeds will be used for the
                                                   development of a Resettlement Policy
                                                   Framework (RPF) for the ETNIP.
                                                   Development of the RPF will be done

                                             4
                                                        on a participatory basis, including
                                                        consultations with the potentially
                                                        affected communities and other
                                                        relevant stakeholders. Grant proceeds
                                                        may also be used for the preparation of
                                                        site-specific Resettlement Action Plans
                                                        (RAPs), as need may be. Therefore,
                                                        OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No
 Projects on International Waterways      No
 OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


A. Tentative target date for preparing the updated PAD stage ISDS:
    Not applicable.
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
   needed.
    The TORs for the development of ESMF and RPF will be drafted, agreed with the Bank,
    disclosed, and opened for stakeholders’ feedback prior to signing of the Grant Agreement.


IV. APPROVALS

Signed and submitted by:                           Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                  Artur Kochnakyan, TTL, Energy           December 20, 2013
                                   Economist, ECSEG
Environmental Specialist:          Darejan Kapanadze, Sr. Environmental    December 20, 2013
                                   Specialist, ECSEN
Social Development Specialist      Sarah G. Michael, Sr. Social            December 20, 2013
                                   Development Specialist, ECSSO
Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Agi Kiss, Lead Ecologist and Regional   December 20, 2013
                                   Safeguards Coordinator, ECSOQ,
                                   Europe and Central Asia
Sector Manager:                    Ranjit Lamech, ECSEG, Sector Manager    December 20, 2013




                                               5
