                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                             APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 12/09/2013                                       Report No.: AC7039
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P109961                 Original Project Name: Second National
                                             Water Supply and Sanitation Project
Country: Azerbaijan                          Project ID: P147378
Project Name: Second National Water Supply & Sanitation Project - AF
Task Team Leader: Hadji Huseynov
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2014 Estimated Board Date: May 22, 2014
Managing Unit: ECSUW                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Water supply (60%);Wastewater Collection and Transportation
(20%);Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (19%);Central government administration
(1%)
Theme: City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (67%);Pollution management and
environmental health (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           150
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                     84.00
                                                                      84.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the original project is to improve the availability, quality, reliability, and
sustainability of water supply and sanitation (WSS) services in selected regional centers
(rayons) in Azerbaijan. This objective will be achieved through rehabilitation and
reconstruction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure in 8 rayons outside the
Greater Baku Area.

 The purpose of the Additional Financing requested by the Government is to cover the
costs associated with the increased scope of works under existing civil works contracts to
ensure that more population in the selected 8 rayons would benefit from 24-hour water
supply and sanitation services.
3. Project Description
The Additional Financing will not involve any change in the nature of project activities,
thus, the description remains the same as for the original project:

  Component A: Rayon Investment Component
  This component finances the rehabilitation and reconstruction of water supply and
sewerage systems in 8 rayons, as well as water, wastewater and septic sludge treatment
facilities in these rayons. Rayons covered under the project include: Siyazan, Shabran,
Aghsu, Ismayilli, Masalli, Jalilabad, Yardimli, and Lerik. The project covers the rayon
centers and the villages located in close proximity of the urban centers or along the
transmission mains supplying the centers.

 Component B: Institutional Modernization Component
 This component further supports development and implementation of activities needed
for capacity building and modernization of Azersu and its subsidiary companies to
improve the efficiency and sustainability of WSS services. It will assure that
modernization measures already included in the NWSSP can be extended to cover the
additional rayons and to also cover the time after the closing of the NWSSP. It
specifically includes training in management, financial management, customer service,
procurement, preventive maintenance and other subjects pertinent to effective and
efficient management of the utilities, as well as provide continued support to activities
such as development of performance monitoring, preventive maintenance and leak
detection and repair. It also finances costs of technical support for construction
management including procurement support and contract supervision for the investments.

 Component C: Project Implementation and Management

 This component supports project implementation by financing project management
activities including incremental operating costs and project audits.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is implemented in Siyazan, Shabran, Aghsu, Ismailli, Lerik, Yardimli,
Masalli and Jalilabad rayons of Azerbaijan, including urban centers and villages located
in close proximity of the urban centers and along the transmission mains supplying the
centers. The location of several rayons under the project within the catchment areas of
some international waterways including: (i) the Kura River, which flows to the Caspian
Sea through Azerbaijan from Turkey and Georgia; ii) the Araz River which flows from
Turkey and Armenia, and along Azerbaijan's border with Iran, joining the Kura River
near the town of Sabirabad in Azerbaijan; and (iii) the Samur River, which flows along
Azerbaijan's border with Russia to the Caspian Sea, triggers the Bank's international
Waterways Operational Policy. Azerbaijan is, however, located at the downstream end of
the above rivers.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   ()
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                   X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Since no change in the project activities is associated with the AF, the safeguard issues
remain the same as those considered for the original project. No new safeguard policies,
besides those already triggered for the original project will be triggered because of the
AF.

 The project falls under Category A for Environmental Assessment (EA) since it may
provide financing for one or more wastewater treatment plants of considerable size and
potential impact. Most sub-project investments in water supply, rehabilitation of
infrastructure, and smaller wastewater treatment plants pose less risk. Prior to appraisal of
the original project the client prepared an Environmental Assessment document which set
out an environmental framework for screening, due diligence, mitigation and monitoring.
The specific utility and sites locales have been determined during the implementation of
the original project, and site-specific EIAs prepared and approved for each selected site,
which provide for the assessment of the associated environmental risks and put in place
mitigation and monitoring mechanisms. Likewise, the possibility of small scale land
acquisition was reflected in the existing Resettlement Policy Framework, and site-
specific RAPs are being prepared for relevant sites. Details are provided in the
subsequent sections on OP 4.12.

 Once operational, most of the impacts of the Project are assessed to be positive. The
environmental assessment indicated that the implementation of the project would have
long-term environmental impacts in terms of reducing pollution of natural resources,
generation of significant economic, social and public health benefits, and would enable
the government to enforce existing environmental regulations and standards. Specific
impacts are outlined below:

 Potential Positive Impacts
 a)     Improved WSS Services: Repair and improvement of WSS systems, especially,
distribution system, while decreasing fear of pollution, will provide high quality potable
water to a larger population. Improved WSS is also expected to result in reduced
operation and maintenance (O&M) costs to the utilities and higher efficiency through
decreased water losses and pumping costs.

 b)     Improvement of public health and environmental quality: The provision of
wastewater collection and treatment facilities will have a strong long term positive effect
on the overall environment and on public health conditions. There will be an
improvement in the water quality in the streams and rivers that flow throughout the
project area. Another major benefit expected from the project is the protection of
groundwater resources from contamination by untreated sewage, and the reduction of
untreated sewage discharge to the Caspian Sea from Kura and Araz. This will decrease
negative impacts on water quality consumed by other users from those rivers. In
addition, pollution of ground, surface water and underground water caused by flowing of
polluted water directly onto the relief in project areas will be prevented, and salination
and erosion problems which are problematic in some rayons will be avoided.

 c)     Improvement of natural habitats: The project will not cause any direct threat to
natural habitats in the project area as the project components are far away from them.
Indeed, through improvements in water quality as a result of the project, the ecological
conditions of the respective surface water bodies are expected to improve and to assist in
the restoration of the degraded water quality of wetlands. These improvements are
expected to contribute positively to the conservation of natural habitats.

 d)     Additional economic benefits: As a result of the project, economic benefits will
occur in terms of decreased water volume to be pumped (because of leakage reduction
and demand management), and of increased water volume of good quality available to
consumers, increased tourism activities, and lower medical costs associated with treating
water-borne diseases.

 Potential Negative Impacts

 Negative environmental impacts may entail temporary loss of access during physical
works, however they are only temporary. Typical impacts include:

  (i)   The potential for increased abstraction of water from some individual sources
(although at the rayon level no net increase in water abstraction is expected);
  (ii) Dust raised from the roads in the construction sites and from material carrying
trucks;
  (iii) Waste water from construction/renovation sites;
  (iv) Disposal of solid wastes;
  (v) Use of materials that may damage health (i.e. heavy-metal (lead) containing
paints, asbestos-cement tiles, pipes, copper pipes, inflammable and toxic materials etc.);
  (vi) Noise generated by the construction machinery;
 (vii) Traffic disruption and disturbance to the residents of the area. Impacts associated
with increased traffic concern issues such as public safety, congestion of roads and
disruption of regular traffic;
 (ix) Contamination/pollution of soils and water resources by construction, human
wastes, including fuel & oil, hazardous wastes, wastewater, etc.;
 (x) Business activity might suffer during construction from loss of pedestrian and
vehicular access. Interference with water and electrical power supplies might occur in
some urban areas, inconveniencing the public;
 (xi) Loss of visual amenities as construction materials are stockpiled and trees and
natural vegetation cut down.

 International Waterways (World Bank OP 7.50)

  The Project triggers the World Bank's Operational Policy on International Waters OP
7.50 (the Operational Policy) and but after consultation with LEGEN was deemed to fall
within the exception to the notification requirement under Paragraph (7a) of the
Operational Policy. Several of the rayons under the Project are dependent on canals
linked to the Kura River or its tributaries for their drinking water supply, and raw
wastewaters from some of them are discharged untreated into receiving water bodies,
including canals ultimately linked to the above mentioned Rivers and the Caspian Sea.
The works to be carried out under the project are not expected to have adverse impacts on
the quality and quantity of water to the riparians, and will not be affected by the other
riparians water use. It is expected that the water intake from the rivers will actually be
reduced because of the reduction in leakages and improved demand management under
the project. Proposed investments are also expected to improve the quality of wastewater
discharged into the relevant waterways, resulting in overall improvements in their water
quality. The Bank determined in its memo, cleared by the Regional Vice President, dated
November 27, 2007 that the exception to the external notification requirement set forth in
paragraph 7a) of OP 7.50 is applicable.

 Involuntary Resettlement (World Bank OP 4.12)

 Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 is triggered since the project might involve land
acquisition of either fallow land, used agricultural land, and/or pasture areas used for
sheep and cattle, for specific infrastructure investments such as wastewater treatment
plants and water and sewage investments mainly outside the urban centers. As the
specific locations, land type and size were not fully determined at appraisal, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was developed for this project.

 The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional arrangements, schedules and
funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may occur in the project rayons as the
result of the project. The RPF also provides guidelines to stakeholder participation in the
mitigation of adverse social impacts of the project, in order to ensure that the social and
economic well-being of project affected persons (PAP)s will not be worsened as a result
of the project.
 One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines is to restore the income earning
capacity of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and
shepherds. The aim is to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the PAPs
prior to project operations. No resettlement of persons is anticipated, and the project does
not foresee any demolitions of commercial or private buildings.


 Safety of Dams (OP 4.37)

 The Safeguards Policy OP 4.47 (Safety of Dams) has been triggered for the original
project even though the project does not finance the construction or rehabilitation of any
dams or other large control structures, because in some of the rayons rehabilitation of
water supply schemes which are supplied from small existing dams may take place.
Anchor or Regional Dam Safety Specialists will be consulted as to the appropriate means
for ensuring that this OP is met, and if deemed necessary investigations of the safety of
the dams might be carried out by an independent dam safety expert in accordance with
OP 4.37. Since all detailed designs for 8 cities are prepared it has been identified that
Jalilabad and Masalli rayons will be supplied with water from existing Vilashchay Dam
located in Masalli rayon. It was agreed with implementing agency that the Dam Safety
expert would be provided by the Construction Management Company and appropriate
Dam safety report will be submitted to and cleared by the Bank prior to start of
construction of adjacent Water Treatment Plan. The water supply solutions proposed in
the detailed designs for remaining rayons do not involve the use of existing dams other
than Vilashchay Dam.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Please see positive impacts outlined in Section 1 above.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
The 'no project' alternative which would maintain the status quo with respect to WSS
systems and associated conditions including environmental conditions in the project area
was considered. It would however result in a worsening situation in terms of not only the
quality of service delivery, but also additional operations and maintenance (O&M) costs.
The continued failure to effectively collect, treat and dispose of sewage would also
adversely affect the environment. Implementing the project, through the combination of
rehabilitation and reconstruction of water supply and sanitation infrastructure in the
rayons; and implementation of a comprehensive Institutional Modernization Component
to strengthen the WSS sector's capacity to manage services in an efficient, effective, and
sustainable manner, was found to be the best alternative.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
a)     Environmental Assessment: Because details of site selection and technology to
be used are determined during project implementation, an Environmental Impact
Assessment Framework (EIAF) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP) were
prepared prior to the appraisal of the original project. The EIAF and EMP detailed the
procedure, form and contents for specific EAs and EMPs prepared and approved for
investments in each Rayon. These are outlined in the EIAF and EMP, as are the
applicable standards and monitoring indicators and procedures. The implementation of
activities carried out under the project conforms to relevant laws in Azerbaijan and sound
environmental and construction management principles. The short-term negative
environmental impacts, which are mostly expected to occur during construction or
rehabilitation works are minimized by proper planning and application of preventive
measures, and are mitigated by restorative actions after the civil works are completed.
  Site-specific EAs and EMPs have been prepared for all 8 sites identified for financing
under the project. The Borrower arranged for two round public consultations for each site
and properly disclosed the documents. The main environmental issues addressed by site-
specific EAs and EMPs include: (i) selection of siting and technology for wastewater
treatment facilities; (ii) the potential for increased abstraction of water from some
individual sources (although at the rayon level no net increase in water abstraction is
expected); (iii) ecological disturbance associated with the construction phase of
rehabilitation and extension of the water supply and sewer networks and wastewater
treatment plants; and (iv) the potential for bacteriological contamination if water or
sludge from the wastewater treatment plants are used for agricultural purposes.

  Overall, mitigation of any environmental effects is the responsibility of the Project
Implementation Unit for the project (PIU under the Azerbaijan Amelioration and Water
Management JSC (AAWM). In addition, it is the responsibility of the contractors to
ensure that mitigation is carried out successfully during construction/renovation works as
it is required. The specific mitigation measures are implemented by the contractor under
the supervision of the construction supervision manager. The provisions described in
each site-specific EMP are incorporated in the relevant contract with construction
companies selected to perform the works. The cost of mitigation measures are included
in the cost of the contracts and borne by contractors, who are required to make the
necessary provisions for implementation of mitigation measures as part of their
contractual obligations.

  The contractors are also required to take all necessary precautions for the types of civil
works involved, especially in residential areas and those with high circulation of persons
and vehicles. All construction and rehabilitation works should be carried out with
keeping the safety equipment rules, and health and safety regulations. Safety measures
will be adopted to protect the personnel involved in the works. Public access to
construction sites will be properly restricted. Internationally accepted practices and active
regulations should be assisted regarding restoration of construction, health and safety.
The construction contract document incorporate all requirements to minimize disturbance
from construction activities, which are monitored by the Supervision Engineer and the
PIU staff (Environment Specialist) to ensure compliance and implementation of the
required provisions by the contractors.
 The contractors are required to provide suitable and reliable equipment for construction,
with a formal maintenance program to ensure efficient operations. The WSS utilities
develop and establish appropriate safety procedures for the operation and maintenance of
the water and wastewater treatment plants. All employees of the contractors and the WSS
utilities should get suitable training in occupational health, safety, and emergency
preparedness procedures for earthquakes. Safety equipment also needs to be provided.

 The site-specific EIAs are being amended by the PIU Environmental Specialist to
accommodate the increased scope of work associated with the increased number of
potential beneficiaries. Those EIAs will be amended and duly re-disclosed by the AF
Appraisal currently scheduled for February 2014.

 b)     Resettlement Policy Framework: A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
been prepared for this project. The RPF sets out the policies, principles, institutional
arrangements, schedules and funding mechanisms for any land acquisitions that may
occur in the project rayons as the result of the project. The RPF also provides guidelines
to stakeholder participating in the mitigation of adverse social impacts of the project, in
order to ensure that the social and economic well-being of project affected persons
(PAP)s will not be worsened as a result of the project.

  One of the key objectives of the RPF guidelines is to restore the income earning
capacity of project-affected people, i.e., in the case of the WWS, this will be farmers and
shepherds. The aim is to improve or at least sustain the living conditions of the PAPs
prior to project operations. The Loan Agreement includes a clause requiring the
Resettlement Process Framework to be followed in project implementation should any
issues arise in this regard. In addition, the RPF is drafted to ensure that siting of facilities
to be built under the project will not cause displacement of people, demolishing of illegal
structures, or loss of income to illegal or non-titled inhabitants. It also requires that initial
social screening be carried out in line with Bank policies so that all potential issues that
may trigger OP 4.12 are spotted and addressed.

 c) Safety of Dams: The project will not finance any new large dams, but in some of the
rayons rehabilitation of water supply schemes which are supplied from small existing
dams might take place and trigger the Banks OP/BP 4.37 on Safety of Dams.
Investigations of the safety of these dams will be carried out by an independent dam
safety expert in accordance with OP 4.37 (see the status in sub-section 1 above).

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public consultations with regard to EIAF were held with local stakeholders in Azerbaijan
in December 2007 in accordance with Bank Guidelines for EA. The Final EIAF has been
disclosed publicly. It was published through the Bank's Infoshop on January 4, 2008, and
in-country through the Azersu Website on December 17, 2007. Site-specific EIAs have
been prepared in the course of project implementation and duly disclosed at public
consultation meetings as well as on the web-site of the implementing agency and Bank's
Infoshop. The Resettlement Policy Framework was also duly disclosed 'in-country' and in
the Bank's Infoshop in 2008.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/04/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/04/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/04/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                               01/10/2008
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  02/05/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              02/29/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               02/29/2008
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?            Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)        Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the        Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                           No
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts      No
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements        No
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name              Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Hadji Huseynov                10/24/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Gulana Enar Hajiyeva          10/24/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Aly Zulficar Rahim            10/07/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                  Mr Pier Francesco Mantovani         11/01/2013
  Comments: Concurred with no comments by acting SM on Nov 1, 2013
