                                                                                     86741
                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET

TF.No.: TF015844
Date prepared/updated: March 26, 2014

I. Basic Information

      . P •·o.tect
1 BaSIC      .     D ata
Country: BANGLADESH                           Project ID: Pl47836
                                              Additio11al Pl'ojcct 1D (!f any):
Project Name: Bangladesh- Social Engagement for Budgetary Accountability (SEBA)
Task Team Leader: JosefTrommer
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 20, 2014    Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: WBIGA                          Lending Instrument: Small RETF
Sectors: Social Development (50%) and Urban (50%)
Themes: Budget Monitoring
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
        Multi Donor Trust Funds                                              848 968
                                      -
Enviromnental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [ J                 No []
Simplified Processing                            Simple [x]              Repeater [x]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes []       No [x]
and Emergencies)

2. P1·ojcct Objectives:

The development objective of this gr-ant is to improve effectiveness of Union Parishad (UP)
schemes by ensuring increased community participation, transparency, responsiveness,
accountability and inclusion.

3. l'rojcct Description:

The Project will seek constructive collaboration and effective networks that will be established
with national and local government institutions, civil society organizations and platforms to
scale-up best practices on participatory and transparent budget processes. The Project will
closely coordinate its activities with the Govennnent's Local Governance Support Project
(LGSP) partly financed by the World Bank. Through this collaboration local and national
government institutions are expected to benefit from improved accountability mechanisms which
will ultimately strengthen the effectiveness of Bangladesh's decentralization agenda.
Component 1: Community engagement for promoting social accountability in Union Parislwd
budget through selected local CSOs.
This component will work with targeted communities through five local CSOs (competitively
selected) in five administrative divisions 1 ; covering at least 45 UPs to raise community
awareness on local government budget decisions and allocations. Activities include:

•    Can·yout information meetings round table meetings/seminars/workshops in targeted local
     communities to create awareness on UP budget decisions and encourage community
     participation in public hearings.
•    Capacity building activities to strengthen existing local community monitoring groups to
     independently monitor of UP budget using agreed social accountability tools (including
     social auditing tools, social media, access to information, and monitoring and evaluation).
•    Disseminate local budget information using user-friendly tools and formats (including
     infom1ation boards in public places and community meetings).
•    Help UPs to organize meetings (including "ward shavas") to involve local communities to
     discuss budget planning and facilitate learning tl·om good practices through Horizontal
     Lcaming Programs (HLP).

Component 2: lnstitutioual strengthening and capacity building of selected local CSOs
This component will strengthen the capacity of five local CSOs (competitively selected) in five
administrative divisions covering at least 45 UPs. Activities include:

•   Provide training to selected local CSOs on social accountability tools and LGSP
    implementation.
•   Organize cross-learning study tours for selected CSOs to learn and replicate good practices.
•   Provide, on a need basis, technical assistance to support selected CSOs to implement agreed
    social accountability tools in targeted UPs (for example, field visit at least once in every three
    months, coordination meetings with CSOs once in every quarter).
•   Develop aml disseminate knowledge and learning material (for example, report cards,
    surveys for generating community feedback, printing posters tor community awareness,
    developing training modules tor CSOs).

Component 3: Citizen-based feedback for Policy advocacy at the national level.
This component will focus on Documenting and disseminating good practices and lessons on use
and institutionalization of social accountability tools in UPs.

•   Conduct report card surveys to collect feedback on citizens' perceptions, concerns and
    recommendations on local government budget plmming and decisions.
•   Prepare policy notes based on citizens' feedback and presented to UPs.
•   Organizing round table meetings/seminars/workshops with civil society representatives,
    national and local govemment officials and policy makers aimed at improving local
    government budget planning.

1
  Five divisions are targeted out of seven country divisions-- Chittagong Hills Track was excluded due to a large
UNDP community development program implemented there with similar goals, and Nilphamari district that is
targeted by another GPSA grantee-- CARE Bangladesh.
Component 4: Knowledge & Lessons and Project coordination.
This component will focus on Canyout trainings and dissemination activities to relevant
stakeholders on the use of social accountability mechanisms, (including social auditing tools,
social media, access to information, and monitoring and evaluation) facilitate the analysis of
public information, and management and administration of the Project.

o Documenting good practices and lessons.
o Conducting surveys that cover specific issues/themes.
o Preparing video documentary.
o Sharing lessons with Government of Bangladesh, civil society and other stakeholders.
o Sharing lessons with practitioners of social accountability and GPSA grantees across the
  globe.
o Project management and administration.

4. l'roject Location and salient physical charactel'istics •·elevant to the safegua1·d analysis:

The Project's direct beneficiaries will include seven local CSOs selected competitively. It is
expected that at least one CSO will be selected from five administrative divisions of the country.
These CSOs will benefit from the capacity-building and technical support that will be provided
by MJF to implement social accountability tools in sub-projects at UP level. These five CSOs
will cover a total of 45 UPs (I% of total UPs of the country) representing diverse geographic
areas like the coastal area, Char and 1-Iaor.

The selection of CSOs will pay special attention to local organizations working with poor and
vulnerable groups including: women, disabled, ethnic and religious minorities. These groups will
be engaged in social audits, participate in assessing service quality and mobilized to articulate
their concerns in interface meetings, public hearings, participatory planning and open budget
SeSSIOnS.


As these activities only involving administrative works and training or workshop, no salient
physical characteristics from these locations are relevant to the safeguard analysis.

5. Envii'Onmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Sa bah Moyeen, Social Development Specialist (SASDS)
5. Safeguard Policies Trig2ered (please explain why)                      Yes            No
Envit·onmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                   X
Natuml Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                             X
Forests(OP/BP 4.36)                                                                      X
Pest Mana2ement (OP 4.09)                                                                X
l'l~sical Cultural Resom·ces (OP/BP 4.11)                                                X
Indigenous Peoples (01'/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                              X
Pro.iects on International Waterways (01'/BP 7.50)                                       X
l'ro.iects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                X


II. Key Safeguard l'olicy Issues and Their Management

   A. Summary of Key Slifeguards Issues

  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and
  describe any potentiallar2e scale, si2nificant and/m· irreversible impacts:
  The Project will not support any physical investments or civil works and we do not
  anticipate any environmental impacts. Therefore the Project is assigned an enviromnental
  category C; requiring no fmiher assessment. Project activities consist of infonnation
  gathering to identify gaps and opportunities on improving budgetary transparency of
  targeted Union Parishads (UPs), assessment to create monitoring and evaluation tool of local
  budget decisions, training selected CSOs, advocacy activities to educate citizens and
  mobilize public action for government accountability and improved service, and creation of
  a civil society working groups to disseminate the information to a broader community, and
  hence will not create any large-scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social
  impacts. No physical intervention will be involved.

  The Task Team screened for the potential presence of Indigenous Peoples in the pre-
  identified targeted geographical areas, namely: coastal area, Char and 1-Iaor. This screening
  exercise identified sporadic IP presence most targeted areas. The nature of this project is
  such that it will positively impact the IPs with accommodating the IPs voice in the citizen
  mobilization and education towards better local budget allocations and service delivery
  through prior, informed and consultation in culturally appropriate manner, as well as
  including local cultural organization in the creation of CSO working groups to disseminate
  the information to the broader community. This approach shall also be applied in later
  identified UPs with IP presence. Therefore no IPP was prepared and disclosed. The
  elements of the IPP have been integrated into the project design.

  2. DesCI'ibe any potential indirect and/or long tenn impacts due to anticipated future
  activities in the project area:
  There are no potential significant long-term adverse impacts triggered by this Project. The
  benefit of this initiative is to improve budgetary transparency, accountability and service
delivery in selected disadvantaged areas of Bangladesh and to also include the IPs present in
these areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if t·elevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A
4. DesCJ"ibe measures taken by the botTowcr to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrowet· capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.
The Project will not include any activities that will involve construction other physical
interventions; there is no plan to address or to implement safeguard mitigation measures.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on JlOtcntially affected people.
Project stakeholders are national and local government institutions, civil society
organizations and social platfmms that will benefit best practices on participatory and
transparent budget processes. The ultimate stakeholders arc at the local level, to include
seven local CSOs, Ward Shavas, district and direct local government staff, civil society
group and citizens. However, as the project stakeholders will not be involved in any physical
intervention and only dealt with administrative works, hence the project has no adverse
impact to environment and social aspects. Therefore, there is no plan to do consultation and
disclosure of safeguard measures.


 B. Disclosure Requirements

Envit·onmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
Was the document disclosed prior to                 N/A
appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                         N/A
Date of"in-country" disclosure                      N/A
Date of submission to Info Shop                     N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the   N/A
Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive
Directors
Resettlement Action Plan /Framework/Policy Process:
Was the document disclosed prior to                 N/A
appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                         N/A
Date of "in-country" disclosure                     N/A

Date of submission to Info Shop                     N/A
*If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources
nolicics. the resnective issues arc to he addressed and disclosed as nart of the
  Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
  If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain
  why:
  N/A


  C. Compliance Monitoring bulicators fit the C01porate Level (to be filled in when the
  ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

    OP/BP/GP 4.01 -Environment Assessment
   Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                   No
   If yes, then did the Regional EnvirOI).m ent Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review     N/A
   and approve the EA report?
   Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the               N/ A
   cred it/ loan?
   OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
   Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/ Plannjng Framework (as appropriate)         Yes
   been prepared in consultation with affected Indi genous Peoples?
   If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager     N/A
   review the plan?
   If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and    N/ A
   approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or.Sector Manager?


III. APPROVALS
D. Approvals

Signed am/ submitted by:                           N al}¥!                            Date
Task Tea m Leader:                   JosefTronuner /7~                            03/26/2014
Environme ntal Specialist:                           U'
Social Developm ent Specialist       Sabah Moyeen                                 12/3 1/20 13
Add itional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Reg iona l Safeguards Coordinator:   Frank Fragano   //rr"'f                      03/26/20 14
Comments:                                            \j   v
                                                          ~Oft /J
Sector Manager:
  Comments:
                                     Roby Senderowitsch~
                                                          (./   -                 03/26/2014
