                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/10/2014                                     Report No.: AC7141
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P113435                 Original Project Name: Bangladesh -
                                             Primary Education Development Program
                                             III
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P150669
Project Name: AF Bangladesh - Primary Education Development Program III
Task Team Leader: Ayesha Y. Vawda
Estimated Appraisal Date: September 26,      Estimated Board Date: December 15, 2014
2014
Managing Unit: GEDDR                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Primary education (100%)
Theme: Education for all (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            400
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective of the proposed Additional Financing (AF) project
will remain unchanged from the original project and will continue to "(i) increase
participation and reduce social disparities in primary education, (ii) increase the number
of children completing primary education and improve the quality of the learning
environment and measurement of students learning, and (iii) improve effectiveness of
resource use for primary education."

3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) is being sought to support recommendations
emerging from the ongoing Mid-Term Review (MTR) of the PEDP3 program. These
include: (1) deepening of the reforms successfully initiated through the original Credit,
particularly related to quality enhancement and equity targeting; (2) extending universal
coverage of program interventions to approximately 26,000 recently nationalized
"Registered Non-Government Primary Schools" (RNGPS); (3) extending the closing
date of the program to June 30, 2018 in harmonization with the government program
(activities of which are expected to complete in June 2017) and the financing proposed by
all other Development Partners; and (4) addressing a financing gap that results from the
government program closing date extension, impact of the national pay scale
implemented since FY2012/13, and an increase in infrastructure costs arising from
introduction of WASH blocks in standard school design and overall increase in unit cost
of construction. The World Bank has been nominated as the Supervising Entity (SE) for
the proposed $100m Global Partnership for Education (GPE) grant to be provided
through PEDP3. GPE grant financing is expected to be fully aligned and integrated with
the processing of this AF.

 Proposed changes under Additional Financing. There will be additional activities
brought about under the AF as a result of deepening reforms related to quality
enhancement and equity targeting, and extending universal coverage of interventions to
the nationalized RNGPS. However, the nature of those activities will remain unchanged.
No additional safeguards policies will be triggered due to the AF. The original ESMF for
PEDP3 has been updated to incorporate the lessons learned from implementation of the
project so far.

 A restructuring of the original Credit is proposed in light of implementation experience
to date, to: (i) amend Year-3 targets for three DLIs (Teacher Education and Professional
Development, Needs-based Infrastructure Development, and Teacher Recruitment and
Deployment); (ii) eliminate the 18-month limit for achieving DLIs; (iii) utilize the funds
that could not be disbursed for the Year-0 DLIs, and (iv) change the estimated DLI
disbursement schedule from an annual to a bi-annual basis.

 Outcome indicators, intermediate outcome indicators, and their targets would be revised
to reflect scaled-up and expanded program interventions to be carried out by the proposed
new closing date of June 30, 2018. Further clarity would be provided on indicator
definitions, data sources and frequency of data availability, and additional indicators
related to the proposed activities for Years 4-6 of the project will be included, consistent
with conclusions of the MTR. While it is proposed to continue the practice of allocating
equal (disbursement) value to each DLI, the level of financing per DLI would increase
for the Year-4 to Year-6 DLIs because their milestones are more complex and
challenging than the Year-0 to Year-3 milestones.

 The emphases going forward which principally motivate the proposed AF and
restructuring are briefly summarized below by each Part of the project.

  Part 1: The emphasis is on scaling up, from the foundation built to date, to implement a
further set of reforms focused on improving quality, while extending project coverage to
the newly nationalized RNGPS. There are serious cost implications, in terms of technical
assistance, implementation, and monitoring. Priorities are to:
  •      Expand the scope of coverage of the higher standards for teacher qualifications
(i.e. DPEd), while setting foundations for institutionalization, accreditation and
conversion of the program from an in-service to the premier pre-service program for
primary teachers in the country;
  •     Mainstream the system's proactive accountability for each child's learning by
increasing and institutionalizing channels for using the "ECL" approach and materials;
  •     Disseminate and consolidate applying the modernized curriculum which also
involves revised textbooks and exams; and
  •     Use ICT more extensively to support broader and more effective coverage of
training and other development initiatives across the primary education sector.

 Part 2: The emphasis is more effectively to target mechanisms focused on the
remaining, hardest-to-reach population groups, to enroll and retain children in school.
Priorities are to boost completion rates and learning outcomes of disadvantaged children
by ensuring good quality, targeted Pre-Primary Education reaches them, to infuse school
improvement planning with a much stronger results focus, and link policy and activities
vis-à-vis Second Chance Education directly and more strategically to the national
education policy goals to universalize primary education. For more transparent and
effective identification of prioritized sites for needs-based infrastructure, the needs list is
being converted to a "live" database, and results of efficiency gains analysis must feed
into decisions on options for construction design.

 Part 3: The emphasis is on continued system strengthening. The major initiatives of the
project are evolving in a complex system of over 100,000 schools, 450,000 teachers, and
19 million students. The proposed AF and extension of the ongoing project would deepen
the development impact of its focus on inclusiveness and quality of primary education by
allowing MoPME and DPE adequate time and more resources to consolidate gains and
promote synergies between the numerous interventions PEDP3 introduces on many fronts
simultaneously. Under the AF, the project will also contribute to GoB's strategic thinking
and systemic planning for implementing the National Education Policy intentions to
extend primary education beyond Grade 5. Priorities are to:
 •      Build on improvements to date in data collection and analysis (inter alia,
improving the tools for Annual School Census, Annual Sector Performance Report,
Education Household Survey, National Student Assessment) and the use of data for
evidence-based policy decision making at all levels of the system;
 •      Garner evidence from the use of SLIP and UPEP funds, in order to guide and
support decentralized management and governance, also tackling emerging concerns such
as low teacher-student contact hours;
 •      Examine lessons from existing public-private partnerships and bring these to
greater use in primary education, especially for pre-primary and second chance
education.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The PEDP 3 will be implemented all over Bangladesh. Many of these schools are likely
to be built in the disaster-prone coastal regions where they will also serve as shelters
during cyclone and natural calamities. The schools in the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT),
which have the largest concentration of the country's indigenous population, would be
designed considering the norms and culture of the indigenous population. The project,
based on lessons learned during implementation has conducted a rigorous communication
campaign with the indigenous people in the CHT and has proposed three models for Hill-
friendly schools designed in a participatory and consultative manner with the School
Management Committees and local communities. The actual locations of the schools
where infrastructure would be provided will be finalized after site verification by
implementing agency (DPE, LGED, DPHE) of the assessed need prepared by the
consultant. The project will also continue to support
construction/reconstruction/renovation of primary teachers' training institute, education
office at upazila (sub-district) level, boundary wall etc. The schools will be selected and
prioritized based on the certain parameters. The following criteria have been adopted for
ranking the infrastructure needs under PEDP 3.

 Order of prioritization: Additional classrooms
 1) Additional class
 2) Additional teachers
 3) Teachers' room
 4) Replace kacha road
 5) Number of students

 Order of prioritization: Toilets
 1) Girls' WC
 2) Girls' enrolment
 3) Boys' WC
 4) Urinals

 Order of prioritization: Drinking Water
 1) Proposed water
 2) Girls' enrolment
 3) Number of students

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
   Ms Nadia Sharmin (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment issues: No new type of activities from original project are proposed under
the AF. As in the original project, operational policy OP/BP 4.01 will continue to be
triggered and the current Environmental category B will remain the same under the AF.
The program will continue to support mainly four (04) types of the "subprojects". These
are: i) new building construction, ii) expansion or major renovation of existing buildings;
iii) regular operation and maintenance and minor renovation of buildings and iv) water
supply and sanitation provision. The new building construction may include construction
of additional class room or teachers room, at new locations. The nature of civil works
proposed to be financed under the program is not likely to cause significant and/or
irreversible adverse environmental impacts with application of standard construction
management practices. The project will also finance provisions of safe drinking water
(tube-wells, shallow tube-wells and other alternative sources) and sanitation facilities
(toilets, WASH block) to targeted schools based on agreed guidelines and provisions in
the EMF. Beneficiary institutions for tube-wells and toilets/WASH Blocks will be
selected based on need. Arsenic content is also a challenge in the project areas and so is
the potential issue with adjacent location of toilets to tube-wells leading to groundwater
contamination, and lack of proper design, construction and maintenance of tube well and
toilet.
  Apart from construction of additional class rooms, WASH Blocks and water points,
PEDP 3 would also support the extension of the Head Quarter Building of Directorate of
Primary Education (DPE) and a Leadership Center at Cox's Bazar. Both the buildings are
supposed be multistoried buildings, one within the campus of the present DPE HQ which
is in Dhaka and the other one within the campus of the office of District Primary
Education Officer, Cox's Bazar. The design of the buildings has not yet been finalized. It
appears from a preliminary site visit that location wise there are no major environmental
or social concerns. However, as they would be multistoried buildings, an Environmental
Assessment will be undertaken before commencement of the work and will be shared
with Bank.
  Social issues: The project will not undertake activities different in nature to those
undertaken during the current phase, but will expand, deepen and improve the quality of
those activities and services. OP 4.10 has been triggered for the Additional Financing, as
it had been for PEDP3. The existing Social Management Framework which includes an
Indigenous People's Development Framework will be updated to incorporate lessons
learnt from the current phase of the project and will focus on regional differences in the
needs of IPs, IP school designs, strategizing on reaching hard to reach people including
IPs, people living in remote areas, minorities, marginalized and disadvantaged children.
As mentioned above and based on lessons learned, the Gender and Inclusive Education
Plan has been prepared incorporating the priorities and policies of all development
partners (DPs) involved, as a standalone document in order to highlight the importance of
those issues and ensure rigorous implementation. It includes a number of specific
monitoring indicators to be monitored by a dedicated cell at DPE.
  OP 4.12 Although OP 4.12 had been triggered for PEDP3, no land acquisition
displacement or adverse impacts on livelihoods occurred as all civil works were carried
out within DPE premises strictly. The same process will be followed during this AF
phase as well. However, like the previous phase, DPE prefers to keep the option for land
acquisition open during the current phase too. Accordingly OP 4.12 is triggered and
resettlement policy framework including screening formats and RAP preparation
guidelines are incorporated in the SMF.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The activities that trigger both IP and environment are not expected to create any adverse
impacts in the long-term. If anything, project activities (both school facilities and
stipends) are expected to provide positive impacts to student beneficiaries while in
school.
 Most of the project impacts are localized due to the relatively small-scale activities.
However, there are some issues of concern that cut across the range of proposed
interventions. Field studies and lessons from original project and Third Party Validation
report of the WASH program show that issues such as selection of appropriate sites and
location of various components of civil works within the school campus for maintaining
better school environment, appropriate discharge of effluent from toilets/WASH Blocks,
addressing gender issue and access for students with disabilities in design and
construction of toilets/WAHS Blocks need strong monitoring along with construction
phase monitoring of various environmental issues.

 Lessons Learned and Action from the Original Project
 Field Supervision

 During the implementation of PEDP 3, construction, expansion and maintenance of
infrastructure went through environmental screening. Report on environmental issues was
submitted by DPE as part of reporting obligation. Consultant of LGED and DPHE visited
the sites as a part of their routine job to monitor the compliance of the recommendations
of the environmental screening at the field level. Moreover, a number of field visits were
undertaken by the World Bank professionals to see the compliance of the environmental
safeguard issues. Some of the issues came out from these are summarized below:

  •     It seems that the data captured by the field offices some time are not properly
reflecting the field condition and the environmental issues. It was felt that the screening
format needs to be modified to make those more effective in capturing the field
condition. The screening format is updated in the revised version of the EMF.
  •     Also the capacity of the officials who are associated with the environmental
screening and monitoring at the field and HQ level should be enhanced.
  •     It was found during the filed visits that the construction materials are not properly
stacked in the school premises which pose safety concern to the children in many
instances. A guide line needs to be prepared for the contractors observance of which
would be made mandatory for them and would be a part of the tender/contract document.
Such a guide line has been attached with the revised EMF.
  •     While the male and female WASH Blocks are supposed to be separately located
considering the cultural norm of the country, it is not being properly followed. Sometime
shortage of land a cause for such noncompliance. However, even if due to scarcity of
land which compel to construct male and female WASH Blocks side by side, all efforts
will be made to keep the entry in the opposite direction.

 Third Party Validation on WASH

 To assess the effectiveness of the water sources and toilets installed/constructed so far, a
third party independent sample testing and verification of arsenic, iron, manganese and
microbial contents as well as sanitation facilities provided both under PEDP-II and PEDP
3 was undertaken in 2013. About 286 schools were sampled out of which 173 were from
PEDP-II, 52 were from PEDP 3, 50 schools from the list of school which were supposed
to get alternative water sources and 11 schools where tube wells were provided by other
agencies were selected. Some of the key observations and recommendations from that
third party validation are as follows:

 •      The tube wells where concentration of arsenic was found more than the
acceptable limit are found to be identified. Alternative source of water has been
recommended.
 •      It was found that no information is available in the school about the depth of the
strainer of the tube wells which is important to have an idea about the aquifer from where
water is being extracted. Under PEDP 3, an MIS system has been developed which will
keep the record of the relevant technical information.
 •      About 52% of the schools reported nonfunctional tube wells most of which were
provided through PEDP II intervention. The primary reasons for non-functionality are:
stolen pump heads, broken pump handles, damaged check valves, broken plungers,
corrosion of well pipe due to high salinity, lowering of water table, Low/no yield due to
inadequate pump development following installation, abandonment of wells in high
salinity and high iron area. It has been observed that a number of PEDP II well have been
abandoned because of high salinity and/or high iron. In such case avoidance of high
salinity and high iron prone areas are considered. However, seeking alternative sources,
such as, rainwater harvesting, use of treated surface water, pond sand filtration, etc. may
alleviate the problem.
 •      Most of the tube wells surveyed have concrete bases and platforms.

 The typical environmental impacts related to the school construction and water supply
and sanitation issues are (i); (ii) drainage congestion/water logging; (iii) surface water
pollution; (iv) dust and noise pollution; (v) lack of safe distance between tube-wells and
sanitary latrines; (vii) occupational health hazards and safety practices; (viii) improper
maintenance of water supply and sanitation facilities; (ix) lack of maintenance of air and
water quality, (x) improper and insufficient management of surrounding ecosystem and
biodiversity (if any), etc.

  The PEDP 3 intends to ensure that every school has at least one safe drinking water
source, which is either a tube-well, piped water supply or any other alternatives. The
source will be arsenic-free. Arsenic poses the major environmental concern and health
risk with the installation of new tube-well. In the absence of proper testing facilities and
alternative option, students may continue to consume arsenic contaminated water in
arsenic affected-areas of the project. The long-term exposures to arsenic in drinking
water may affect human health and vegetation.

  The social impacts of the project are expected to be largely beneficial. The current phase
identified some shortcoming in the communication and outreach strategy which will be
improved and strengthened in the SMF prepared for the AF. The outreach strategy which
is also elaborated in the Gender and Inclusive Education Plan will be focused on the
inclusion and incentivizing the participation of hard to reach people such as those living
in remote areas, indigenous people and ethnic minorities, marginalized and very poor
populations. Gender issues such as recruitment of qualified female teachers will be
addressed in the SMF.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
In the original plan, standalone toilets and urinals were planned. But later on, WASH
Blocks were introduced to include the hand washing facilities. In the present design, male
WASH Block consists of a three toilet compartments, two having English Pan and one
having Commode to be used by the disabled children. There is also a basin for hand
washing, a foot washing facility and two urinals. The female WASH Blocks also have
similar features except the urinals. The design of the WASH block was finalized after
multi-level consultation among Directorate of Primary Education (DPE), Department of
Public Health Engineering (DPHE), UNICEF and Local Government Engineering
Department (LGED).

 Provision of installation of source of drinking water in the form of shallow tube wells,
deep tube wells and other alternatives sources are also included in the program. All the
tube wells installed under the program are tested for arsenic. DPHE laboratory unit
undertakes these testing of the 100% new tube wells installed under the program. If
arsenic is found, alternative sources are considered in those cases. The location of
tubewell installation and the type of water source is also finalized based on the
consultation among DPHE and School Management Committee.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment: To address potential environmental safeguard issues, the AF will
strengthen monitoring aspects of the construction/reconstruction of school building,
education office, dormitory, academic building and teachers' training institute by LGED
and construction work of water supply and sanitation facilities by DPHE. It will continue
to include regular reporting on arsenic test and efficient database management. Separate
part time Environmental Specialist is deployed both in LGED and DPHE in the project
and the performance of environmental management is expected to continue improving
under the AF.
  Given the scope of the additional financing the Environmental Management
Framework (EMF) adopted for the original PEDP 3 project will also be applicable to the
Additional Financing. The EMF outlines the environmental management procedures that
already practiced in original project during the construction period and also in the
operation & maintenance period to minimize the negative impacts and implementation of
enhancement measures. The EMF has been updated based on the lessons learned from the
original project and third party validation of the WASH program. A Deputy Director will
continue to be responsible for the overall environmental monitoring on behalf of DPE .
PEDP III will continue the MoU signed with DPHE to obtain technical services for safe
water testing of tube-wells and sanitation activities. The MoU with LGED will continue
to ensure environmental safeguard supervision for the construction/reconstruction related
tasks.

  Social Inclusion: The existing legal covenants on the social safeguards would continue
to apply. The updated Social Management Framework (SMF) will reflect lessons learned
from the ongoing project. The Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) has
maintained and would continue to maintain a database on the enrollment of tribal
children, their retention rates and academic progression. A specific Gender and Inclusive
Education Action Plan has been prepared for the project with input from all development
partners which emphasizes the active inclusion of indigenous, extremely poor and
vulnerable, disabled children and those residing in remote, disaster prone areas.

 At the community level, AF project will provide the Parent Teacher Associations of
each school with PTA grants towards education awareness and community mobilization
to address and alleviate the issue. Besides, PTA grants can support school level
community outreach on general issues affecting the student populations.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The updated SMF and EMF for the AF will be publicly disclosed as was the case with the
ongoing project. These will be closely monitored by the implementing agency as well the
Bank task team on a regular basis.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/08/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/09/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/10/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/08/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/09/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/10/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/08/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/09/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/10/2014
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          N/A
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          N/A
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name                         Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Ayesha Y. Vawda                           09/04/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Nadia Sharmin                             09/04/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sabah Moyeen                              09/04/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Halil Dundar                              09/10/2014
  Comments:
