                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 05/02/2014                                     Report No.: AC7118
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P131263                 Original Project Name: Rural
                                             Electrification and Renewable Energy
                                             Development II (RERED II) Project
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P150001
Project Name: RERED II Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Zubair K.M. Sadeque
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 24, 2014     Estimated Board Date: June 19, 2014
Managing Unit: SASDE                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             71.98
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
         Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                         5.80
         LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES                                          10.80
         Non-Government Organization (NGO) of Borrowing Country 29.16
         Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                       45.76
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to increase access to clean energy
in rural areas through renewable energy.

3. Project Description
In support of GOB's vision of providing universal access to electricity by the year 2020,
the Project would support the provision of renewable energy based electricity services,
clean fuels, and modern cooking methods using the capabilities of NGOs and the private
sector. The Project will also support institutional development in the public sector so that
the GOB can play a more effective role in increasing access to modern energy services.
 The additional financing is required to scale up Component A (access to electricity),
covering installation of solar home systems (SHS) and other renewable energy-based
options under the Remote Area Power Supply Systems (RAPSS). It is also proposed to
drop Component C (energy efficient lighting), which had been allocated US$17 million,
and reallocate those funds to other components.

 Proposed Components for the additional financing (US$65 million) and the proposed
restructuring of the original project (US$17 million re-allocation) are as follows:

  a.    Component A: Scale up of the Access to Electricity Component (US$65 million
from additional financing and US$12 million from reallocations). This will provide
credit support for installation of additional 400,000 SHS. This will also support other
eligible RAPSS as and when basis. The proposed additional financing includes technical
assistance support (US$2.7 million) for the SHS and other RAPSS programs, including
quality assurance, training and outreach, environmental protections, studies and planning,
and goods. Together with support from IDCOL reflows and other funding sources, the
target of the Project is 950,000 SHS (550,000 from the original credit and 400,000 from
the additional financing/reallocation), 42 mini-grids, and 1,600 irrigation pumps.

 b.    Component C: Sector Technical Assistance (US$5 million). In addition to
continuing support for sector reform and capacity building through the Power Cell, this
component will also provide support for promoting energy efficiency and developing and
enforcing quality standards. It will fund a feasibility study for introduction and promotion
of LED lights in the country.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The main investment components will support electricity access and clean energy
services in the rural areas of Bangladesh where grid electricity has not reached or is not
expected in years to come.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
   Ms Sabah Moyeen (SASDS)
   Mr Iqbal Ahmed (SASDI)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                    X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed additional financing to the Rural Electrification and Renewable Energy
Development II (RERED II- P131263) is targeted to further promote and scaling-up
access to electricity through renewable energy by installing solar home systems and other
options. No major changes are envisaged in the scope of the proposed additional
financing except that the energy efficient lighting component is proposed to be dropped.

 The project yields net positive environmental impacts. The project is designated as
environmental Category B (partial assessment) according to OP/BP of the Bank and only
two environmental safeguard policies OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.10 have been triggered.
No significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and social issues are expected in
the sub-projects financed under the project.

  The project components mainly deal with the solar panels and batteries. The
mini/micro-grid (Solar based system) does not associate with air or water pollution
during operation phase. The improper disposal/ recycling of lead-acid storage battery and
improper disposal of PV panel of solar system and slurry for biogas are identified as key
anticipated negative impacts and appropriate safeguards have been put in place. Several
measures have been undertaken by the infrastructure Development Company Limited
(IDCOL) to ensure the long lifetime of PV panel, proper collection of expired PV panel
and batteries, strengthen SHS battery recycling including refinancing for battery
replacement, and enhanced incentives for POs and manufacturers for collection of
expired batteries. All battery recyclers and battery manufacturers rare required to have
ISO 14001:2004 and OHSAS 18001:2007 certifications. Enhanced incentives and
monitoring systems have been put in place to ensure that the expired batteries are
collected by the POs and sold to compliant recycling facilities for ensuring proper
recycling. Although the additional financing does not cover biogas plants for cooking,
the original credit supports such plants. An environmental screening/assessment along
with the mitigation plan has been put in place.
  No public land will be used for the Project, and no land acquisition will be financed
under the Project. Land required for the RAPSS sub-projects will be private lands made
available by the sub-project sponsors via direct purchase or by leasing. IDCOL requires
that the land for the sub-projects is free of disputes and encumbrances. All land
transactions are documented as part of sub-project due diligence by IDCOL. All land for
Project use, whether made available via direct purchase or leasing, will be screened to
ensure that no physical or economic displacement of communities/persons will take
place, and lands which are disputed or have encroachments on them (informal settlers,
non-titled entities) will not be used for the Project. It may be mentioned that such
encumbrances are very rare in rural areas.

 The Project may extend facilities in areas where indigenous people (IPs) live and
therefore Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP/BP4.10) has been triggered. Availing the
facilities/services/products under the components of the Project is purely on a voluntary
basis for all paying customers (including IPs). No negative impacts are anticipated
towards IPs. In cases of project activities in the IP areas like Chittagong Hill Tracts, the
POs are well-versed in IP languages to offer adequate consultation on maintenance of
products, proper usage of facilities offered, awareness raising, and training. A Tribal
Peoples Framework (TPF) has been prepared and included in the ESMF based on which
sub-project specific Tribal Peoples Plans will be developed as and where relevant. The
POs will undertake free, prior and informed consultations with IPs on maintenance of
products, proper usage of facilities, awareness raising and training as laid out in the TPF.
Although OP 4.10 was not triggered for the previous phase, IDCOL has maintained the
consultation process and has conducted regular field based monitoring of the processes.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The major environmental concerns of the original project were: (i) improper disposal/
recycling of lead-acid storage battery used in SHS; and (ii) health impact of mercury
from improper disposal of CFL bulbs. However in the proposed additional financing, the
energy efficient lighting component that supported deployment of CFL bulbs is proposed
to be dropped (adopting a national guideline for safe disposal of CFLs will continue to be
supported and the consultant work on developing the guideline is continuing). The
implementing agencies will take measures to ensure appropriate collection and recycling
of lead-acid batteries following the World Bank Group Occupational Health and safety
Guidelines. Also improper disposal of PV panel of solar systems is identified as
anticipated negative environmental impacts in the updated ESMF. The PV panels have to
comply with the standards of the Technical Standard Committee of IDCOL that requires
20-year warranty for panels. IDCOL will develop a guideline for safe disposal of PV
panels so that when the panels reach the end of their useful lives, there is an adequate
mechanism in place for ensuring safe disposal of the panels. . All the expired batteries
will be collected at the offices of Partner Organizations (PO) and Battery suppliers at
each division in Bangladesh to ensure the proper collection and recycling. The battery
manufacturing and recycling plants are required to have ISO 14001:2004 (Environmental
Management Standard) and OHSAS 18001:2007 (Occupational Health Safety Standard)
certifications to ensure proper recycling of batteries. For biogas plants, an environmental
screening/assessment along with the mitigation plan by the project sponsor for any
number of cattles/birds or any location (urban or rural) is required. IDCOL reviews the
plan and visits the project site and assesses the suitability of the site in respect to
environmental and social and safeguards. Such plans are shared with the relevant
stakeholders.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
No alternative analysis was carried out at this stage. However, alternative options will be
explored during the sub-project identification and design phase for mini depending on the
environmental and social impact assessments. The purpose of this Framework is to
identify the likely environmental and social impacts, propose suitable alternatives and
mitigation measures for solar home systems, mini-grids, micro-grids, biogas and biomass
based captive plants, biogas digesters for cooking, improved cookstoves, and solar
irrigation pumps.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Legislative bases for Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) in Bangladesh are the
Environmental Conservation Act 1995 (ECA'95) and the Environmental Conservation
Rules 1997 (ECR'97). Department of Environment (DOE), under the Ministry of
Environment and Forest (MOEF), is the regulatory body responsible for enforcing the
ECA'95 and ECR'97. Other law of Bangladesh like Renewable Energy Policy of
Bangladesh (2008), Bangladesh Labor Law (2006), etc. will be obliged for the project.
The ESMF will also be guided by the World Bank's Safeguards (Relevant Policies)
mainly OP 4.01.

 The implementing agency IDCOL has already gained considerable experience in
implementing Bank-supported projects complying with the environmental and social
safeguards requirements of the World Bank and various other development partners and
also that of the Department of Environment (DOE). IDCOL has already established the
Environment and Social Safeguards Management Unit (ESMU) to institutionalize the
environmental and social management in its operation. IDCOL has a full-time
environment staff member who is working with the POs and battery
manufacturers/suppliers to raise awareness about the importance of environmental and
social safeguards and to discuss the environmental impacts of improper disposal or
recycle of lead-acid batteries. Another staff has been appointed and will join from May
2014. Visits are made by the staff to all battery recycling plants on half-yearly basis for
ensuring environment compliance. Environmental and social consultants appointed by
the sub-project sponsors guide the sponsors in preparing and reviewing the environmental
and social assessment/screening for subprojects.

 No public land is used for the Project, and no land acquisition will be financed under the
Project. Land required for the sub-projects are private lands made available by the sub-
project sponsors via direct purchase or by leasing. The implementing agency requires
that the land for the sub-projects is free of disputes and encumbrances. All land for
Project use, whether made available via direct purchase or leasing, is screened to ensure
that no physical or economic displacement of communities/persons will take place, and
lands which are disputed or have encroachments on them (informal settlers, non-titled
entities) are not used for the project.

  The project may extend facilities in areas where indigenous people (IPs) live although
availing the facilities/services/products under the access to electricity and household
energy components of the Project is purely on a voluntary basis for all paying customers
(including IPs). No negative impacts are anticipated towards the IPs. Considering the
fact that SHS are reaching the IPs and other sub-projects under RAPSS will reach the IPs,
the indigenous People's policy (OP4.10) has now been triggered and a Tribal People's
Framework (TPF) has been adopted.

  A Gender Responsive Social Assessment for the RERED II Project was carried out in
2012 during the original phase of the project. The detailed assessment design was based
on the experience of the predecessor RERED project taking into account the learning and
feedback from the project beneficiaries. Using a gender lens of analysis, the assessment
report explored the impacts, problems and opportunities in the Solar Home Systems
(SHS), improved cook stoves (ICS) and biogas plants for cooking in the lives of women
living in remote rural areas. Based on those findings and recommendations, IDCOL has
introduced several measures like incorporating requirements in its SHS installation
manual to consult with the women in the households before putting in the light
connections, training female motivators to market door to door about the biogas plants
supported under the project, introducing cook stove models that are suitable for women
etc.

 Several measures have been undertaken by IDCOL to strengthen the battery recycling
under the SHS component of the REREDII project that includes refinancing for battery
replacement and enhanced incentives for POs and manufacturers for collection of expired
batteries.

 The following are the major progress achieved under the ongoing REREDII (and the
predecessor RERED) projects:

 •      All the 17 battery suppliers in IDCOL in SHS program have fully completed the
ISO 14001:2004 (Environmental Management Standard) and OHSAS 18001:2007
(Occupational Health Safety Standard) certification process. Out of the existing 17
battery suppliers, 3 have their own recycling plants while the rest have entered into
arrangements with the existing 3 recycling plants to use their facilities.

 •      For the efficient lighting component (now proposed to be dropped), an
international consultant firm has been hired to develop a national guideline for the proper
disposal of lamps and ensure safe collection of waste CFL bulbs. The work is currently
on-going and will continue to ensure safe disposal of CFLs that are being used in
Bangladesh.
 •      Audit Consultants (Environment Audit specialist and Mechanical Engineering
Specialist) are being hired for undertaking an environment audit to assess the adequacy of
the current mechanism for ensuring proper recycling of batteries.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders are the project beneficiaries who are availing the project
services (solar home systems, connections from mini-grids, water supply from solar
irrigation pumps, or biogas digesters for cooking) through a commercial transaction on a
purely willing buyer-willing seller basis. As part of the commercial transactions, the
participating organizations (POs) consult with the potential customers about the benefits
of the project services and the beneficiaries (households/shops for SHS or mini-grid
connections or farmers for water supply from pumps) will have to agree to buy the
project services and pay for the services. In cases of project activities in the indigenous
people areas like Chittagong Hill Tracts, the POs are well-versed in IP languages to reach
out to potential customers.

 A monthly Operational Committee meeting is held with the senior representative of all
partner organizations (POs) participating in the program where different issues pertaining
to project implementation are discussed.

 The implementing agency (IDCOL) has an established method for addressing
grievances in this project. All customers relevant to all sub-projects are given the contact
numbers for IDCOL Customer Care Center which is staffed by male and female
members. All complaints are recorded and a computerized documentation process shows
exactly which complaints have been resolved and which require follow-up. Complaints
are then registered at the relevant branch offices of the partner organizations (POs) where
they are resolved. If the complaint is not resolved within a reasonable time, the issue is
discussed at the monthly Operational Committee Meetings. In the rare event that
complaints are not resolved at this stage also, the customer is free to go for legal action.

  An environmental management and social management framework (ESMF) was
adopted under the original RERED project, which was updated during the two additional
financing of RERED. The ESMF has been further reviewed and revised for the RERED
II Project. The update was mostly to reflect the dropping of the efficient lighting
component and for including the tribal people's framework (TPF). The updated ESMF of
RERED II Additional Financing includes an assessment of the progress on the
compliance of the activities undertaken in the existing ESMF. The ESMF includes
appropriate templates for environment and social screening including the tribal people's
framework. Where needed, an Environment Management Plan (EMP), a Social
Management Plan (SMP) and Tribal People Development Plan (TPP) will be prepared for
sub-projects. The updated ESMF has been prepared by IDCOL in a series of
consultations with the relevant project stakeholders including POs (NGOs), battery
manufacturers, existing and potential users of renewable energy technologies, and other
agencies. The updated ESMF along with the summary of the ESMF in Bengali language
has been disclosed in IDCOL website on April 20, 2014 and in World Bank Infoshop on
April 21, 2014. The environmental screening/assessment for different sub-projects will
include mandatory consultations in the field level.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/20/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/20/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/21/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  04/20/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/20/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/21/2014
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?             Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)         Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the         Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
  appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   Yes
  and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Zubair K.M. Sadeque                       04/20/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi                     04/20/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Sabah Moyeen                              04/20/2014
Additional Environmental and/or     Mr Iqbal Ahmed                               04/20/2014
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano                        05/01/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Julia Bucknall                            05/01/2014
  Comments:
