                                                                                      84640
                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET

TF.No.: TF015843
Date prepared/updated: December 9, 2013

I. Basic Information

1. Bas1c   ' tD at a
      ' ProJec
Country: BANGLADESH                            Project ID: Pl47682
                                               Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Bangladesh- Journey for Advancement in Transparency, Representation and
Accountability (JATRA)
Task Team Leader: JosefTrommer
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 18, 2013 Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: WBIGA                          Lending Instrument: Small RETF
Sectors: Public Sector (60%) and Social Development (40%)
Themes: Budget Monitoring
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source:
        Multi Donor Trust Funds                                              644~138


Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                    Yes []                  No []
Simplified Processing                            Simple [x]              Repeater [x]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes []       No [x]
and Emergencies)                                                                  I
2. Project Objectives:

The development objective of this grant is to ensure that the Union Parishad (UP) public finance
management systems are strengthened, transparent and aligned with the Local Government Act
of2009.

3. Project Description:

The Project will seek constructive collaboration and effective networks that will be established
with national and local government institutions, civil society organizations and platforms, and
the media to scale-up best practices on participatory and transparent budget processes. For
example, . the Project will closely coordinate its activities with the Government's LGSP.
Through this collaboration local and national government institutions are expected to benefit
from improved accountability mechanisms which will ultimately strengthen the local
                       and                                                                        of
 Bangladesh.

                                                            to

  The core objective of this component is to support citizens (especially women and pro-poor
 leaders) to engage influencing budget                and monitoring expenditure and the quality of
 services. More specifically, this component will work towards institutionalizing transparent,
 inclusive and responsive budget mechanisms to benefit UP local communities, especially poor
 and marginalized households. Building on existing participatory forums such as: Open Budget
 Meeting, Ward Sava, Union Development Coordination Meeting, the Project will work with the
 Local Government Division, National Institute of Local Government, Horizontal Learning
 Center (HLC) and other development initiatives to support specific capacity building activities
 directed at local leaders (focusing on women). Furthermore, community score-cards will be
 developed to monitor public service delivery and social audit tools will be used to monitor the
 quality of key public infrastructure. Finally, Public expenditure tracking systems will be put-in-
 place throughout the 15 targeted unions to monitor public expenditures and collect information.
·The Project will work in close association with the HLP and the LGSP/LIC to ensure that
 government trainings (e.g. local PEM I and II) are delivered to local leaders targeted by this
 Project.

Component 2: Sirengthen provision          access to information.
This component aims to improve the provision and the access to information as stipulated by the
Right to Information Act. The main objective is to support transparency in the operations ofthe
Union Parishad. All the avenues for sharing information regarding UP budget will be
strengthened. Basic information package on "UP Budgeting Process" and "Participatory
Governance" will be shared using local folk groups in local hatbazaar. The project will also
support UPs to print citizens' charter which will be made available at the UP. It is planned to
build partnerships with media outlets at the local and national level. Information will be provided
through local radio and newspaper, using the UP notice boards, the Information centers and a UP
help line.

Component 3: Influencing social accountability practitioners with knowledge and learning for
improved results.
This component will focus on generating learning from the project to influence development
practitioners, government counterpmi and donors to support the effective implementation of
social accountability tools for transparent and accountable UP budget processes. The project will
facilitate "peer to peer" learning for horizontal scaling up. More specifically, this component will
(in collaboration with BRAC Development Institute and Horizontal Learning Program under
Local Government Division and National Institute of Local Government) generate knowledge
materials appropriate for a wider targeted audience. The project will also organize lessons
learning and advocacy workshops to share knowledge products. It is expected that media outlets
will also play a key role in disseminating key lessons produced under this component.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
The targeted population to be supported by funding through the GPSA is approximately 30,000
extreme poor households; specifically those headed by marginalized women, in the targeted 15
unions. Using existing poverty maps the Project will capitalize on already identified local
leadership (with a specific focus on strengthening women leadership) to help articulate and find
solutions to public service delivery problems faced by targeted communities.

As these activities only involving administrative works and training or workshop, no salient
physical characteristics from these locations are relevant to the safeguard analysis.


5. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                          Yes             No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                          X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                     X
P4Ysical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                      X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                   X
Pro.iects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                             X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                       X


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

   A. Summary of Key Safeguards Issues

  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and
  describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  There are no safeguards issues and impacts associated with this Project given the geographic
  scope of implementation. The regions where it will be implemented do not have indigenous
  people.
  The Project· consists of information gathering to identify gaps and opportunities to
  strengthen local budget planning and monitoring ultimately improving their legitimacy,
  effectiveness in delivering services and revenues. Project activities include monitoring and
  evaluation tool of local budget decisions, training for local stakeholders, advocacy activities to
  educate citizens and mobilize public action for government accountability and improved
  service, and creation of a civil society working group to disseminate the information to a
  broader community, and hence will not have any large-scale, significant, or irreversible
  environmental or social impact. Furthermore, no physical intervention will be involved.

  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
  activities in the project area:
  There are no potential significant long-term adverse impacts triggered by this Project.
  3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
                                                      3




remail!ls as defined in                  i'liHl   ISDS,
                 el!!vinmmenta! or   §Odll.l
