                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1074

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                       Project ID:      P149734
                            Project Name:      BD RIVER BANK IMPROVEMENT PROJECT - PHASE 1 (P149734)
                            Task Team          Abedalrazq F. Khalil
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Jul-2015                      Estimated        15-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Flood protection (70%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                               (15%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry secto r (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Water resource management (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (15%),
                                               Other environment and natural resources management (15%), Other rural
                                               development (20%), Natural disaster management (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    580.00                     Total Bank Financing:        500.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            80.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  500.00
                              Total                                                                        580.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of this program is to reduce the adverse impacts of flooding and erosion along the
                           Brahmaputra right embankment, enhance its sustainable management and improve accessibility
                           along the BRE corridor.
                         The project specific PDO is to improve flood and erosion management capacity, and increase
                         protection against river flooding and erosion along selected sections of the Brahmaputra River.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project RBIP-I (i.e. Phase I of the RBIP program) consists of the following
                         components:

                         Component A: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Brahmaputra River Embankment Scheme (US
                         $375 million). This component would primarily consist of the civil works required for rehabilitation
                         of embankment schemes and associated river bank protection works.

                         Component A1: Flood Embankment Rehabilitation and Improvement (US$ 105 million). This
                         component aims to increase community resilience to flooding. It will finance systematic
                         strengthening of the existing degraded embankments and repairing and upgrading the associated
                         drainage for improved flood management of project area. It is expected that 60-70km of embankment
                         will be rehabilitated under this component.

                         Component A2: River Bank Protection and Revetment (US$ 270 million). This component aims to
                         increase community resilience to bank erosion and to provide increased protection against river
                         attacks and embankment breaches. It is expected that 60-70 km of riverbank protection will be
                         strengthened to cover priority areas that endanger the stability of the embankment.

                         Component B: Implementation of Social and Environmental Management Plans (US$135 million).
                         This component will implement the planned social and environmental programs to address the
                         negative social environmental issues under the project, including resettlement, and provide
                         development assistance to local communities in the project area.

                         Component B1: Resettlement and Social Development (US$ 120 million). The aim of the Social and
                         Resettlement Management Plan (SRMP) is to mitigate the adverse impacts of the project, improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the living standard of those affected and provide assistance to promote local area development along
                         the embankments, by addressing the social dimensions of the project, and finance implementation of
                         such plans. The proposed civil works will require land acquisition (i.e., approximately 330 ha) and
                         relocation of many people (i.e. in average 70 households per km of the priority reach with average
                         family size is of four per household, a total of some 20,000 people). The SRMP plans: (i)
                         compensation for lost assets, resettlement and livelihood restoration for the population affected by
                         the project; (ii) gender and public health action plans; iii) a communication strategy, grievance
                         mechanism and a plan for ongoing stakeholder engagement; and iv) local development assistance to
                         communities along the embankment.

                         Component B2: Environmental Management (US$ 15 million). All construction-related
                         environmental issues would be addressed in the construction contracts; thus the cost of such
                         measures is included in Components A. This component would include those aspects which are not
                         or cannot be covered under construction contracts, including measures addressing indirect and
                         cumulative impacts, development and implementation of programs for ecological conservation, and
                         costs associated with monitoring and supervision of Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                         implementation. This will also support the development of EIAs for all remaining embankment and
                         river bank protection works and road development to be carried out in subsequent phases of the
                         proposed program.
                         Component C: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building of BWDB, Technical Assistance and
                         Training and Future Project Preparation and Strategic Studies (US$ 20 million). This includes:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C1: Strengthening of BWDB, Independent Panel of Experts and Technical Assistance
                         (US$ 15 million). This sub-component will provide strategic support for enhancing central-level
                         institutional capacity and increase the use of non-structural measures in flood and erosion
                         management. It will also strengthen BWDB capacity to carry out effective operation and
                         maintenance (O&M) programs of the embankment scheme and the associated river bank revetment
                         and road. This will also aim to improve O&M divisions and monitoring cells through office
                         upgrading, capacity building, and modern survey equipment to support timely embankment O&M.
                         This subcomponent will also develop BWDB capacity for community mobilization for sustainable
                         O&M. This will also support the development of embankmentasset management system and improve
                         the flood early warning systems. It will also support the recruitment of independent panel of experts
                         to provide expert technical advice necessary for efficiently and effectively addressing the flooding,
                         river control, economic, environmental and social impacts, and other project related issues as well as
                         provide BWDB with long term strategic planning regarding Jamuna River management.

                         Component C2: Future Project Preparation and Strategic Studies (US$ 5 million). This sub-
                         component would support strategic studies to address technical, financial, or management issues,
                         mitigation measures, pilot nonstructural interventions and plans and preparation of future projects
                         that may be identified during Project implementation and agreed upon with the Bank. For examples,
                         this subcomponent would finance: (i) strategic studies including the continuous updating of the
                         strategic assessment /master plan to look into river training, flood control schemes, and river
                         navigation and other preparatory studies for following phases of the RBIP; (ii) a feasibility study to
                         assess different toll options; and (iii) establish framework of collaboration among allied institutions
                         to improve integration of structural and nonstructural measures in flood and erosion management and
                         overall water resources planning.

                         Component D: Project Management Support, Construction Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the Project Impacts and Social and Environmental Management Plan (US$ 50 million). This
                         includes:

                         Component D1: Construction Supervision and Implementation Support (US$ 25 million). This sub-
                         component would cover the cost of consulting and other services for the Project implementation. It
                         will finance consulting services for (i) surveys, designs of remaining embankment improvement and
                         (ii) construction supervision of civil works. It would also cover implementation of all activities under
                         the Project, including: procurement, contract administration, quality control, certification of
                         payments, financial management, preparation of any additional designs, and bidding documents.

                         Component D2: Third Party Monitoring and Evaluation of Project, and Supervision of GAPP, EMP,
                         SRAP (US$5 million). This sub-component aims at ensuring effective Project monitoring and
                         evaluation. It will finance consulting services for continuously monitoring project activities and
                         providing feedback to the government and the implementing agency on the Project’s performance.
                         This includes supervising the implementation of the Governance and Accountability Action Plan
                         (GAAP), EMP and Social Resettlement Action Plan (SRAP). This will be provided through third
                         party assessment and monitoring of key aspects of project/program implementation.

                         Component D3: Project Management Support and Audit (US$ 20 million). This sub-component
                         would support BWDB in implementing Project-related activities, including support for operation of
                           the Project Management Unit (PMU), capacity building, and incremental allowances for Project's
                           staff, operational cost, and audits, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project Cost

                           The total project cost is US$ 580.00 million, of which physical works account for US$ 375.0 million
                           and land acquisition and resettlement cost amounts to US$ 120.0 million. RBIP-I will be financed
                           by: (i) IDA is expected to contribute 80 percent of works and land cost and 100% of other costs with
                           total financing of about US$500 million; and (ii) GOB is expected to contribute 20 percent to works,
                           land acquisition and resettlement.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project location covers the Brahmaputra right-bank from Jamuna Bridge to Hasnapara. This is
                           expected to cover approximately 60-70 km that is exposed to high erosion rates (i.e. priority reach).
                           Follow-on phases of the program are expected to cover the entire Brahmaputra right embankment up
                           to Dudkumar River in Kurigram district. The project's physical works will include river bank
                           protection on portions of the western (right) bank, embankment upgrading, reconstruction and
                           realignment, and drainage improvement works. The proposed civil works will require land
                           acquisition and relocation of many people (i.e. an average of 70 households per km of the priority
                           reach with average family size of four per household). Nearly two-thirds of those affected live on
                           embankments.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Bangladesh Water Development Board (BWDB) has the sole mandate for the construction,
                           rehabilitation, and operation and maintenance of flood control embankments in Bangladesh.
                           Riverbank protection has also been included under the scope for better water management in the
                           major rivers. BWDB has a long experience in implementing Bank financed projects. Its collaboration
                           with the World Bank has started back in the 70's with the Coastal Area Rehabilitation Project (Cr
Public Disclosure Copy




                           339-BD). It satisfactorily implemented the Coastal Embankment Rehabilitation Project (Cr. 27830)
                           between 1996-2002. It is currently implementing three World Bank financed projects: Component C
                           of Emergency Recovery and Restoration Project (Cr. 45070); Water Management Improvement
                           Project; and Coastal Embankment Improvement Project. Although BWDB is well-versed in
                           implementing Environment Management Plan and Social/Resettlement Management Plans in
                           accordance with Bank guidelines and procedures, it does not have dedicated professionals or unit on
                           environmental and social management with qualified staff. Project management unit will be
                           equipped with specialized staff to undertake such responsibilities for the proposed project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaohua Zhang (GSURR)
                           Leanne Farrell (GENDR)
                           Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
                           Nadia Sharmin (GSURR)
                           Md. Akhtaruzzaman (GSURR)
                           Iqbal Ahmed (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project activities will widely involve major
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     civil works by reconstruction and rehabilitation
                                                                     of the embankment to protect against flooding.
                                                                     Since the Jamuna River is of high ecological
                                                                     sensitivity and vulnerability, there might be
                                                                     certain negative environmental impacts on river
                                                                     ecology and fish migration during the
                                                                     implementation and operational phase of the
                                                                     river bank improvement project.
                                                                     The key potentially negative impacts and issues
                                                                     associated with the proposed project include
                                                                     changes in land form and land use, resettlement
                                                                     of people, land acquisition, use of natural
                                                                     resources particularly river sand, handling of
                                                                     hazardous materials, solid waste generation, air
                                                                     quality deterioration, noise generation,
                                                                     contamination and land and water, changes in
                                                                     aquatic habitats, loss of trees, risk of accidents,
                                                                     effects on water bodies, water logging due to
                                                                     blockage of local routes, and impacts on
                                                                     sensitive receptors such as schools.
                                                                     BWDB is undertaking the detail Environmental
                                                                     Assessment (EA) for priority reach including
                                                                     the Cumulative Environmental Assessment of
                                                                     the overall program and an Environmental
                                                                     Management Framework (EMF) for remaining
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     part.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          Brahmaputra/Jamuna river is declared as the
                                                                     KBA (Key Biological Area). The impact on
                                                                     river ecology is the destruction of important
                                                                     feeding and breeding biotopes for virtually all
                                                                     aquatic fauna, especially fish in the submerged
                                                                     parts of the embankment. Fishing activities on
                                                                     the charlands may also be impacted due to loss
                                                                     of breeding and spawning areas along the
                                                                     embankment. The impact on natural habitats
                                                                     will be assessed during the Environmental
                                                                     Impact Assessment. If any of the affected
                                                                     habitats constitute critical natural habitats as per
                                                                     this policy, the project will make all efforts to
                                                                     avoid significant conversion or degradation, and
                                                                     to offset any such impacts that cannot be
                                                                     avoided. Fish migration (between tributaries /
                                                                     floodplain canals and the Jamuna) will be
                                                                     considered as a Valuable Environmental
                                                                 Components (VECs) of the cumulative
                                                                 environmental assessment.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   Initial impact assessment under the feasibility
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 study indicates that there are forested areas in
                                                                 the project area, consisting of either closed
                                                                 forest formations or open forest. The full EIA
                                                                 will include a comprehensive baseline of forest
                                                                 resources, and assessment of the extent to which
                                                                 the project may affect them. If affected, efforts
                                                                 will be made to avoid and minimize their loss or
                                                                 degradation wherever possible, and to mitigate
                                                                 and compensate for any unavoidable losses.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   The proposed project will result in changes in
                                                                 land use, which may include intensification of
                                                                 agricultural production in the newly flood-
                                                                 protected areas. The exact nature and extent of
                                                                 this potential impact, including the extent to
                                                                 which increased use of chemicalpesticides or
                                                                 fertilizers may result, will be identified through
                                                                 the environmental impact assessment. The
                                                                 decision on triggering this policy will therefore
                                                                 be finalized at the appraisal stage. If required, a
                                                                 Pest Management Plan will be developed.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The countryside of the current embankment is
                         BP 4.11                                 densely populated which may have a number of
                                                                 public places like schools, open-air gathering
                                                                 spaces (i.e. Eid gah), mosques etc. These places
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 may be impacted due to the project intervention.
                                                                 The EIA will fully identify all known physical
                                                                 cultural resources that may be affected, and
                                                                 appropriate mitigation measures will be
                                                                 discussed with local communities and included
                                                                 in the EMP. In addition, the EMP will include
                                                                 ‘chance find’ procedures for contractors in the
                                                                 event of discovery of an unknown resource
                                                                 during the course of construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The Brahmaputra Right Embankment (BRE)
                                                                 covers the bankline upazilas of Sirajganj, Bogra,
                                                                 Gaibandha and Kurigram districts of North
                                                                 West Bangladesh. Initial social impact
                                                                 assessment under the feasibility study indicates
                                                                 that there are no indigenous communities
                                                                 residing in the project area and therefore, no
                                                                 impacts on them are expected under the project.
                                                                 This has been confirmed in the priority reach
                                                                 where investments will be carried out under the
                                                                proposed project. However, this finding will be
                                                                further reviewed through the detailed
                                                                assessments to be carried out during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                implementation for the subsequent phases.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Investment in embankment improvement in the
                         4.12                                   project area will require relocation of a large
                                                                number of people from existing embankments
                                                                and from lands to be used for embankment
                                                                improvement and rehabilitation works along the
                                                                bank of the river Brahmaputra/Jamuna.
                                                                Incessant river erosion and floods have
                                                                devoured huge areas of lands in the bankline
                                                                upazilas, displacing large numbers of people
                                                                and forcing many of them to live in temporary
                                                                shelters on the embankments. The people on the
                                                                embankments are among the poorest in the
                                                                country.

                                                                A development-oriented resettlement program
                                                                is, therefore, required not only to mitigate the
                                                                impacts of their relocation, but also improve
                                                                their livelihoods and living conditions. Such a
                                                                resettlement program will also help keep the
                                                                embankments accessible for future maintenance.

                                                                BWDB has conducted a social assessment along
                                                                the priority reach for the proposed flood and
                                                                erosion control scheme. Land is required for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                proposed alignment and ensuring up-to-date
                                                                design standards. These will lead to involuntary
                                                                displacement of people and temporary impact
                                                                on livelihoods of some of the embankment
                                                                settlers.

                                                                BWDB is developing a Social Action Plan as
                                                                part of the project design. The Social Action
                                                                Plan includes the following: (1) A development-
                                                                oriented resettlement program with the aim of
                                                                not only mitigating adverse impacts, but also
                                                                improving their livelihoods and living
                                                                conditions; (2) A resettlement policy framework
                                                                for the entire riverbank improvement program;
                                                                (3) A gender action plan; (4) A public health
                                                                action plan; (5) A local area development
                                                                assistance program; and (6) Grievance
                                                                mechanism and a plan for ongoing stakeholder
                                                                engagement.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered, as the project is not
                                                                                                                                 constructing any new dams, nor does it rely on
                                                                                                                                 an existing dam. Nonetheless, while the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 embankments are not technically “dams”, many
                                                                                                                                 of the same risks and concerns associated with
                                                                                                                                 potential dam failure are also relevant in the
                                                                                                                                 context of the embankments. The project has
                                                                                                                                 therefore convened an international Panel of
                                                                                                                                 Experts to provide guidance on diverse project
                                                                                                                                 aspects including technical, environmental and
                                                                                                                                 social. The technical reviews to be provided by
                                                                                                                                 the panel will look at embankment safety
                                                                                                                                 aspects and provide guidance to BWDB on
                                                                                                                                 design aspects to minimize structural risks of
                                                                                                                                 breaching or failure of the embankments.
                                                                                                                                 Safety monitoring and emergency management
                                                                                                                                 plans will also be developed and implemented
                                                                                                                                 through the project.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           International Waterways Policy is applicable for
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            the proposed project since the proposed flood
                                                                                                                                 and erosion control scheme is located in the
                                                                                                                                 Brahmaputra River Basin which is an
                                                                                                                                 international river basin. Bangladesh is the most
                                                                                                                                 downstream country of the Brahmaputra/
                                                                                                                                 Jamuna River and the proposed project is not
                                                                                                                                 expected to adversely change the quality or
                                                                                                                                 quantity of water flow to the other riparian.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in any disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Apr-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      All Social and Environmental studies will be completed by February 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Abedalrazq F. Khalil

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 14-Nov-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: William D. Kingdom (PMGR)                                                                                            Date: 14-Nov-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
