INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO74
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P151544
Project Name:    MSME Growth Innovation and Inclusive Finance Project (P151544)
Task Team        Niraj Verma
Leader:
Estimated        05-Jan-2015                Estimated     24-Feb-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       SME Finance (100%)
Theme(s):        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (80%), Other Financial Sector
Development (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     550.00             Total Bank Financing:   500.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         50.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           500.00
Total                                                           550.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
16. The proposed PDO is: 'to improve access to finance of startups and MSMEs in manufacturing
and service sectors including through innovative financial products".
17. By doing so, the project aims to contribute to a broader overarching development objective of
fostering inclusive economic growth, including through coverage of low income states and first


﻿generation and other early stage entrepreneurs, and increasing jobs. Funded MSMEs are expected to
be formal sector firms.
C. Project Description
The project aims to contribute to a broader overarching development objective of fostering inclusive
economic growth, including through coverage of low income states and first generation and other
early stage entrepreneurs, and increasing jobs. The PDO is proposed to be achieved through
implementation of three project components and a parallel technical assistance (TA):
Component 1: Spurring early stage finance: Component 1 will support pioneering early stage debt
financing (including angel and venture debt) where angel investment has already been provided. This
specifically addresses one of the key recommendations, amongst others, identified in the Mitra
Committee (2012) to develop and scale up debt offerings in order to build a pipeline of startups that
will contribute to a vibrant entrepreneurial ecosystem in India.
Component 2: Supporting service sector financing models: Component 2 will provide funding for
direct financing by SIDBI and refinancing to Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) to introduce
new models of financing and financial products that improve the collateral requirements using asset-
light models of financing and are hence tailored to the needs of the services sector (for example non
fund based products; financing against movable assets).
This component could also support the scale up of financing models to service sector firms through
improved credit appraisal criteria. This could leverage industry associations for specific sector
knowledge and to reduce information asymmetries and credit risk. Cluster centric financing models
based on tested and tried models of cluster financing and development (including through financing
links fostered with industry associations) could be explored, building on SIDBI's past experience
with industry associations. In addition, a particular focus on franchisee financing would be explored
as the franchising industry in India is expected to quadruple between 2012 and 2017 contributing to
almost 4 percent of India's GDP in 2017 from a current estimated 1.4 percent of GDP. The industry
is also expected to create job opportunities for an additional 11 to 14 million people by 2017,
contributing to the overall India's objective of 10-15 million jobs per year for the next decade. If
achieved the industry will account for almost 10 percent of the total estimated workforce. Further,
scaling up and developing further the existing models of service sector financing that SIDBI has been
piloting, will also be supported
Component 3: Supporting finance to manufacturing MSMEs: Component 3 will support access to
finance of MSMEs in the manufacturing sector, in line with SIDBI new focus on manufacturing.
Through (mainly) indirect financing through SIDBI and other financial intermediaries the component
will complement bank lending to the sector. By increasing the flow of competitive credit to
manufacturing MSMEs, the project will contribute to improved competitiveness of the MSMEs and
job creation, in line with the importance accorded to the sector by the Gol.
Models of cluster financing/vendor financing and development could be among the financing models
supported under this component. In addition, synergies with banks/institutions that have a
predominant presence in identified clusters would be developed. Particular attention will be to
expand manufacturing activity in financially underserved areas, including low income states, and in
doing so links will be fostered with other sub-national ongoing work.
This component could also facilitate Loan Extension Services to MSMEs. In that light, the lending


﻿activities under this component would be supplemented with Loan Extension Services (LES), where
each loan appraisal could go through a quick opportunity assessment for overall improvement of the
unit. These services would tap a wide range of improvements including energy efficiency, cleaner
production, lean management, and so forth, which would contribute to increase MSMEs competitive
O
U       advantage.
Parallel technical assistance to PFIs: Efforts will be made to include coordinated financing of
technical assistance funds to support capacity building particularly in areas of research and
development on early stage financing models and PFI (including SIDBI) capacity building in credit
appraisal and new product development. This component will be funded through parallel but
coordinated development partner funding from partners - discussions have been initiated with
partners such as GiZ (German agency for technical cooperation that was part of the Bank led
previous SME financing project with SID BI and currently has an existing TA engagement with
SIDBI) and IFC. Support will also be provided for implementation support to SIDBI.
For each component, consultations with banks, industry associations, financing institutions and other
stakeholders will be conducted to ensure stakeholder inputs to the project and applicability, as well as
to leverage partnerships to maximize scale up.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will cover MSME industries across India. Specific locations of these industries will be
known once firms are identified by SIDBI as part of project implementation. The project will not
support any MSME operations that would result in: (i) land acquisition and displacement of people
(loss of assets, loss of livelihoods); (ii) adverse impacts on indigenous people (IP) collectively
present and/or attached to the MSME area of operation; and (iii) forced labor or child labor. Hence,
land acquisition and physical and economic displacement as well as impacts on IP is not anticipated.
Environmentally sensitive locations are not expected to be encountered and the majority of the
MSMEs supported under the project are expected to be located in designated industrial zones/areas
or in areas where commercial enterprises operate from. Further, a majority of MSMEs under the
project are expected to be service sector firms. In any case the sensitivities will be determined as part
of project implementation on a case to case basis as part of PFI's on lending appraisal process.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower, Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) in the past has implemented
SME Finance and Development Project (SMEFDP) financed by the World Bank. As part of this
project, SIDBI has streamlined the safeguards management mechanisms in to lending appraisal
mechanisms. In addition, SIDBI has streamlined the environmental credit risk management
mechanism in to their lending programs. Through the previous project, SIDBI has also taken credible
initiatives to build the capacity of loan officers. As part of the preparation of the current project, the
project team will assess the status of SIDBI's capacity in managing safeguards risks.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Sita Ramakrishna Addepalli (GENDR)
Sangeeta Kumari (GSURR)
Varun Singh (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies             Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes            The project is expected to extend the loans to
BP 4.01                                       MSME manufacturing sector through SIDBI as
o
the financial intermediary (for both direct and
indirect financing with participating financial
institutions). The project is expected to cover
range of industries which may include polluting
industries with environmental impacts. All the
industries are located in designated industrial
areas (or located where site clearance, consent
for establishments is ensured by pollution
control boards). The regulatory mechanism has
clear mandate on location of industries which
prevents industries in natural habitat areas.
While these systems are in place to address the
environmental impacts, there is a need to
address environmental risks from FI
perspective. SIDBI already has corporate
environmental management systems adopted as
part of the previous project (SMEFDP) support
by the Bank. The current status of these systems
need to be reviewed and fine-tuned to suit the
environmental safeguards risk management for
the current project. As part of the screening by
SIDBI, complying with ESMF provisions (prior
to sanctioning sub-loans), will ensure that
exclusion of lending for polluting MSME units
located near Natural Habitats, critically polluted
areas, and any other sensitive ecological areas
and reflected in the updated ESMF.
o   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
o   Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No             The project will be supporting service and
manufacturing enterprises that typically would
operate from designated industrial estates/zones
across the country or be located in areas where
commercial enterprises operate from. The
project will not be working with individual(s) or
communities but formal sector MSMEs which
are the primary beneficiary and stakeholder of
this project. The nature, size and specific


﻿locations of individual MSME sub-projects
exclude the possibility of locating them
randomly and as such IPs are not found in the
sub-project areas. Hence, the project is not
anticipated to have impacts on indigenous
people, their lands, culture, livelihood or way of
life.
 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No           The Project will cover MSME industries across
4.12                                           India. Specific locations of these industries will
be known once firms are identified by SIDBI as
part of project implementation. However,
majority of the SMEs supported under the
project are expected to be located in designated
industrial zones or in areas where commercial
enterprises operate from.
No compulsory land acquisition, displacement
of people or communities from private or public
lands or any negative impacts on livelihoods
will be permissible under the project. Hence,
land acquisition and physical and economic
displacement is not anticipated.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No
Projects on International       No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
In the past, SIDBI as part of"SME Finance and Development Project" financed by the Bank has
developed an Environmental and Social Risk Management Framework (ESMF) and has adopted
for streamlining SIDBI's lending processes for addressing the safeguards related risks, as well as
other social issues related to labor. As part of the project preparation, the current status of
safeguards management will be reviewed including the applicability of old ESMF for the current
project. This process would also identify the necessary updates required to meet the current
project's safeguards management requirements, including exclusion and screening checklists (land,
IPs), implementation capacity and monitoring and reporting systems. SIDBI will share the revised
ESMF for Bank's clearance and disclose it before appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader: Name: Niraj Verma
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)               Date: 08-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/   Name: Henry K Bagazonzya (PMGR)              Date: 08-Dec-2014
Manager:


