                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 10/10/2013                                    Report No.: AC7033
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P111272                 Original Project Name: Emergency 2007
                                             Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project
Country: Bangladesh                          Project ID: P146500
Project Name: Emergency 2007 Cyclone Recovery and Restoration Project-- AF II
Task Team Leader: Masood Ahmad
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 18,       Estimated Board Date: March 6, 2014
2013
Managing Unit: SASDA                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Other social services (60%);Flood protection (20%);Rural and Inter-Urban Roads
and Highways (10%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
Theme: Natural disaster management (90%);Climate change (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):            140
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development (PDO) Objectives will remain the same as for the original
project which is "to support Government of Bangladesh efforts to facilitate restoration
and recovery from the damage to livelihoods and infrastructure caused by Cyclone Sidr
and Cyclone Aila and to build long-term preparedness through strengthened disaster risk
management."

3. Project Description
No changes are proposed to the project's design or to the current implementation
arrangements. Additional Financing would continue to finance recovery and restoration
in nine districts severely affected by Cyclone Sidr and subsequently by Cyclone Aila.
The additional financing will have two components out of 6 components of the original
project. Monitoring and evaluation of project impact will be covered by original project.

 The Original Project Components:
 Component No.       Component Title
 A    Recovery of Agriculture Sector and Mid-term Improvement Program
 B    Reconstruction and Improvement of Multipurpose Shelters
 C    Rehabilitation of Coastal Embankments
 D    Long-Term Disaster Risk Management Program
 E    Monitoring and Evaluation of Project Impact
 F    Project Management, Technical Assistance, Strategic Studies and Training, and
Emergency Support for Future Disasters


 The project is currently implemented through the Departments of Agriculture, Livestock
and Fisheries in conjunction with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
(Component A), the Local Government Engineering Department (Component B and D3),
the Bangladesh Water Development Board (Component C and D2), the Disaster
Management Bureau (Component D1 and F2), the Project Coordination and Monitoring
Unit in the Ministry of Planning (Component F) and is overseen by a Project Steering
Committee. The description and activities of the components of Additional Financing are
given below:

 Component B: Construction and Improvement of Shelters (USD 78.50 Million)

  The additional financing would be used to rehabilitate/upgrade about 220 shelters and
build about new 100 shelters. Access roads to the improved and new shelters will be
improved for easy access by the communities. The shelters are multipurpose complex for
education and other social use in normal time. All shelters constructed are primary
schools, with separate bath rooms for men and women, safe water supply is ensured,
water treatment for wastewater is constructed and solar panel is provided and connection
to existing road is ensured by constructing a link, where needed. The class rooms are
provided with furniture and other teaching tools. Generally, one floor is constructed for
livestock and animals and top floor for human shelter. Floors have mosaic finish and
bath rooms have tiles for easy maintenance and cleaning etc. The shelters designed to
withstand wind speed of 260 km/hour and placed higher than the expected surge level.
Foundation is constructed to bear vertical addition in future if necessary. The same design
features will be continued in implementation of the additional financing.
  The Local Government Engineering Department (LGED) under the Ministry of Local
Governments implements the component B activities.
  Component No.         Component Title       Amount (USD Million)
  B1 Construction of New Shelter 40.0
  B2 Improvement of existing shelter          20.0
  B3 Improvement of Communication Network 15.0
  B4 Design and Supervision           3.5
  LGED cost 1.0
  Consultancy Contract         2.0
  Total 78.0

 Component C: Rehabilitation of Coastal Embankments (US$37.0 million):
 The objective of Component C is to rehabilitate coastal embankments damaged by
Cyclone Sidr. At the start of ECRRP, the Bangladesh Water Development Board
(BWDB) considered to rehabilitate and improve about 30 polders. However, the 9
contracts awarded for about 19 polders ran into slow implementation and contract
management issues. The additional financing will rehabilitate the remaining 10 polders
(one out of the remaining 11 polders was taken up under the Coastal Embankment
Improvement Program, Phase-I Project, which was recently approved).

 All existing covenants for ECRRP will apply for implementation of activities under
Additional Financing.
 Component No.        Component Title      Amount (USD Million)
 C1 Rehabilitation of Coastal Embankments          20.0
 C2 Design and Construction Supervision 0.5
 Total 20.5

 Component D2: Preparation of Future Projects (US$3.0 million).

 Additional financing is proposed for this component to continue support for ongoing
activities under original credit and first additional financing as needed, and to finance the
preparation studies for selected activities such as studies related to the River Bank
Improvement Program (RBIP) for revamping the Brahmaputra River Bank Embankment
(BRE) or other such projects agreed between Government and Association. The revised
total for this component is US$9.0 million.

 Component E: Project Monitoring and Evaluation (US$0.8 million).

  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities provide continuous feedback to the
Government, the Project Steering Committee (PSC), the Project Coordination and
Monitoring Unit (PCMU), and the project's implementing agencies on the project's
performance and impact of its various components. M&E consultants hired under this
component also supervise implementation of the overall EMF and S/RPF, provide careful
review and monitoring of sub-project specific social and environmental management
plans and impact assessments, and supervise their implementation. Additional financing
is proposed for this component to continue support for ongoing activities under original
credit and first additional financing as needed, and expenses in evaluating the additional
activities under Components B and C. The revised total for this component is US$5.7
million.

 Component F: Project Management, Technical Assistance Strategic Studies and
Emergency Support for Future Disasters (US$20.7 million):
 This component supports the Government in implementing the project, including
coordinating all project related activities, technical assistance and training. It includes
provisions for the operation of the PCMU under the Ministry of Planning. For continued
the Project Management Support by PCMU (Component F1) US$0.7 million have been
added bring the total for component F1 to US$5.7 million. For component F5, the
emergency support for future disasters, US$20 million have been allocated. The total
allocation of funds for the Component F would be US$31.1 million. The funds allocated
for the F5 component, if not used for any future disaster would be allocated to
Component C for the rehabilitation of polders provided its implementation proceeds well.
In the event that there is no disaster during the project implementation period, and if
deemed relevant, the allocation could also be used for more shelters.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project activities under the additional financing will be limited to the nine worst
affected coastal districts of Bangladesh. These districts are in the Lower Gangetic delta,
mostly below 3 meters above sea level and vulnerable to floods and storm surges. The
delta is characterized by high fertility and agricultural productivity.
  Assessment from original project shows the land type is plain land and soil is clayey
loam. Comparatively high land is selected for construction of cyclone shelter. Good
drainage facilities are incorporated in the project design to avoid long term water logging.
Unavailability of drinking water is a persisting problem in the project area due to high
salinity. Ground water of the project area is slightly to moderately saline, most of the area
were reported to be arsenic free but contains iron. The depth of the groundwater varies
from 2.0 to 5.5 m. But the depth for drinkable water is varying from 50 m to 200m. Any
notified reserve forests area was not reported in the subproject area. No endangered floral
or fauna species were reported. Land holdings are usually small due to a high population
growth leading to lack of land not already committed to agriculture; growing demand for
other land uses such as infrastructure, industry and urban settlement, making land the
scarcest factor of production. Significantly affected by Cyclone Sidr and Aila are also the
wetland areas in the southern part of Satkhira, Khulna and Bagerhat districts.
  Population density in the project area ranges from 488 to 1046 persons per square
kilometer (average 808 persons). Population density is above 1000 in Bagerhat, Khulna
and Satkhira districts while it is less than 1000 and more than 500 in Pirojpur, Bhola,
Barisal and Jhalokathi districts. Barguna and Patuakhali districts has the least population
density; below 500 persons per square kilometer. The Project area is generally accessible
by means of land transport through existing road networks; there are still remote mouzas
and villages, which could not be reached by road due to the numerous rivers and
waterways and char lands. Accordingly, the primary means of transportation of the local
population is via the waterways. But the limited transport system and basic infrastructure
limits the access of these remote coastal communities to basic services and social
infrastructure such as health, education, electricity and power supply, water supply and
sanitation and the like. Livelihood and income generating opportunities are also limited
by the absence of basic infrastructure. Majority (56%) of the households in the Project
area are dependent on agriculture for their source of income. The major issues and
concerns pertaining to agriculture in the area include perennial flooding, water logging,
high soil salinity, saltwater intrusion, lack of irrigation, and the constant threat of
cyclones. According to the social assessment of shelter sites under component B, extent
of losses caused by the cycle Sidr in 2007 was 90% of fish stock, 90% of permanent
assets, 75% of domestic animals as well as heavy losses to trees, infrastructures.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)
   Mr Iqbal Ahmed (SASDI)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The findings from original project interpret that investment on the component B and C
yields net positive environmental impacts. The shelters constructed so that they are used
as primary schools when no disaster. The shelters are constructed with separate
bathrooms for men and women. Safe water supply is ensured, water treatment for
wastewater is included and solar panels are provided. In addition, connections to existing
road are ensured by constructing a link, if needed. One floor is constructed for livestock
and animals and top floor for human shelter. Ramp has been provided for disable people
and easy movement of livestock. The shelters are designed to withstand wind speeds of
260 km/hour and placed higher than the expected surge level. Again the polder are
rehabilitated to keep this zone free of waterlogging, salinity intrusion and can be used for
farming and other agricultural work. The Environmental Monitoring report states that
negative environmental impacts are triggered mostly from the construction related
activities. These impacts are mostly temporary and limited within project boundary.

 The Additional Financing will be used to scale up the construction and rehabilitation of
infrastructure like construction of 100 new and rehabilitation of 220 multipurpose
cyclone shelters as well as the associated improvements of connecting roads under
Component B and rehabilitation of 10 coastal embankments under Component C of the
original project which will have environmental and social safeguard footprint. The
construction of new cyclone shelters and access roads and rehabilitation of coastal
embankment will require environmental assessment to identify and avoid environmental
impacts. The project was reviewed and screened during preparation and implementation
of original project and designated as environmental 'Category B' which is appropriate and
consistent with the provisions of OP/BP 4.01, and as the project objectives, designs and
expected impacts remain unchanged, the safeguard Category B will also remain
unchanged. Social safeguards compliance issues of OP/BP 4.12 is applicable to both the
components B and C as the original project. No tribal peoples will be affected by the
additional financing.

 Activities under Component B are limited in existing vacant land of sponsoring local
educational institutions and cause no population displacement under the implementation
of original and Additional Financing. In few contract packages, voluntary donation,
exchange or direct purchase of lands were involved and supported by the sponsoring
institutions. Activities under component C involve temporary displacement of people and
in limited cases, acquisition of private lands and involuntary displacement. No tribal
peoples have been identified in the project influence areas of the selected polders for
rehabilitation of embankments and no discrimination between social groups was reported
by the catchment area population in accessing the disaster shelters No changes are
proposed to the project's design or to the current implementation arrangements from the
original one. The project does not envisage any significant or irreversible environmental
impact and negative social impact from the rehabilitation/reconstruction of the coastal
infrastructures. The construction of new shelters and access roads envisage no land
acquisition but at critical circumstance, additional private lands may need to be acquired
for new shelters. Rehabilitation of embankments in the 3 out of 10 polders involves land
acquisition, while displacement of some people (mostly squatters living on
embankments) have been identified in almost all the polders. Social safeguards
compliance issues of OP/BP 4.12 is applicable to both the components B and C as the
original project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The nature of the project, which is intended to rehabilitate the impact of cyclone sidr, is
unlikely to lead any significant incremental long-term impacts since most infrastructures
already existed prior to the cyclone. The investment on the component B and C yields net
positive environmental impacts. Experience from the original project shows that the
negative environmental impacts will be triggered mostly from the construction related
activities. These impacts are mostly temporary and limited within project boundary.

 According to the existing EMF and S/RPF, screening are and will continue to be
performed of any potential indirect or long-term adverse impacts and taking necessary
mitigation measures to ensure minimal impacts.

 The new cyclone shelters and access roads as well as major rehabilitation works
undertaken to upgrade the embankments may require land acquisition and hence will
require site specific Social Impact Assessments and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) in
accordance with the S/RPF. The new cyclone shelter and road construction will require
environmental assessment in planning stage.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
All sub-projects were and will be subject to an environmental screening at an appropriate
level of assessment based on the agreed EMF. The screening process will distinguish sub-
projects requiring an environmental review or more detailed environmental assessments.
The later is expected for the new construction (e.g. new disaster shelters or realignment
of embankments) and full environment assessment will be carried out with sound
environmental professional (and cleared by the Bank). These sub-projects will continue
to undergo an analysis of alternatives specially the location and design as required under
standard EIA practice.

 Subprojects for embankment rehabilitation have taken measures to avoid land
acquisition and displacement of people through reconstruction of eroded embankment in-
situ where feasible and also adopting situ relocation of embankment squatters

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and Social and Resettlement Policy
Framework (SRPF) were completed in the original project, and these have been reviewed
and approved by the Bank and disclosed by the Project Coordination and Monitoring
Unit (PCMU). The EMF and SRPF are set of policies, acts, rules, programs, and
institutions that collectively work towards protecting and enhancing the attributes of the
environment and persons that may be impacted by the activities undertaken in the Project.
Various mitigation measures are suggested to minimize environmental impacts and fair
compensation mechanisms should residual impact be unavoidable. Moreover, the EMF
and SRPF suggest screening, monitoring, and post-evaluation mechanism so that any
present or future impact can be identified and resolved quickly. The SRPF establishes
resettlement objectives and principles, legal framework and applicable laws and policies,
organizational arrangements, grievance redress mechanisms, monitoring and evaluation,
and institutional capability. The SRPF details the legal framework and applicable policies
for the project and the processes (assessments, surveys); instruments (Resettlement
Action Plan) required for complying with those policies. Types of expected impacts from
the acquisition of land and/or displacement of people, including squatters, mitigation
measures, and eligibility criteria for compensation, an Entitlement Matrix, details of the
land acquisition process, implementation arrangements and outlines of RAPs are
provided.

 Once sites are selected for investments, site specific Environmental Impact
Assessments, Management Plans, and Resettlement Action Plans (if applicable) are
undertaken, disclosed and consulted with the impacted populations. An independent
M&E Consultant under Component E of the original project is responsible to review,
supervise and monitor activities for environmental and social safeguards compliance of
all subprojects. This system worked very well and will continue to operate under the
additional financing. There are no outstanding safeguards issues.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the project are those affected by the Cyclone Sidr and Aila. The
EMF and SRPF were prepared in consultation with the local communities, NGOs and
government officials/agencies. The subproject specific EA (environmental screening
and/or assessment) and SIA (social impact assessment) and EMP, Social Management
Plan (SMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), where required, will be prepared in
consultation with affected communities and the draft will again be consulted with
communities and NGOs. EIAs/EMPs and SMPs/RAPs are and will also be published in
the website for public information and comments.

  The Project Coordination and Monitoring Unit (PCMU) at the Ministry of Planning is
responsible for overall coordination and monitoring of the environmental assessment
process and implementation of EMP. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Consultant
under PCMU, two separate Design and Supervision (DSM) Consultants under LGED and
BWDB have been hired. The environment specialists of DSM consultants are responsible
for preparation of the EIA after consultations with all stakeholders in accordance the
Bank policies and the supervision of the EMP implementation. Since the number of
construction of new cyclone shelter has been significantly increased with the additional
financings II, one additional position of Environment Specialist in the DSM Consultant
for Component B will be required for timely deliver the EA report before the bidding
process.

  The environment specialist of M&E consultants is responsible for reviewing the EA and
supervising implementation of the overall EMF. Both LGED and BWDB are already
familiar with the environmental and social safeguard required and have gained substantial
experience on implementing the original ECRRP and its earlier additional financing.
LGED and BWDB will continue to obtain clearance on sub-project specific EA report
from Department of Environment (DoE) for Component B and C.

 The EMF, along with the Bangla version, was disclosed in websites of the implementing
agencies (http://www.bwdb.gov.bd and http://www.lged.gov.bd) on January 9, 2009 and
in the World Bank's InfoShop on the same date. Hard copies of the document have also
been made available in the site offices of BWDB and LGED in project areas. In
accordance to the EMF, to date total 205 numbers of EIA reports out of 230 nos of new
construction Cyclone Shelter and all the 250 nos IEE reports for improvement of Cyclone
Shelter have been prepared by LGED for component B and the IEE reports for all the 19
polders have been prepared by the BWDB for Component C along with detailed survey
and baseline studies. A total of 250 open community meetings were conducted at
locations for improvement of existing shelters, 229 for new shelters, 127 for shelter
connecting roads and 18 for killas for Component B. A total of 58 community
consultation meeting were conducted as of today covering a total of 806 persons
including men and women for component C. The engineering design of subproject under
component B incorporated number of recommendations from the consultation. The
consultation process will be continued for Additional Financing.
 Also required budget for implementation of EMP has been estimated for preparation of
the Bill of Quantity (BOQ) of bid document. Specific items relevant to environmental
compliance have been included in the Bill of Quantities (BOQ) for the civil works and
the contractor has been paid accordingly.

 Overall the method followed in the parent and AF-I project worked satisfactorily. The
same methodology and institutional arrangement will be followed for Additional
Financing II.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/01/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/01/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/01/2009
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                               09/01/2009
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  09/01/2009
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              09/01/2009
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               09/01/2009
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
  review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
  credit/loan?
  OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
  Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Masood Ahmad                              09/02/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Iqbal Ahmed                               09/06/2013
Social Development Specialist       Mr Md. Akhtaruzzaman                         09/06/2013
Additional Environmental and/or     Ms Nadia Sharmin                             09/06/2013
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano                        10/10/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:
  Comments:
