                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 11/21/2013                                    Report No.: AC7046
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P101190                 Original Project Name: Water Supply and
                                             Sanitation Project
Country: Belarus                             Project ID: P146493
Project Name: Water Supply and Sanitation Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Stephane Raphael Dahan
Estimated Appraisal Date: December 2,        Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2014
2013
Managing Unit: ECSUW                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Water supply (25%);Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (35%);Wastewater
Collection and Transportation (25%);General water, sanitation and flood protection
sector (5%);Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (10%)
Theme: City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):            90
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                         0.00
                                                                          0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objective of the Project is to increase access to water supply services and to improve
the quality of water supply and wastewater services in selected urban areas in all six
participating oblasts of the Borrower.

3. Project Description
The project consists of four components:

 Part A:       Rehabilitation of Water Supply and Sanitation Systems (US$73.30m)

 Provision of goods, works and consultants' services for (a) rehabilitation and
construction of deep wells, pumping stations, transmission mains, distribution network,
ground and elevated reservoirs and iron removal plants, and other water supply facilities;
and (b) rehabilitation and construction of wastewater collection systems and wastewater
treatment plants including upgrade of monitoring stations and laboratories, and other
water sanitation facilities.

 Part B:       Support to the Preparation of Investments (US$3.60m)

 Provision of works, goods and consultants' services for: (a) feasibility studies,
preliminary and detailed designs, bidding documents, assistance with bidding and
evaluation review; and (b) construction management, including supervision, monitoring
and evaluation of physical implementation.

 Part C:       Project Implementation and Management (US$0.20m)

 Provision of goods, consultants' services and training to the Project Coordination Team
(PCT) to assist in the implementation, management, supervision and auditing of the
Project.

 Part D:        Technical Assistance (US$5.30m)

 Provision of support for the modernization of the water and wastewater sector, through
inter alia: (a) preparation of conceptual studies for the regionalization of water and
wastewater services in selected oblasts; (b) review of technical design standards; (c)
analysis of tariff policies; (d) strengthening of the operational capacity of selected water
and wastewater service providers; and (e) preparation of energy efficiency audits for
selected water and wastewater service providers.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The implementation of the additional financing is taking place in 8 municipalities in all
six oblasts (regions) of the country: Brest, Grodno, Gomel, Minsk, Mogilev and Vitebsk.
Population of these municipalities range between 7,000 and 350,000, with two large
cities exceeding 100,000 inhabitants. Most project works will be implemented within the
footprint of existing water supply and wastewater treatment utilities and landscapes
(mostly urban) already modified by human activity.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
   Ms Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Impacts of the project are associated with works on rehabilitation and construction of
water supply and waste water treatment infrastructure. Most of the impacts are taking
place at existing footprint of utilities or adjacent areas (mostly urban). The activities
proposed under the Additional Financing are very similar, in size and type, as those of the
original project, and are not expected to generate any new type of impact.

  The available detailed engineering designs suggest that in one sub-project (Mogilev),
permanent acquisition of land will be necessary, according to the foreseen alignments of
pipes in populated areas. The government has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework
and disclosed it in the local language in the country in December 2011. An Abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) for this sub-project has been prepared and was
disclosed in the country in local language on November 19, 2013, in compliance with
safeguards policy on Involuntary Resettlements (OP/BP 4.12) triggered under the original
project and the proposed additional financing. The ARAP describes how project impacts
will have to be mitigated. Given that the Mogilev works contract under this additional
financing project is unlikely to be signed before 2015, the mitigation measures set up in
the ARAP will have to be reassessed prior to their implementation (provisions are
included in the ARAP in that perspective).

 Policy on Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.12 is as well triggered in the original
project and the additional financing with regard to a single sub-project (Mogilev). The
location of prospective works is in the area of historic and cultural significance "Troitsky
Settlement". A Physical Cultural Resources Action Plan (PCRAP) was prepared by the
Client and a chance find procedure outlined in this Plan will be included in the works
contract's technical specifications. A contract for archeological supervision was signed
between Mogilevoblvodokanal and Institute of History of the National Academy of
Science, under local financing.
 The OP/BP 7.50 International Waterways applies to water projects that involve "the use
or potential pollution of international waterways." The policy exempts from the
notification requirement "minor additions or alterations" to existing schemes that
"adversely change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other riparians." The
original project and the additional financing seek to improve water quality, reduce
wastewater flows and improve the quality of wastewater discharges, therefore meeting
the definition of the policy. The reduced downstream flow of pollutants into both the
Black and the Baltic Seas has positive regional/global impacts. The "Exemption to the
notification of riparian states" was prepared and approved by the Bank Legal Department
and ECA Region VP on October 23, 2013.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
There are no indirect and/or long term impacts associated with this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The activities proposed under the Additional Financing are very similar, in size and type,
as those of the original project, and are not expected to generate any new type of impact.
The EMP prepared and approved by the Bank for the original project will therefore be
used for activities under the Project additional financing. The EMP stipulates that any
adverse environmental impact associated with the Project will be prevented, eliminated,
or minimized to an acceptable level. This will be achieved through the mechanism for the
continuous refinement and effective implementation of the environmental mitigation
measures, including careful selection of project sites; replacing of old pipes and pumps
and conducting rehabilitation works in a way that would prevent as much as possible
cutting of trees, destroying of open landscape, pollution of air and soil; ensuring labor
safety and health impacts prevention during welding operations, proper treatment of
construction waste, etc.

 The client prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework and an ARAP for the Mogilev
sub-project. Relevant resettlement instruments will be prepared for any sub-project which
could necessitate land acquisition.

  A Management Plan for Physical Cultural Resources is being prepared by the client and
it will be incorporated to the EMP. For the Mogilev sub-project, a Physical Cultural
Resources Action Plan has been prepared by the client and agreed with interested
stakeholders. It includes a chance find procedure, which will be incorporated to the
technical specifications of the bidding documents for civil works. Continuous
archeological supervision of works will be undertaken by a group of archeologists from
Mogilev State University. In case of chance finds, the items found will be handled
(described, photographed, registered and placed to local historic museum for
museufication/exhibition or storage) according to established procedures related to
management of cultural artifacts. Upon completion of the works, a report on the results of
archeological supervision will be produced and provided to the Employer (Mogilev
Vodokanal) and the National Academy of Science of Belarus.

 Under the original Project, civil works have been implemented in full compliance with
the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), as confirmed during Bank safeguards
specialists' regular visits to construction sites. The implementing entity (PCT) has good
experience in addressing environmental and social safeguards issues under the original
World Bank project (Water Supply and Sanitation Project). It has the required
institutional capacity to monitor implementation of this additional financing, and will be
regularly trained to sustain this capacity.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Ministry of Housing and Communal Services, the National Ministry of Nature
Protection, the participating municipalities, the water companies and project beneficiaries
are the key stakeholders. The consultations took place with the main stakeholders. The
project EMP was prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal of the original project. The
Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared for the original project and disclosed in the
country in local language and in the Infoshop. The ARAP for Mogilev sub-project was
prepared and disclosed in local language on the web-site of the municipality and in the
Infoshop. The project affected persons were duly consulted in course of ARAP
preparation.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     11/16/2007
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 11/30/2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  12/30/2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                     04/18/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 12/02/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                  05/23/2012
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                         No
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification           Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                        Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name                       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Stephane Raphael Dahan                    11/19/2013
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Alexei Slenzak                            11/19/2013
Social Development Specialist       Ms Klavdiya Maksymenko                       11/20/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Agnes I. Kiss                             11/20/2013
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Sumila Gulyani                            11/21/2013
  Comments:
