                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 02/19/2014                                   Report No.: AC7002
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P107146                 Original Project Name: Acre Social and
                                             Economic Inclusion and Sustainable
                                             Development Project - PROACRE
Country: Brazil                              Project ID: P130593
Project Name: Additional Finance to Acre Social and Economic Inclusion and
Sustainable Development Project
Task Team Leader: Adriana Goncalves Moreira
Estimated Appraisal Date: November 7,        Estimated Board Date: March 5, 2014
2013
Managing Unit: LCSAR                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Sanitation (70%);General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%);Primary
education (10%);Health (10%)
Theme: Water resource management (40%);Pollution management and environmental
health (40%);Education for all (10%);Other rural development (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           150
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                        37.50
                                                                         37.50
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []             Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                    Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The original Project Development Objective (PDO) will be maintained as follows: "The
objective of the Project is to contribute to the Borrower's efforts to promote social and
economic inclusion of its rural and urban poor, including its poorest and most
disadvantaged population living in isolated areas of the Borrower's territory." These
improved outcomes will be achieved through the expansion of access to, and
improvement in the quality of basic health, education, water supply, sanitation and other
basic infrastructure; and increased technical expertise and improved organization in
sustainable production methods and the development of selected productive sectors.

 Building on the successful implementation of the PROACRE Project, the State of Acre
has requested an Additional Financing (AF) in the amount of US$150 million to expand
and carry out new activities in order to leverage the project's impact and improve social,
economic and environmental health conditions for poor population in the targeted urban
and rural areas. The AF would make it possible to:

  a.    Carry out new environmental sanitation and basic infrastructure activities in
isolated municipalities (Marechal Thaumaturgo, Jordão, Porto Walter, and Santa Rosa do
Purus), including water treatment and distribution, wastewater collection and treatment,
adequate solid waste management, paving, stormwater drainage, and improving river
access with the objective of contributing to improved public health and environment
preservation; and

 b.    Scale up existing activities with the most vulnerable groups and isolated
municipalities in the state through (i) expanding the project to new areas, including
additional indigenous groups, and (ii) expanding the education and health agenda for the
most vulnerable groups. The scaled-up activities would also strengthen the community
development plans and the market chains of selected agricultural products and the
support for small business enterprises in urban areas.

3. Project Description
This operation (P130593) is an Additional Financing to the Acre Social and Economic
Inclusion and Sustainable Development Project (PROACRE – P107146), currently under
implementation, with closing date on March 31, 2015. The Additional Financing loan is
expecte to be implemented within a 3-year period, with a closing date of March 30, 2018.
This Additional Financing maintains the five components from the original operation,
with the following adjustments:

  Component 1: Basic Services for Isolated Rural Communities (US$85.2 million IBRD):
This component will continue to support the provision of basic services in primary health
care, basic education and agricultural extension services, including technical and
financial assistance, to Acre's dispersed and most isolated rural communities, as defined
in the original three subcomponents. A fourth subcomponent has been added for
development of integrated environmental sanitation systems and basic infrastructure in
four of the isolated municipalities (Marechal Thaumaturgo, Jordão, Porto Walter, and
Santa Rosa do Purus), particularly through water treatment and distribution, waste water
collection and treatment, paving and drainage of all season urban roads, garbage
collection and adequate disposal, and improving landing sites for better access to river
transport in order to ensure public health and improved quality of life for isolated
populations.

 Component 2: Social and Economic Inclusion in Rural Communities (US$33.1 million
IBRD). The structure of this component will remain the same, and will continue: (i)
improving the quality and governance of education and health services in 100 COPs
(Pole Communities); and (ii) improving income levels of the population living in these
communities by supporting selected production chains.
 Component 3: "Social and Economic Inclusion in Marginal Urban Communities".
(US$13.4 million IBRD). The objective of this component is to promote social and
economic inclusion of urban communities in areas of high socioeconomic and
environmental vulnerability. This component will include activities to foster
entrepreneurship and promote economic empowerment through the promotion of small
businesses, and the expansion of vocational training for professionals and community
members in all 22 municipalities. The following subcomponents are proposed: (i)
Education activities for social inclusion of the most disadvantaged groups living in urban
ZAPs; (ii) Health Activities for Social Inclusion; and (iii) Development of
entrepreneurship and small business enterprises in Urban ZAP Communities.

 Component 4: Public Policy and Institutional Strengthening (US$12.3 million IBRD).
This component will continue to modernize Acre's State agencies and to support the
decentralization of primary services in health and education, which is a constitutional
responsibility of the municipalities. The component will maintain the same
subcomponents: (i) Public Sector Management Interventions in education, health, WSS
and public administration; and (ii) Institutional Strengthening of Indigenous
Organizations.

 Component 5: Project Management and Information Dissemination (US$6.0 million
IBRD). This component will continue to support overall project coordination and
supervision and the strengthening of the effectiveness and quality of all project
operations.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
As in the parent project, the area for the proposed Additional Financing will encompass
the entire state of Acre (Amazon Region) for the education, health and sustainable
development activities. The new environmental sanitation activities under Component 1
will focus on four isolated municipalities (Marechal Thaumaturgo, Jordão, Porto Walter,
and Santa Rosa do Purus).

 Sustainable development activities (Community Development Plans and Indigenous
Land Management Plans) would follow from Plans prepared under PROACRE or
continue from activities being implemented under the parent project, and may include
natural resource management activities in rural communities, involving non-timber
and/or timber products in forest extractive reserves. Such activities will be small in scale
and shall follow specific management plans developed and monitored collaboratively by
communities and state agencies (SEMA, SEAPROF and SEDENS), as detailed in the
project's Environmental Assessment.

  The new environmental sanitation activities, encompassing potable water treatment and
distribution systems, sewage collection and treatment systems, urban paving and
drainage, solid waste management, and improving river access with docking ramps, will
target four small villages in the four isolated municipalities (less than 4,000 people) and
should consist of mostly urban works, with no expected negative impacts on the
surrounding forests and rivers. Due to the numerous public spaces available for system
structures, up to the time of appraisal no need was identified for land acquisition and no
impacts covered under the involuntary resettlement policy are expected.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
   Ms Agnes Velloso (LCSEN)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                  X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The most significant potential for impacts derive from the following project supported
activities:

  a.    As under the parent project, the Additional Financing may support small-scale
timber and non-timber community-led economic activities in existing extractive reserves.
Such activities are implemented according to specific NRM management plans, prepared
and implemented under the guidance and close supervision of state agencies (SEAPROF,
SEDENS, SEMA). No significant negative impact was detected to-date from the
implementation of this type of activities under the parent project. Lessons learned during
implementation of the parent project led to improvements in the monitoring system and
prior and periodical screening procedures (improved checklists, periodicity of
supervision, and training of project staff), which are already operating and will be applied
to new investments.
  b.    Water treatment and distribution systems; and sewage collection and treatment
systems: while these activities should result in improved human health and reduced water
pollution and soil contamination, main potential negative impacts might involve land
acquisition or involuntary resettlement and river contamination due to eventual
flaws/disruption in treatment system. The works to put these systems in place will be
carried out in urban environments and up to the time of appraisal, no need for land
acquisition or involuntary resettlement was identified because there are numerous public
spaces available for system structures. The EA and the Environmental Manual for Civil
Works contain detailed guidance on adequate planning procedures for each intervention,
which involve complying with the procedures to obtain an Environmental License and
preparing a specific environmental and social assessment and action plan. The latter
would assist in the development of the engineering designs and selection of location of
system structures and treatment methodologies (including treatment/ disposal of sludge
and effluents from the treatment process) among other aspects, and indicate the adequate
prevention and mitigation measures to prevent or reduce potential impacts in each
municipality context. According to national legislation, limited intervention in riparian
areas for essential infrastructure works will only occur if no other technical option proves
viable for the planned system, which may occur for parts of the system in some cases
given the particular landscape of these river-side towns. Nevertheless, the areas to be
eventually disturbed would be virtually negligible compared with the total of riparian
areas in the target municipalities. Specific safeguards checklists and supervision
procedures have been developed to guide and monitor water and sewage interventions.
  c.     Urban paving and drainage: most existing urban streets in the target isolated
municipalities are unpaved or precariously paved and with little or no drainage structures,
which results in severe erosion during the rainy season. The number and location of
specific streets to be paved in each village will be defined during implementation. The
main potential impact from this activity might be insufficient capacity of the drainage
system to be designed. The streets will be paved with clay bricks, resulting in partial
waterproofing and reducing paving impact, and the environmental assessment for this
intervention in each municipality will ensure the drainage system is adequately designed
for the local climate and the selected paving material. Overall, impacts from this activity
should be positive, resulting in reduced erosion and reduced sediment deposition in
nearby watercourses, and improved accessibility within the urban space.
  d.     Solid waste management: currently, none of the isolated municipalities have a
reliable solid waste collection service and all waste disposal is in precarious and poorly-
located open dumps, and access roads to dumps are often impassable during the rainy
season. This activity will involve structuring a solid waste collection service and the
construction of sanitary landfills in adequate locations (to be selected during project
implementation). While the implementation of this activity should improve
environmental and human health, main potential negative impacts from this activity could
result from poor selection of landfill sites leading to soil/water contamination with
landfill effluents. Sanitary landfills will be constructed according to the national
environmental and recent (2012) solid waste legislation to serve small communities in the
four isolated municipalities (less than 4,000 people), applying existing technology to
prevent or reduce impacts from waste decomposition. The environmental licensing
procedures and the preparation of specific environmental assessments for each
intervention should minimize the risks associated with the selection of landfill location,
and indicate the most suitable and viable solution to minimize, manage and/or treat
landfill effluents. These solutions regarding landfill effluents will be submitted for Bank
review and approval before implementation.
  e.     River access: river access in these isolated communities is very precarious and
disorganized, increasing and speeding the natural erosion of river banks, which in some
cases results in hazardous conditions for nearby housing, businesses and roads. The
project will organize river access in these areas, recuperating eroded margins and
building access ramps and floating docks for small boats and canoes, as well as a landing
platform at the highest point of the access area. As the existing sites are heavily used and
degraded, this activity should reduce human impact. The first action in these investments
will be an assessment of the currently used sites to define if the project will invest in the
rehabilitation of the existing site or in the construction of an adequate structure in a more
appropriate site. Main potential negative impacts from this activity might involve poor
design of river access structures and unnecessary soil waterproofing if care is not taken to
adopt environmentally-friendly techniques such as using vegetation or porous materials
to hold soil in place as much as possible. The specific environmental and social
assessment to be prepared for each intervention should indicate adequate solutions for the
recuperation and stabilization of river margins, recovery of natural vegetation cover
where possible, and best design of river access to prevent erosion processes in each
municipality context. The identified technical solutions in engineering designs will be
submitted for Bank review and approval before implementation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
All project activities are designed to improve public health/quality of life and the
conservation of forests, increasing sustainability of natural resources use (improved
NRM) and reducing overall negative human environmental impact. The capacity-building
activities being carried out and planned for rural technical assistance agents are expected
to contribute to the internalization of sustainable NRM and agricultural practices, and
investments in sewage treatment, paving and solid waste management are expected to
produce positive long-term impacts, reducing erosion and water/soil contamination.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Sustainability criteria and specific social and environmental checklists were developed by
the borrower to previously screen and to monitor implementation of investments in
sustainable development activities (including NRM) identified through the Community
Development Plans and Indigenous Land Management Plans, and new investments in
environmental sanitation activities (water and sewage systems, solid waste management,
paving and drainage, river access). The electronic monitoring system of the project has
been upgraded to better monitor environmental and social aspects of existing and new
project investments, as well as the implementation of eventual mitigation measures.
 Bank supervision missions of the original project have found that the implementation of
the safeguards frameworks has been satisfactory. The main adjustment identified is the
need to provide refresher courses for the on-the-ground staff responsible for safeguards
within the project team, particularly those from the State Secretariat of Agroforestry
Extension and Smallholder Production (SEAPROF) who provide technical assistance to
rural communities during the implementation of productive subprojects supported under
the project. Resources have been included in the Additional Financing for this additional
training, as well as for training of new staff (from SEAPROF and the Sanitation
Department − DEPASA) as the proposed project expands to new themes (water supply
and sanitation) and new geographical areas, the latter including Indigenous Lands and
Rural Communities as well as four urban areas (four isolated small towns).
Implementation of the project's Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was also satisfactory. The
main adjustment identified is the need to strengthen technical assistance staffing for
indigenous communities via SEAPROF.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the original project preparation, consultations on safeguard policies (with
indigenous and civil society organizations and beneficiary stakeholders) were carried out
through seminars and focus groups organized both at the regional and state levels. All
safeguard documents (EA/EMP and IPP reports) were made available on the home page
of State Government. During project implementation, consultations have been focused on
local stakeholders - mainly indigenous and rural community organizations eligible for
project support – during project dissemination and planning events.
 Indigenous and civil society organizations consulted endorsed the conclusions of the
project IPP and EA and seemed to clearly understand the EMP and IPP procedures. The
Indigenous Peoples organizations stressed the need to respect their traditional knowledge,
in particular in the use of forest resources management and biodiversity conservation.
 The Government of Acre conducted additional consultations of all revised and updated
safeguard documents after completion of the draft updated EA/EMP and IPPF, and the
Ressetlement Policy Framework (RPF). Public events were held from February 18 to 22,
2013 in the municipalities of Santa Rosa do Purus, Jordão, Marechal Thaumaturgo, Porto
Walter, and Cruzeiro do Sul (the latter is no longer a target under this project, as
additional government funds were made available through a different project to achieve
the envisioned objectives in that municipality). These consultation events had the
participation of representatives of municipal and state agencies, NGOs, social
movements, producers associations and cooperatives, and indigenous and non-indigenous
groups. Broad advertising of the events was carried out prior to the meetings, with all
relevant documentation being made available for public review.
 The representation of civil society in the meetings was recorded in the consultation
report, as well as consultation methodology and results (feedback received), and
responses from the project team. The detailed consultation reports were appended to the
revised safeguards documents.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                     08/30/2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                 10/21/2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                  10/25/2013
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive     10/21/2013
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/30/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              10/21/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/25/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/30/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              10/21/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/25/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/30/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              10/21/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               10/25/2013
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                      Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                     Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or    Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed      N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector           Yes
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints   Yes
been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these           Yes
constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include        Yes
provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                            N/A
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification              Yes
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                           Yes
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's          Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a          Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities       Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project      Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the              Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name            Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Adriana Goncalves Moreira    01/27/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Ms Agnes Velloso                01/27/2014
Social Development Specialist       Mr Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa   01/27/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Glenn S. Morgan              02/06/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Laurent Msellati             02/19/2014
  Comments:
