                                                                                                  99525

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                                Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          August 15, 2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                      Brazil                 Project ID:                   P152285

 Project Name:                 Brazil Investment Plan Coordination Project

 Task Team Leader:             Bernadete Lange

 Estimated Board Date:         October 25, 2014

 Managing Unit:                GENDR
 Sector(s):                    Public administration, agricultures, fishing and forestry (100%)

 Theme(s):                     Climate change (70%); land administration and management (15%); biodiversity
                               (15%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                    No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       US$m 1.00                   Total Bank Financing:         US$m 1.00
 Financing Gap:            0
     Financing Source                                                                             Amount
     Borrower                                                                                           00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                            1.00
     Total                                                                                            1.00
 Environmental Category: C
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred         Yes
 project?


 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The proposed Project’s overall objective is to support the Government of Brazil’s ongoing
 efforts to coordinate the implementation of the Brazil Investment Plan, under Forest Investment
 Program, which seeks to promote sustainable land use and forest management improvement in
 the Cerrado Biome, contributing to a reduction in pressure on the remaining dry forests and in
 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and to an increase in carbon dioxide (CO2) sequestration.
 The objective of the Project is to enhance the capacity of Inter-Ministerial Executive
Committee’s capacity to coordinate, supervise, monitor and evaluate the Brazil Investment Plan
implementation.

3. Project Description
The proposed US$1.00 million grant, funded by the Forest Investment Program, specifically
foresees the establishment of mechanisms for the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of
the Brazil Investment Plan and its projects.
The Project will be implemented over a five-year period. The proposed Project will be managed
by the Ministry of the Environment, and it will be implemented in collaboration with Brazil
Investment Plan Inter-ministerial Committee (BIP-EC).
The proposed project is a technical-assistance project aiming at strengthening Brazil
Investment Plan (BIP) agencies to improve environmental and natural resource management in
the Cerrado Biome, through appropriate policies and practices.
The proposed Project aims to enable the overall management of the BIP, in order to guarantee
coordinated and synergetic implementation of the projects to reach the objectives of the Forest
Investment Program, both in terms of what was formulated under the BIP, and also in relation to
the global objectives and outcomes.
The following main activities are proposed:
Planning. A meeting to align the projects will take place annually, in order to identify the
UGPI’s synergies and actions aimed at supporting the implementation of the BIP as a whole.
These meetings can also be leveraged to reach agreement on the distribution of responsibilities
and the instruments to be used. Alignment among projects is particularly relevant in light of the
temporal differences in the operationalization of projects and coordination. In addition, it will
also promote the exchanging of information and experiences, as well as mutual learning among
the executors.
Implementation. Implementation will take place in accordance with the three areas of the
UGPI’s operations: (i) assistance to the Inter-Ministerial Executive Committee; (ii) assistance
to project management and implementation; and (iii) management and implementation of the
BIP.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The BIP’s M&E is expected to be conducted in
accordance with the procedures and rules established for the FIP. The process of reaching
agreement on the content and format of the monitoring of results and monitoring under the FIP
progressed in 2013, leading to the adoption of a format (Report Framework) that includes a set
of indicators and themes on which pilot countries should report annually.
The scope of the proposed Project should stipulate works to establish the BIP’s M&E system,
defining and interpreting indicators of the Program in line with and complementary to the
indicators adopted by the projects. Expected steps are the operationalization of indicators,
including their interpretation, the definition of baselines and targets, and the mechanisms and
responsibilities of monitoring.
Thus, during the first six months of project implementation, the proposed Project will support
the implementation of the necessary operational structure for M&E activities, including the
     design of the BIP’s tracking tool for monitoring and reporting.
     Communication and Dissemination. The BIP calls for the establishment of a communications
     plan at the start of the program’s implementation, including tools such as a website for the BIP,
     periodic reports and dissemination activities.
     The UGPI should have the responsibility for developing and implementing the plan, but this
     needs to take place in conjunction with the projects and the thematic or institutional initiatives
     of each executing agency’s communications and dissemination activities (e.g., activities related
     to CAR).
     It is important to highlight that the FIP Report Framework calls for close coordination between
     monitoring and reporting activities, and communication and dissemination activities.
     The activities under this activity can also contribute positively to coordination and
     compatibility among different initiatives, programs and projects targeted to address
     deforestation and forest fires in the Cerrado Biome, as well as their connection with climate
     issues. In this sense, one of the activities to be promoted could be the conduction of annual
     events for knowledge sharing and dissemination of these broad initiatives, bringing together
     managers as well as representatives of the various stakeholders in the specific subject areas
     (government bodies at the three administrative levels, civil society, private sector, etc.).

     4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
     (if known)
     The geographical size and environmental complexity of Brazil and the need for, inter alia,
     ensuring the consistency of the various instruments employed, coordinating efforts in the
     regions and sharing timely and relevant information are all challenges that call for building of
     synergies among the various actors and activities with a view to securing cost-effective
     solutions.
     As a response to these challenges, the Brazil Investment Plan proposes a coordinated and
     synergic set of actions of different actors in order to improve the sustainability and efficiency of
     forest resource management and land use in the Cerrado Biome.
     It is important to highlight that, since the beginning of the design phase, the successful
     collaboration between the three Ministries (MMA, MAPA and MCTI) has allowed the
     development of a strategic approach capable to foster synergies not only among BIP and its
     projects, but also with ongoing Cerrado government plans and policies already in
     implementation at federal, state and municipal levels.
     To ensure the interaction among the different Ministries directly involved in the BIP, the
     Inter-ministerial Ordinance No110 of March 26, 2014 1 , established the Inter-ministerial
     Executive Committee (BPI-EC), which is responsible for monitoring and implementing the
     BIP. The BIP Executive Committee is responsible for the overall management of the BIP and
     includes representatives from the Ministry of Finance (MF), Ministry of Environment (MMA),
     Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply (MAPA), and Ministry of Science,
     Technology and Innovation (MCTI).
     The proposed Project will therefore contribute to the efforts being undertaken by the

1
    Portaria Interministerial No- 110, de 26 de Março de 2014. Published in the Diário da União on March 27, 2014 section 1
Government of Brazil to coordinate the implementation of the Brazil Investment Plan and its
projects.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
   Ms. Bernadete Lange (Senior Environmental Specialist, GENDR)
   Mr. Alberto Costa (Senior Social Development Specialist, GRUDR)




6. Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01     No            The proposed Project is a Technical
                                                      Assistance and conservation Project,
                                                      and it is proposed to be assigned
                                                      environmental Category C.
                                                      The proposed Project focuses on
                                                      meetings,       workshops,      studies
                                                      centering on progress and result
                                                      indicators, monitoring reports and
                                                      communication activities. As such,
                                                      there are no investments in physical
                                                      works and field interventions and the
                                                      activities of the Project will not have
                                                      significant negative impacts. No
                                                      further EA action will be required
                                                      during the preparation.
                                                      The project will focus on promoting
                                                      synergies among Brazil Investment
                                                      Plan projects, supervision activities,
                                                      and monitoring and evaluation
                                                      reports. The activities under the
                                                      proposed Project would positively
                                                      contribute to the coordination and
                                                      compatibility      between    different
                                                      initiatives, programs and projects
                                                      targeted to addressing deforestation
                                                      and forest fires in the Cerrado Biome,
                                                      as well as its connection with climate
                                                      issues. As such, it is likely to have
                                                      minimal or no adverse social and
                                                      environmental impacts.
                                                      During implementation, the Bank
                                                      team will supervise the project's
                                              activities,      ensuring        that
                                              implementation      activities    are
                                              consistent    with    Category     C.
                                              Environmental and social supervision
                                              during project implementation should
                                              provide technical assistance to
                                              enhance effectiveness of forest fire
                                              monitoring management.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No   Activities under the proposed Project
                                              should not involve conversion or
                                              degradation of critical or other natural
                                              habitats. Thus, this policy is not being
                                              triggered at this time.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No
                                              This policy is not being triggered
                                              because it is not expected that Project
                                              implementation will have negative
                                              impacts on forest resources.
                                              The Brazil Investment Plan overall
                                              implementation will contribute to the
                                              conservation of the Cerrado Biome.

Pest Management OP 4.09                  No   This policy is not being triggered
                                              because the proposed Project will not
                                              support the purchase or increased use
                                              of pesticides and other agricultural
                                              chemicals as defined under the policy.
                                              The proposed Project will not include
                                              any support for forest plantations or
                                              other agriculture land use, which
                                              would promote pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No   It is not expected that Project
                                              implementation activities would have
                                              any negative impact on archeological
                                              or physical cultural resources. This
                                              policy is not being triggered at this
                                              time.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No   Due to the nature of the technical
                                              assistance being provided, which will
                                              have no physical footprint and no
                                              specific action undertaken in specific
                                              indigenous peoples` communities,
                                              there is no need to prepare an
                                              Indigenous       Peoples     Planning
                                                                       Framework or Indigenous Peoples
                                                                       Plans. This approach is considered
                                                                       consistent with the Bank`s Interim
                                                                       Guidelines on the Application of
                                                                       Safeguard Policies on Technical
                                                                       Assistance projects, which recognizes
                                                                       that instruments such as IPPFs and
                                                                       IPPs may not always be appropriate
                                                                       for these type of projects.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              No                The Involuntary Resettlement policy
                                                                       is not triggered because the proposed
                                                                       Project will neither cause involuntary
                                                                       physical resettlement, nor negative
                                                                       impacts on livelihoods due to
                                                                       involuntary land taking or restriction
                                                                       of access to natural resources. The
                                                                       proposed Project has no bearing on
                                                                       land property or use rights, including
                                                                       indigenous rights.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        No                The proposed Project will neither
                                                                       support      the    construction    or
                                                                       rehabilitation of dams nor will it
                                                                       support other investments related with
                                                                       services of existing dams.

    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
    7.50
                                                                       The proposed Project will not affect
                                                                       international waterways.

    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60            NO
                                                                       The proposed Project will not be
                                                                       implemented in disputed areas.

    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The proposed Project is a technical assistance exclusively focusing on the strengthening of the
    client`s capacity for planning, implementing, monitoring and evaluation, as well as for
    promoting transparency and stakeholder engagement through public information disclosure.
    According to the Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical
    Assistance activities in Bank Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank,2

2
  See: interim guidelines on the application of safeguard policies to technical assistance activities in Bank Financed
Projects and Trust Funds administered by the Bank.
this type of Technical Assistance projects supports activities that do not have potential adverse
environmental and social implications or risks – such as staff training, study tours, recruitment
and payment of salaries, supply of office equipment, etc. – and does not require the preparation
prior to appraisal or during implementation of any safeguard instrument.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The implementation of the proposed Project will strengthen the capacity of Environment
Ministry, and BIP`s implementing agencies to improve environmental performance, including
better and more consistent environmental and social safeguard standards.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders of this project are governmental decision-makers and environmental
managers. The direct beneficiaries of the coordination of the BIP are the government
institutions and all implementing agencies that are part of the plan. In a wider sense, the Project
actions must contribute to the successful implementation and the achievement of objectives of
BIP’s projects, also benefiting their respective audiences and other interested parties
(stakeholders).
Major indirect beneficiaries identified are the institutions participating in the Program and the
Projects in the articulation and implementation of government plans and programs linked to the
objectives and themes of the BIP, through the strengthening of the managerial capacity of
MMA in project execution and generation of synergies.
Stakeholder consultations. The Brazil Invest Plan consultation process was a two-stage
process. Several rounds of consultations were held with a wide range of stakeholder to discuss
the concept of the Brazil Investment Plan. These took place from May 2011 to March 2012, and
included several meetings in Brasilia with representatives from the States of the Cerrado biome.
Arrangements for involvement and consultation process were coordinated by the Environment
Ministry (MMA), with participation of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food
Supply (MAPA), the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (MCTI), the Ministry of
Finance (MF), the National Indigenous Foundation (FUNAI), and the Brazilian Forest
Service (SFB).



B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Not applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                Not applicable
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the    Not applicable
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Not applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                Not applicable
"In country" Disclosure
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Not applicable
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                Not applicable
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]         No [   ]   NA [ X ]
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ ]          No [   ]   NA [ X ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or     Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [X   ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ ]       No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange
Approved By: Maria Elena Garcia Mora
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora               Date: 09/23/2014
Sector Manager:                 Name:                                    Date:
