                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC5260

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                           Project ID:      P143492
                            Project Name:      BR DGM for Indigenous People (P143492)
                            Task Team          Alberto Coelho Gomes Cost
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        20-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSAR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Forestry (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Social Inclusion (40%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                               (30%), Climate change (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      6.50                     Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                  6.50
                              Total                                                                         6.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           10.     To enhance the capacity of Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities in Brazil, with focus
                           on the Cerrado biome, to engage in FIP and other REDD+ processes and activities at the local,
                           national and global levels in order to improve the effective sustainable management of natural/forest
                           resources.
                           C. Project Description
                         2.       The proposed project is part of a global program - the Dedicated Grant Mechanism for
                         Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (DGM) - which has allocated $6.5 million in grant
                         resources to Brazil. The DGM was designed to promote the inclusion of communities reliant on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forests in policy formulation and initiatives that seek to reduce deforestation and degradation.
                         3.       The Brazil DGM is based on (a) the Design Proposal for the global DGM – which was
                         developed by the Global IPLC Working Group – and (b) the FIP Grant Mechanism for Indigenous
                         Peoples and Local Communities Project Concept Note (P128748). It follows the framework
                         guidelines and set of activities covered under the components designed for the global DGM.
                         4.       The project will support capacity building and finance the demand-driven provision of grants
                         to community organizations of IPLCs in Brazil in order to strengthen their participation in FIP and
                         other REDD+ processes at the local, national and global levels. To foster synergies with the Brazil
                         Forest Investment Plan and address the challenges posed by the geographical dispersion of
                         Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs), the Brazil DGM will also prioritize its actions
                         in the Cerrado biome Nevertheless, capacity building and training activities will have a national
                         scope.
                         5.       Drawing from lessons learned in previous operations, the proposed project intends: (a) to
                         promote a strong sense of ownership and social accountability among the grant beneficiaries and key
                         stakeholders convened at the NSC; (b) to strengthen the institutional capacity of indigenous and local
                         organizations by means of in situ training events on managerial issues for grant beneficiaries and by
                         encouraging a diversity of partnerships with governmental and civil society organizations; (c)
                         designing adequate, flexible, and efficient, administrative and financial arrangements that will enable
                         easy, streamlined and fast-track access to grants by grassroots IPLCs, and facilitating adequate
                         financial flows and management of project resources to diverse communities; (d) carrying out
                         preliminary assessments of the economic, environmental and social feasibility of community
                         proposals; and, (e) providing culturally adequate technical assistance to design, develop and
                         implement community subprojects.
                         6.       The proposed components of the project which are under consultation with IPLCs are as
                         follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a.       Component 1: Institutional Strengthening (approximately $1.2 million). This component will
                         finance activities aimed at: (i) strengthening IPLCs’ capacity for investment-preparedness, including
                         support for registration, preparing proposals, and financial management skills for traditional forest
                         investments as well as Payment for Environmental Services and carbon payments; and (ii) improving
                         access to forest financing and investments. Activities may include informational workshops on
                         public policies and access to credit lines; training on new technologies to be applied on land
                         surveillance; ethno-mapping studies; capacity building on methodologies for: participatory Land or
                         Territorial Management Plans, fire management and control of forest fires; inter-regional workshops,
                         organizational strengthening and youth leadership; and cultural strengthening among other topics
                         proposed by IPLCs.
                         b.       Component 2: Sustainable Initiatives (approximately $4.3 million). This component will
                         finance the provision of micro grants for eligible community based organizations of IPLCs to
                         undertake small-scale activities for sustainable development and natural resources management that
                         fall under predetermined themes. Based on ongoing consultations, some potentially eligible areas
                         activities would include: REDD+ related livelihood and resilience activities; integrating indigenous
                         knowledge and cultural practices with modern technologies to enhance climate adaptation and
                         mitigation; food security activities; production and storage of native seeds; small agro-processing
                         units; production and commercialization of artisanal products; agro-ecological production and
                         ecotourism; surveys of native species of flora and fauna; land/territorial management plans; recovery
                         of degraded areas and protection of water springs; and fire management plans.
                         c.       Component 3: Communication, Monitoring and Evaluation (approximately $ 1.0 million).
                         This component will finance activities aimed at the institutional support and capacity development
                         for Project management, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, including: (i) reaching out to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         target groups to provide them necessary information on the DGM, (ii) facilitating a process of
                         bottom-up self-selection to identify beneficiary communities, (iii) supporting the preparation of
                         proposals, and (iv) supervising sub-projects implementation and results assessments.
                         7.       Additionally the Brazil DGM will benefit from the global component on knowledge sharing
                         and networking on REDD+.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         8. To foster synergies with the Brazil Forest Investment Plan and address the challenges posed by the
                         geographical dispersion of IPLCs, the Brazil DGM will also prioritize its actions in the Cerrado
                         biome. Nevertheless, capacity building and training activities will have a national scope.
                         9. The main beneficiaries of Brazil DGM are Indigenous Peoples and traditional communities –
                         social groups who self-assert a distinctive cultural identity and keep distinctive forms of social
                         organization and culture, occupy traditional lands and territories and hold traditional knowledge and
                         practices, rely on distinctive productive systems and low impact natural resource management
                         strategies for their livelihood - which have a population of approximately 5 million people and
                         occupy 25% of the country s total land area. Among them, Indigenous people account for 0.42% of
                         Brazil's population, but comprise 238 different ethnicities (plus an estimated 77 isolated indigenous
                         groups living in remote areas), which speak 180 different languages.
                         10. Indigenous peoples live in about 670 Indigenous Lands, which comprise almost 13% of the
                         Brazilian territory. While about 60% of the Indigenous Peoples live in the Amazon, the Cerrado is
                         home to 38 Indigenous Peoples, comprising the following ethnicities: Apinayé, Atikum, Avá, Ava-
                         Canoeiro, Bakairi, Barbados, Bororo, Cinta Larga, Enauwenê-Nawê, Guajá, Guajajara, Guarani-
                         Kaiowá, Halotesu, Irantxe, Javaé, Kadiwéu, Kanela, Karajá, Kaxixó, Kinikináo, Kiriri, Krahô,
                         Krahô-Kanela, Menku, Nambikwara, Ofayê, Pankararu, Paresi, Tapirapé, Tapuia, Terena, Timbira,
                         Tuxá, Wasusu, Xakriabá, Xavante e Xerente.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         11. They live in 98 Indigenous Lands, occupying 8.9 million hectares – 4.35% of the Cerrado. These
                         indigenous lands are concentrated in the states of Mato Grosso, Tocantins and Maranhão and about
                         79% of them have their land tenure rights secured.
                         12. Traditional communities included are represented, in the Cerrado, by quilombolas (African
                         descendants), geraizeiros (who live in the drier areas), ribeirinhos (who live along rivers),
                         babaqueiras (whose livelihoods are based on the babassu palm), vazanteiros (who live on
                         floodplains), and indigenous peoples, among others. These communities live throughout the region
                         and possess extensive traditional knowledge on the richness and uses of the Cerrado’s biodiversity,
                         comprising valuable social and cultural Brazilian heritage.
                         13. Throughout Brazil, indigenous and other territories inhabited by traditional communities record
                         very low or zero deforestation rates and play an important role in the protection of biodiversity, but
                         continue to face land use conflicts, which have depleted their natural resources, endangered their
                         health and security as well as their ability to maintain traditional lifestyles and more sustainable
                         livelihoods.
                         14. Settlers, ranchers, wildcat miners, loggers, fishermen and hunters have caused considerable
                         environmental damage to Indigenous Lands and traditional communities. Deleterious impacts occur
                         by both seizing and restricting territories traditionally occupied and exploited by IPLCs or by
                         resources exploitation and land-use in areas surrounding Indigenous Lands (ILs) and traditional
                         communities.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           15. The specific non-government organization which will implement the project (the National
                           Executing Agency - NEA) will be selected during preparation in a competitive basis and is not yet
Public Disclosure Copy




                           decided at this stage. Selection criteria have been discussed with Indigenous Peoples, Traditional
                           Communities and Governmental partners.
                           16. To be eligible, the Non-Governmental Organization may have at least two years of operation,
                           legal constitution and registration; it may also demonstrate previous and highly qualified experience
                           on: the financial management of projects and programs targeting IPLCs, the implementation of
                           projects and activities in the Cerrado biome; the provision of capacity building activities on socio-
                           environmental subjects to IPLCs; monitoring and evaluation of socio-environmental activities
                           implemented at Indigenous Lands and Traditional Communities; and on the implementation of
                           projects financed by Multilateral and International Agencies.
                           17. Selection criteria of sub-grants activities will ensure that no land is acquired nor any restriction of
                           access to natural resources will occur. Similarly, the activities will not be in areas of environmental
                           importance (e.g. protected areas).The physical investments would be mostly small scale, and are not
                           expected to have major environmental or social safeguards issues. The nature of these investments
                           will determine the choice of locations for physical investment.
                           18. Brazil has substantial experience with grants for environmental management programs in
                           indigenous lands and local communities. The Indigenous Lands Program (PPTAL), the
                           Demonstration Programs (PDA), and a number of other programs within the context of the Pilot
                           Program for the Protection of the Tropical Forests of Brazil (PPG7) have contributed significantly to
                           building expertise related to territorial environmental management of other population groups and
                           landscapes in addition to the Indigenous Lands. In consequence, Brazil has built large institutional
                           capacity for dealing with Safeguard Policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                           Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The proposed Project is a conservation Project,
                           BP 4.01                                                and it is proposed to be rated as Category B.
                                                                                  The proposed Project is expected to have a
                                                                                  positive impact on the environment as it seeks
                                                                                  to promote sustainable development and natural
                                                                                  resources management in Indigenous Lands and
                                                                                  for the traditional communities whose
                                                                                  livelihoods depend on the biome’s natural
                                                                                  resources.
                                                                                  The nature and scale of the proposed
                                                                                  investments will not have significant adverse
                                                                                  impacts. Notwithstanding these positive
                                                                                  impacts, the proposed Project will be working in
                                                                                  some sensitive biodiversity and dry forest areas.
                                                                                  For the purpose of clarifying the parameters
                                                             under which the Brazil DGM sub-grants will be
                                                             carried out, a Programmatic Environmental and
                                                             Social Management Framework (PESMF) has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             been prepared for the global DGM to be
                                                             reviewed during preparation for any country-
                                                             level specificities. The PESMF guidelines will
                                                             be included in the project level Operations
                                                             Manual along with fiduciary and procurement
                                                             rules also to be applied. This PESMF identifies
                                                             the main impacts to be expected and indicate the
                                                             process to screen these environmental risks and
                                                             mitigate or compensate them. The PESMF also
                                                             addresses the possible capacity shortcomings
                                                             with the main stakeholders as well as the
                                                             monitoring requirements and procedures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Activities under proposed Project should lead to
                                                             positive impacts on natural habitats, such as
                                                             their conservation and recovery. Given that OP
                                                             4.04 is triggered and all planning activities must
                                                             follow World Bank policies, the project will
                                                             identify monitoring and management activities
                                                             to prevent or mitigate any possible negative
                                                             impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The Project will contribute to the conservation
                                                             of the Cerrado biome. It is expected to have a
                                                             positive impact by avoiding deforestation and
                                                             maintaining natural vegetation, along water
                                                             courses or in the vicinity of springs, protecting
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             environmental services and values of natural
                                                             vegetation. The ESMF to be prepared will
                                                             consider the requirements of OB/BP4.36
                                                             whenever restoration and plantation activities
                                                             are being planned.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The project would not finance any pesticides or
                                                             other chemical amendments that would trigger
                                                             OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of
                                                             pesticides would probably to be used in the
                                                             short term by a small portion of targeted small
                                                             producers. The need to use pesticides or
                                                             herbicides should be indicated in each sub-
                                                             grant, as well as the IPM measures to be
                                                             adopted. When the use of pesticides or
                                                             herbicides is justified, an analysis of potential
                                                             negative impacts resulting from the use of these
                                                             chemicals and the risks associated with the
                                                             inappropriate handling or storing of their
                                                             containers should be conducted. The sub-grants
                                                                 should also include measures to reduce those
                                                                 risks, in compliance with Law No. 7802/89.
                                                                 A pest management framework will be prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 as part of the PESMF. It would make use of the
                                                                 World Health Organization's Recommended
                                                                 Classification of Pesticides by Hazard and
                                                                 Guidelines to Classification (Geneva: WHO
                                                                 1994-95).
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   It is not expected that Project implementation
                         BP 4.11                                 activities would have any negative impact on
                                                                 archeological or physical cultural resources.
                                                                 During project preparation, the determination of
                                                                 whether this Policy is triggered or not will be
                                                                 made and also whether specific Physical and
                                                                 Cultural Resources Management Plans will have
                                                                 to be prepared before approval of the project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Since the project specifically covers indigenous
                                                                 communities and will be implemented in known
                                                                 locations of Indigenous Peoples in forest lands,
                                                                 OP4.10 applies. As Indigenous Peoples will be
                                                                 the overwhelming majority of direct project
                                                                 beneficiaries, as project preparation will be
                                                                 carried out in a broadly participatory way
                                                                 including an intensive process of consultation
                                                                 with Indigenous Peoples, and as ruled by this
                                                                 Safeguard Policy (OP 4.10, paragraph 12), no
                                                                 separate Indigenous People Policy Framework
                                                                 (IPPF) or Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 required. Meanwhile, the elements of an IPP/
                                                                 IPPF will be included in the overall project
                                                                 design and the Project Appraisal Document
                                                                 (PAD) will include a brief summary of how the
                                                                 project complies with OP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    One of the principles covered in the grant
                         4.12                                    mechanism is avoiding relocation and
                                                                 displacement of Indigenous Peoples and
                                                                 traditional communities occupying forest lands.
                                                                 The criteria for selection of activities will ensure
                                                                 that no relocation or restriction of accessto
                                                                 resources takes place.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The proposed Project will neither support the
                                                                 construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
                                                                 support other investments related with services
                                                                 of existing dams.
                         Projects on International         No    The proposed Project will not affect
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The proposed Project will not be implemented
                                 7.60                                                                                            in disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A Programmatic Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared
                                      for the Global DGM to be reviewed during preparation for any country level specificities.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Alberto Coelho Gomes Cost

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 06-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                                                                                                Date: 11-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
