                                                                                           92584
                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE - DRAFT

Date prepared/updated: May 15, 2014

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: Brazil                                             Project ID: P143376
                                                            Additional Project ID (if any): no
Project Name: Brazil Cerrado Climate Change Mitigation: Rural Environmental Cadastre and Fire Prevention in
Bahia State Project
Task Team Leader: Bernadete Lange
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 20, 2014                    Estimated Board Date: not applicable
Managing Unit: LCSEN                                        Lending Instrument: Grant
Sector: General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%); Public administration, agricultures, fishing and
forestry (50%)
Theme: climate change (50%); land administration and management (35%); biodiversity (15%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.): 4.4 million
IDA Amount (US$m.):00
GEF Amount (US$m.):00
PCF Amount (US$m.):00
Other financing amounts by source: 00

Environmental Category: B
Is this a transferred project                              Yes [X ]                     No [ ]
Simplified Processing                                      Simple [x ]                  Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   Yes [ ]          No [x ]
Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The proposed Project is part of the Brazil Cerrado Climate Change Mitigation Trust Fund
(BCCCMTF). The Project’s main objective is to promote the reduction of climate change
impacts in the Cerrado of the west of the Bahia State by:

        Promoting the environmental regularization of landholdings in the targeted
         municipalities and support actions to promote recovery of environmental
         liabilities; and

        Strengthening the State’s capacity to prevent and combat forest fires through the
         integration of local actors and promoting the adoption of sustainable production
         practices in the targeted municipalities.

3. Project Description:

Launched in 2012 as part of the Cerrado Biome approach, the Brazil Cerrado Climate
Change Mitigation Trust Fund (BCCMTF) is a single-donor trust fund with Bank- and
recipient-executed components from the Department for Environment, Food and Rural
Affairs of United Kingdom (DEFRA).
The Program’s main preliminary goals are: (i) the capture of 22.5 million tons of CO2
equivalent over 30 years through the recovery of forests, 26 million tons through direct
reductions from deforestation, and 65 million tons by reducing fires (including a
reduction in the burning of forests and agricultural lands); (ii) the restoration of 360,000
hectares (ha) of native vegetation and 128,000 ha of avoided deforestation (a 46 percent
reduction), with a substantial impact on reducing biodiversity loss; and (iii) intervention
with 1,000 small landholders (20 percent of the total target of 5,000 farmers) to improve
livelihoods through a combination of access to credit and the adoption of improved
agricultural practices and natural resource management.

The proposed Project will contribute to the environmental regularization of rural
properties in the Cerrado of Bahia and to the decrease in forest fires in the Cerrado.
Greater environmental compliance and mitigation of wildfires mean less illegal
deforestation, fewer degraded lands and more reclaimed areas. In a more global view, this
will contribute toward reducing net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and conserving
ecosystem services and biodiversity. The proposed Project will have the following
components:

Component 1: Rural Environmental Regularization (Estimated Cost: US$2.6
million). The aim of this component is to promote environmental regularization by
implementing the CAR for small landholders and promoting the recovery of degraded
areas in APPs and RLs in these landholdings located in the targeted municipalities.

This component will focus on building the institutional capacity of the State and the
targeted municipalities’ agencies to implement the CAR and on developing a framework
to support the recovery of degraded areas in these municipalities. Activities are envisaged
to: (i) update the land use maps for the target municipalities; (ii) establishment of
“situation rooms? in the target municipalities to monitor CAR registration and
deforestation; (iii) delivery of training to environmental agencies technicians, state and
municipal staff and rural extensions staff, as well as consulting firms in environmental
regularization of rural properties in how to operate CEFIR and how to prepare Plans of
Recovery of Degraded Areas (PRAD); (iv) design and implement a communication
strategy and campaign to involve local and interdisciplinary team for joining CEFIR and
on the activities to be developed; (vi) organize events to promote the CAR; (vii) support
the preparation of plans for recovery of degraded areas in small rural landholdings and
the preparation of the environmental assessment of the targeted municipalities; (viii)
develop a financial sustainability plan for the Degraded Areas Recovery Centers (Centros
de Referência em Recuperação de ?reas Degradadas, CRADs); (ix) promote the creation
of a seed collection network in the targeted municipalities and/or establish nurseries
linked to the CRADs; (x) provide technical training courses on degraded areas recovery
and sustainable economic alternatives; and (xi) design a financial sustainability strategy
for the CRADs.

Component 2: Prevention and Fight of Forest Fires (Estimated Cost: US$1.5
million). The aim of this component is to strengthen the capacity to prevent and fight
forest fires and promote alternatives to the use of fire in the State of Bahia, especially in
the Project’s targeted municipalities.
This component will focus on strengthening the capacity of the State and targeted
municipalities to prevent and fight forest fires, and on developing practices to promote
alternatives to the use of fire. Activities envisaged are: (i) empowering the Prevention and
Fight Forest Fires State Committee to prevent and fight forest fires in targeted
municipalities; (ii) assisting in the creation of municipal committees or municipal
protocols for preventing and fighting forest fires and of the contingency plan; (iii)
promoting the development of municipal operating plans for preventing and fighting
forest fires; (iv) developing a communication strategy to disseminate actions on
preventing and fighting forest fires; (v) providing training on how to prevent and fight
forest fires; (vi) establishing municipal situation rooms to monitor deforestation and
forest fires; (vii) implementing units to demonstrate alternatives to the use of fire, and
promoting community forest fire prevention protocols; (viii) providing training on
practical alternatives to the use of fire and on sustainable economic activities; (ix)
promoting the subject of forest fire prevention and control through environmental
education efforts, and (x) acquiring equipment and materials to support preventive and
repressive inspection efforts.

Component 3: Administrative and Financial Management (Estimated Cost: US$0.44
million). The aim of this component is to support the Project’s effective and efficient
management, administration, monitoring and evaluation. This component will include
activities such as: Project coordination, monitoring and reporting; adequate financial
management, and procurement; and Project financial and technical activities for Project
closure.

The proposed Project would be implemented over a period of 2 years (2014-2016). A
Grant Agreement will be signed between the Bank and Fundação Luis Eduardo
Magalhães (FLEM). FLEM was chosen due to its procurement and administrative
experience, and qualifications acceptable to the Bank. It is fulfilling its role effectively
during the implementation of the GEF Mata Branca Project in the States of Bahia and
Ceará.

FLEM will sign a technical cooperation agreement with the State of Bahia’s Secretary of
Environment (SEMA/BA), who will have overall coordination of the Project. SEMA/BA
will also sign an Institution Cooperation Agreement with the Ministry of Environment
(MMA), in order to guarantee MMA’s overall supervision of the Project activities and
needed technical assistance to the state.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis:

The Ministry of Environment published Decree No 97, on March 22, 2012, determining
the 52 priority municipalities in the Cerrado biome that require immediate actions to
prevent and control deforestation, as these are the municipalities with the highest levels
of deforestation for the years of 2009-2010, and the ones that have an area of remaining
native vegetation of more than 20% of their total area or have protected areas. Out of
these 52 municipalities, and based on environmental, social and economic aspects of each
one of them, the municipalities in the States of Maranhão, Tocantins, Bahia and Piaui
were the ones that required more support to implement the new legislation. Since
Maranhão and Tocantins are already supported by the Amazon Fund / PPCDAm, the
Cerrado Climate Change Program will focus on the municipalities in the States of Bahia
and Piaui.

The Cerrado Biome occupies 151.348 km2 of the total area of 564.693km2 in the state of
Bahia, and by 2010 almost 30% of it had been deforested.

The Project will cover eight municipalities of the Cerrado Biome in west of Bahia. The
following criteria were used to select the priority municipalities: (i) Ministry of
Environment’s Decree 97/2012, which lists 52 municipalities deemed priorities under the
PPCerrado based on the following: (a) areas of remnant native vegetation larger than 20
percent of the municipality, or existence of protected areas; and (b) deforestation over
25km2 observed during the 2009–2010 period; (ii) numbers of hotspots detected in 2011;
(iii) concentration of extreme poverty in rural areas; and (iv) municipalities that are not
financially supported by external funds or grants to carry out a cadastre of small rural
landholdings.

Based on the above criteria, the municipalities are Formosa do Rio Preto, Cocos,
Jaborandi, Correntina; São Desidério, Riachão das Neves, Barreiras e Luís Eduardo
Magalhães. In these municipalities there are about 5,000 small rural landholdings (less
than 500 hectares), which will directly benefit from this project.

Considering the amount of funds available, the State establish criteria to determine where
to focus the CAR registration efforts, which included: (i) have access conditions and
logistics to implement Project activities within the Project’s time frame; (ii) with state
Protected Areas (UCs); (iii) with a significant area of remaining native vegetation; (iv)
well-organized local organizations to support the process; (v) potential synergies with
existing activities in the CAR; and (vi) have local administrative capacity to implement
the project immediately.

Based on these criteria, the following municipalities have been selected: Formosa do Rio
Preto, Riachão das Neves, São Desidério e Luís Eduardo Magalhães. In a total of 4,823
small rural landholdings, in an estimated area of 119,860ha.


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

   Ms Bernadete Lange (Environmental Specialist, LCSENV)
   Mr. Alberto Costa (Social Specialist, LCSSO)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                        Yes   No     OP/BP 4.00
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                        x
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                x
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                         x
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         x
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                          x
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                   x
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                             x
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       x
                                                                                                1
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                  x         N/A
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           x         N/A

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The proposed Project is a conservation
Project, and it is proposed to be rated as Category B. The environmental benefits of the
proposed Project would be: (i) reduced deforestation, relative to a scenario without
intervention, and thus reduced carbon emissions land use change; (ii) reduced carbon
emission from pasture burning and wildfires; (iii) increased carbon storage from
restoration of cleared forest reserves; and (iv) enhanced biodiversity conservation through
reduced loss of native vegetation cover. Notwithstanding these positive impacts, the
proposed Project will be working in some sensitive biodiversity and dry forest areas.
Bahia government has prepared an Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF),
including social and environmental assessments, that serves as a guide for addressing
issues arising during Project implementation. In this social impact assessment special
attention has been given to identify the presence, the interests and the potential impacts of
Project interventions on minority ethnic groups (such as “Quilombola? communities) or
traditional communities which hold different consuetudinary systems for collective land
use (such as the so-called “Fundo de Pasto? communities). It is expected that potentially
adverse environmental or social impacts will be small, since they will be avoided or
minimized with appropriate preventive and mitigation measures.
As a preventive measure, Project’s approach includes a wide-ranging outreach
communication strategy to mobilize and inform all landholders, landholder associations
and local governments in the targeted municipalities. Additionally, the ESMF has
assessed potential benefits identified for small farmers (e.g access to credit,
environmental compliance, technical assistance) and adopts measures designed to avoid
social conflicts that could result from Project implementation.
Compliance by landholders with these requirements is at the heart of the efforts by the
Federal and State Environmental Agencies to monitor and control deforestation and to
secure CAR registration of APP and RL in private holdings. This objective is also the


1
    OP/BP 7.50 and OP/BP 7.60 are not eligible for piloting under OP 4.00
main focus of the proposed Project, registering APP and RL by each landholding in the
CAR system.
The ESMF report will be available during project implementation in Brazil via the Bahia
State, MMA, and Fundação Luis Eduardo Magalhães websites. This report contains a
detailed description of the environmental impacts of Project activities; identify
preventive/corrective measures, including the training and capacity-building of
firefighters and the use of adequate equipment. The ESMF includes a specific action to
ensure adequate staffing and resources for the implementation and enforcement of any
safeguard issues.
Project implementation arrangements are built on the lessons learned from past
operations in the State of Bahia and in the MMA. The MMA, inter alia, will articulate
the cooperation among the parties and monitor and oversee the progress of work and
production of outputs. The SEMA/BA will be responsible for coordinating this Project’s
implementation (planning, supervision, preparation of terms of reference, Project M&E
and reporting).
The grant recipient will be Fundação Luis Eduardo Magalhães (FLEM). FLEM was
chosen due to its procurement and administrative experience, and qualifications
acceptable to the Bank. It has fulfilled this role effectively during the implementation of
the GEF Mata Branca Project in the States of Bahia and Ceará.

The MMA, SEMA/BA, and FLEM have substantial experience working with Safeguard
policies from their implementation of the previous Bank-supported projects.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). Activities under Project components should lead to
positive impacts on natural habitats, such as their conservation and recovery). Given that
OP 4.04 is triggered all planning activities must follow World Bank policies, the project
will identify monitoring and management activities to prevent or mitigate any possible
negative impacts on natural habitats. The rural environmental cadastre procedures will
comply with: (i) the Brazilian Forest Code (Law 16651 of 2012); (ii) Brazilian legislation
on protected areas (SNUC - Law 9985 of 2000, Decree 4340 of 2002 and Decree 5758
of 2006; (iii) national, State, and local laws on natural habitats; and (iv) the principle of
refusing to register rural landholdings that impinge on officially-demarcated Protected
Areas.
The Brazilian Forest Code requires landholders to retain natural vegetation on steep
slopes, along watercourses (up to a given distance from the margin) or in the vicinity of
springs. These areas are APPs (Area of Permanent Preservation). In addition, the
holdings must also set aside and area called Legal Reserve (Reserva Legal – RL).
Compliance by landholders with these requirements is at the heart of the efforts by the
Federal and State Environmental Agencies to monitor and control deforestation and to
secure CAR registration of APP and RL in private holdings. This Project will assist
rehabilitation of degraded natural habitats in Legal Reserves (LR) and Areas of
Permanent Protection (APP).
The Project will also promote conservation by preventing forest fires and by controlling
burning and strengthening the fire-fighting capacity. The ESMF considers the criteria,
impacts, and management measures for controlled burning as well as fire suppression
activities.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36). This Project will contribute to the conservation and restoration of
the Cerrado biome. It is expected to have a positive impact by avoiding deforestation and
maintenance of natural vegetation in parts of private rural holdings (all land on steep
slopes), along water courses (up to a given distance from the margin) or in the vicinity of
springs, protecting environmental services and values of natural vegetation. These areas
are ‘Areas of Permanent Preservation’ (APPs).
The Project will also contribute to conserve and/or restore special areas in the private
landholdings, which are to be set aside and preserved and are known as a ‘Legal Reserve’
(RL).
The ESMF considers the requirements of OB/BP4.36 whenever restoration and plantation
activities are being planned.
According to the new Forest Code, landholders have to request previous authorization
from the State Environmental Agencies to use fire, where this practice is a part of
agroforestry and forestry production systems. It also determines that Federal, State and
Municipal Governments need to prepare and keep updated contingency plans to combat
forest fires, whereas the Federal Government needs to develop the National Fire
Management Policy, which includes the use of controlled burning, as well as the combat
and prevention of forest fires. The proposed Project will assist prevention activities,
promotes training and capacity buildings activities and focus on wild fire prevention in
the Cerrado biome on private landholdings.
Pest Management (OP 4.09). The Project does not intend to invest in the forest sector
and will not support plantations or any forest related activities therefore the policy should
not be triggered at this time. All activities and technical assistance under components 1 and 2
must follow World Bank policies.
The Project will encourage the control of pest populations through the integrated pest
management framework within the ESMF. The Project would encourage and support
technical assistance for the adoption of environmentally sustainable practices.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). It is not expected that Project
implementation activities would have any negative impact on archeological or physical
cultural resources. Therefore, this policy is not being triggered at this time.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Involuntary population displacement, negative
impacts on livelihoods and/or restriction to access and use of natural resources on which
the livelihoods of family farmers rely due to the creation of new protected areas are not
envisaged. In accordance with the Bank’s OP 4.12 the Involuntary Resettlement policy is
not triggered because: (i) no person would be displaced or relocated from his/her
landholding; (ii) the Rural Environmental Cadastre (CAR) focuses on regulating natural
resources management on a national and State level; (iii) the Project would not restrict
the management of natural resources; and, (iv) the Project will not register in the CAR
system any land which is the subject of dispute between private parties.
The land use restrictions of Permanent Preservation Areas (APP) and Legal Reserves
(RL) have been applied to private landholdings since 1965 and, more importantly,
according with the new Brazilian Forest Code (Law 12651/12) they impose no access
restrictions to natural resources on which the livelihoods of family farmers rely. This
Project will not affect the rights or welfare of landholders nor their dependence on, or
interaction with, the forest. The enforcement of restrictions will not affect access to
natural resources in protected areas. The proposed Project will not cause physical
resettlement or economic displacement.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). No interferences are foreseen on indigenous peoples
and OP 4.10 is not triggered, because the locations selected for Project interventions do
not include any area traditionally occupied or used by the 16 (sixteen) indigenous peoples
which live in the territory of the state of Bahia. Indigenous lands in Bahia are mostly
located at the coastal area (Atlantic Forest), South and Northern portions of the state in
the following 16 municipalities: Banzaê, Camamu, Glória, Euclides da Cunha, Ibotirama,
Itabuna, Itajú da Colônia, Muquém do São Francisco, Pau Brasil, Paulo Afonso, Porto
Seguro, Prado, Ribeira do Pombal, Rodelas, Santa Cruz Cabrália and Serra do Ramalho.
Other indigenous peoples without demarcated lands are found at the municipalities of
Angical, Abaré, Buerarema, Curaça, Ilhéus, Santa Rita de Cássia e Una. These
municipalities do not overlap with the project targeted municipalities. These targeted
municipalities are: Barreiras, Cocos, Correntina, Formosa do Rio Preto, Jaborandi, Luís
Eduardo Magalhães, Riachão das Neves and São Desidério.
Additionally, no landholding will be registered in CAR if it is found to overlap with land
claimed by indigenous peoples, Quilombola communities and traditional communities
even in cases where such land has no secure land rights yet.
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37). The proposed Project will neither support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other investments which rely on services of
existing dams.
International Waterways (O.P750). The proposed Project will not affect international
waterways.
Project in Disputed Areas (OP7.60). The proposed Project will not be implemented in
disputed areas.


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

The implementation of a rural environmental cadastre and strengthening the local
governments’ capacity to prevent and control forest fires should lead to improve
environmental performance, including better and more consistent legal compliance and
environmental safeguard policies.

The Project’s institutional sustainability is ensured by the legal liability of the state and
municipalities to implement the CAR and establish procedures to prevent and combat
forest fires, as stipulated in the Brazilian Forest Code (Law 12.651/2012).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

Not applicable

4. For those safeguards to be addressed through OP/BP 4.00, characterize in general
terms the extent to which borrower systems are equivalent to the Objectives and
Operational Principles of OP 4.00, Table A1. For those safeguards to be addressed
through conventional OP/BPs, identify the reason for the decision to not apply OP 4.00
(e.g. absence of equivalence and/or acceptability report).

 Not applicable

5. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues to identify
any significant gap-filling measures necessary to fulfill the conditions for application of
OP 4.00. Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the
measures described:

 Not applicable

6. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, including the Safeguard Diagnostic Review (SDR) with
an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The target groups, main beneficiaries and principal stakeholdersof this Project are
primarily the landholders (of any size) and the municipal governments, but also the Bahia
Environmental Secretary and the Ministry of Environment.
The consultation process consisted of a two-stage process. The first phase involved
preparatory meetings from September to December 2012 in Brasilia and Salvador (Bahia)
to discuss the concept of the proposed Project and to select the target municipalities.
During this first stage of the consultation process, the scope, objectives and timing of the
Project were discussed with representatives of the MMA, Bahia State, and potential target
municipalities. The proposed approach and activities have received widespread support
from State and local governments.
The second phase of the consultation process discussed specific Project activities took
place in Salvador and targeted municipalities. This phase was more focused on rural civil
society organizations active in the productive sector, technical assistance agencies, and
land regularization agencies. Two meetings have been held. The first convened technical
and management staff from the municipalities of the priority area of intervention and was
attended by representatives of three out of the four priority municipalities (Formosa do
Rio Preto, São Desidério, and Luiz Eduardo Magalhães. This round of consultation took
place in the municipality of Barreiras, at April 10-11, 2013, and counted with the
participation of 16 participants. The second convened representatives from the Rio
Grande Watershed Committee, which is composed by 39 members from the civilian
society, the private and the public sector. This round of broader consultation took place at
April 11 and convened 28 people. All participants have previously received a technical
description note of the project, including detailed information on its objectives, scope,
components and potential environmental and social impacts.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF):
   Dates of "in-country" consultation and disclosure                                        04/09/2014
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                                            4/14/2014
   For category A projects, date of distributing the PID to the Executive Directors      Not applicable
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized
by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?       Yes [ x ]      No [ ]   N/A [ ]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager        yes
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.00 – Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in
Bank-Supported Projects
Did the Quality Assurance and Compliance Unit (QACU) and the            Yes [ ]      No []    N/A [ X ]
ESSD and International Law Practice Group (LEGEN) review and
approve the Safeguard Diagnostic Review report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes [ ]        No [X ]    N/A [ ]
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Not applicable
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?              Yes [ X ]      No [ ]   N/A [ ]
Is a separate PMP required?                                             Yes [ ]      No [X]    N/A [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards          Not applicable
specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP requirements included in
project design? If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to physical cultural      Yes [X ]       No [ ]   N/A [ ]
resources?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the             Not applicable
potential adverse impacts on physical cultural resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as           Yes [ ]      No [ ]    N/A [X]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been     Not applicable
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process      Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [X]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Not applicable
Sector Manager review and approve the plan/policy
framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and    Yes [ X ]        No [ ]    N/A [ ]
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome      yes
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it     Not applicable
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                   Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of      Not applicable
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and             Not applicable
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                 Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Not applicable
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:                Not applicable
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                Not applicable

OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the                Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in        Not applicable
the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World      Yes [ ]      No [ ]       N/A [X]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place    Not applicable
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ X ]        No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the   yes
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       yes
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
      D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                    Name      Date
Task Team Leader:                   Bernadete Lange                5/15/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Bernadete Lange                5/15/2014
Social Development Specialist:      Alberto Costa                  5/15/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Ms. Emilia Battaglini          5/16/2014
  Comments:
