INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA8927
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Brazil                     Project ID:  P143492
Project Name: BR DGM for Indigenous People (P143492)
Task Team       Alberto Coelho Gomes Cost
Leader:
Estimated       05-Dec-2014                Estimated    12-Feb-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Forestry (50%)
Theme(s):       Social Inclusion (40%), Other environment and natural resources management
(30%), Climate change (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       6.50            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                6.50
Total                                                                       6.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To strengthen the engagement of Brazilian Cerrado biome s indigenous peoples and traditional
communities in FIP, REDD+ and similar climate change oriented programs at the local, national and
global level, as well as to contribute towards improving livelihoods, land use and sustainable forest
management in their territories.
Page 1 of 14


﻿3. Project Description
The Brazil DGM follows the framework guidelines and set of activities covered under the
components designed for the global DGM. The Project will support capacity building and finance the
demand-driven provision of grants to community organizations of IPTCs in Brazil in order to
strengthen their participation in FIP and other REDD+ processes at local, national and global levels
as well as to increase their capacity to adapt to climate change. The Brazil DGM will prioritize its
actions in the Cerrado to promote synergies with the BIP projects and to reduce the challenges posed
a        by the geographic dispersion of IPTCs in Brazil.
A.     Project Components
Component 1: Sustainable and Adaptive Community Initiatives (estimated total cost: US$4.0
million). The aim of this component is to support indigenous peoples and local communities and
organizations in developing on-the-ground, no-regrets community activities of the IPTCs' choice in
order to promote sustainable forest and land use management systems, more resilient livelihoods,
ethno-development, and adaptation to climate-related changes. The component will provide
subgrants for community initiatives, training and technical assistance activities. A minimum share of
60 percent of the funds allocated for this component will be targeted to Indigenous Peoples and a
maximum share of 40 percent to Traditional Communities. It will include two subcomponents.
Subcomponent 1.A: Community Initiatives (estimated total cost: US$3.2 million) will finance the
provision of micro- and small grants for eligible community-based IPTC organizations to undertake
on-the-ground, no-regrets community activities that fall under predetermined themes related to forest
and land use management, livelihoods and sociocultural survival, and have been proposed and
selected by IPTC-led decision making. All grant proposals will be assessed by the National Steering
Committee (NSC) according to the following core criteria of: (i) alignment with the core objectives
of the DGM and FIP programs, (ii) socio-environmental relevance; (iii) cultural adequacy; (iv)
community support; and (v) sustainability. The targeting of women and youth in community
initiatives will be an advantage. All proposals submitted for Subcomponent 1A will be also screened
to ensure compliance with the World Bank's Operational Policies on environmental and social
safeguards as well as with the Brazilian legislation on the environment and Indigenous Peoples,
according to criteria to be established in the Project Operational Manual (POM).
Taking into consideration the current scenarios faced by different IPTCs, these activities will be
eligible for funding under three grant windows:
(a)    Natural Resources Management Subproject Window. * This window will fund proposals
from IPTCs that are located in environmentally priority and vulnerable areas in which manmade
threats and climate-related risks may bring major loss or decline in the long-term quality of valued
species, habitat and landscape; widespread decline in land and water quality; widespread failure of
ecosystem function or service; and major consequences for significant numbers of affected people
among vulnerable groups who lack previous experience with planning and implementing
vulnerability assessments, forest and natural resources management plans. This window will provide
funding for IPTCs to undertake a full subproject cycle of community-led assessment, planning and
implementation. Thus, subprojects are intended to enhance local IPTC capacity and social and
environmental outcomes. In addition to the core criteria, proposals for this window will be assessed
in terms of: (i) the territories' relevance for the forests, natural resources and biodiversity in the
Cerrado Biome. The ceiling value per proposal is US$75,000. Based on this value, it is estimated that
the Project may support proposals from at least 20 communities.
Page 2 of 14


﻿(b)    Immediate Threat Response Subproject Window. This window will fund proposals from
IPTCs that are under severe and immediate threat to their forests, natural resources, livelihood needs,
physical and cultural survival due to manmade and climate-related challenges. It is therefore
O
expected that subprojects funded through this window will be implemented more rapidly than those
funded under the component's other two grant windows. In addition to the core criteria, proposals for
this window will be assessed in terms of high levels of social vulnerability (poverty, food insecurity,
cultural and social distress) already faced by the proponent communities as a result of manmade and
climate-related pressures. The ceiling value per proposal is US$30,000. Based on this value, it is
estimated that the Project may support proposals from at least 36 communities.
(c)    Market-oriented Productive Subproject Window. This window will fund proposals from
IPTCs that have proven organizational capacity in handling external funds and need support to
increase their access to markets for the commercialization of agricultural and/or nontimber forest
products. It is expected these communities will have previous successful experience with livelihood
diversification and/or value-added processing of agricultural and non-timber forest products. In
addition to the core criteria, proposals for this window will be assessed according to their economic
viability and potential income-generation impacts. The ceiling value per proposal is US$60,000.
Based on this value, it is estimated that the Project may support proposals from at least 10
communities.
Taking into consideration the needs expressed by IPTCs during the Project's participatory
preparation process, these windows will finance community activities aligned with DGM and FIP
core objectives that promote: (i) sustainable forest and land use management systems as well as
community-led forest landscape restoration; (ii) seedling production for the maintenance of native
and threatened species/varieties; (iii) agroforestry production systems and agroecology tillage
practices through the use of indigenous/traditional knowledge and new technologies; (iv) collection,
value-added processing and commercialization of nontimber forest and agricultural products; (v)
indigenous and traditional water, soil and landscape management practices, including the recovery of
degraded areas and the protection of water sources; (vi) livelihood diversification for improved
nutrition, food security and quality of life; and (vii) revitalization of cultural values and traditional
knowledge.
o        Under the Natural Resource Management window, the selected IPTCs will receive grants to cover:
(i) the participatory development of local vulnerability and livelihood assessments; (ii) priority
community initiatives identified in these assessments; and (iii) training and technical assistance.
Under the other two windows, the Project will support one community-based initiative proposed by
each indigenous and traditional community as well as the needed training and technical assistance
package required for its effective implementation and sustainable management. No community
counterpart financing responsibilities will be requested.
Subcomponent IB: Training and Technical Assistance (estimated total cost: US$0.8 million) will
finance the services, goods and operational costs to carry out: (i) training activities to enhance the
technical and managerial capacities of beneficiary organizations; and (ii) technical assistance to
support the preparation of the technical projects for the preselected community proposals and the
implementation of the approved community initiatives. Each proposal submitted by IPTCs for
community initiatives will be assessed in a participatory manner by the National Executing Agency,
which, in agreement with the beneficiary IPTCs, will define the needed on-site training and technical
assistance package.
Page 3 of 14


﻿Component 1-Project Cycle: Once a year, the NSC (whose membership is described in paragraph 41
below) will establish the priority thematic areas for funding under each grant window. The National
Executing Agency (NEA, whose selection is currently underway as described in paragraph 42 below)
O
will issue annual Calls for Proposals that will state the priority thematic areas, the eligibility and
selection criteria, and the number of proposals to be funded. IPTCs will express their interest by
submitting a streamlined Expression of Interest form. Their proposals will be assessed by the NEA
according to eligibility criteria, and the NSC will rank and select the winning proposals. The NEA
will then provide support to the selected IPTCs for preparing the Technical Project and the training
and technical assistance packages. Subgrant agreements will be signed by the NEA and the winning
IPTCs' community-based organizations and representative organizations. These organizations will
implement the technical projects. The NEA will monitor implementation and evaluate results under
the supervision of the World Bank and the NSC (see Annex 2 for a flowchart of the project cycle).
Component 2: Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening (estimated total cost: US$1.5
million). The aim of this component is to finance capacity-building and institutional-strengthening
activities that target IPTC organizations. These activities may contribute toward increasing
managerial and technical capacities, access to financing sources for forest/land use and sustainable
natural resources management, and participation in FIP, REDD+ and climate-change-related
decision-making processes. The Project will finance goods, services and operational costs to: (i)
carry out the Project's communication and dissemination strategy, reach target groups, and mobilize
communities and organizations; (ii) promote training and informational workshops as well as
capacity-building activities; and (iii) support the creation and consolidation of representative
community-based organizations. The annual Capacity-Building Plans will be prepared and
implemented by the NEA according to priorities established by the NSC. The NEA may hire
subcontractors to implement some or all activities in this Plan (see Annex 2 for a flowchart of the
project cycle).
Taking into consideration the needs expressed by IPTCs during the Project's participatory
preparation process, these capacity-building and institutional-strengthening activities will focus on:
(i) enhancing leadership and negotiation skills and active participation in initiatives related to natural
resource-based mitigation and climate-change adaptation; (ii) promoting a better understanding of
REDD+ mechanisms, forest management and climate-change adaptation programs; (iii) increasing
a        knowledge of and access to public policies, credit lines and financial resources related to forest
adaptation; (iv) enhancing financial management skills; (v) improving knowledge about new
methodologies for participatory land and environmental management, vulnerability mapping,
planning and implementation of strategies for coping with and adapting to manmade climate change,
sustainable forest and land management practices, and forest-fire prevention; and (vi) expanding
technical skills for the adoption of new technologies that deal with productive activities, livelihood
diversification, environmental conservation, and land surveillance. These thematic areas are fully
aligned with FIP and DGM guidelines.
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated total cost: US$1.0
million). The aim of this component is to support the Project's effective governance and efficient
management, dissemination, monitoring and evaluation. This component will finance the incremental
operational costs incurred by the National Executing Agency (NEA) to effectively and efficiently
carry out its responsibilities: (i) by serving as secretariat to the National Steering Committee (NSC);
(ii) through the Project's technical coordination, monitoring and evaluation; and reporting to the
World Bank and the Global Steering Committee; (iii) through the Project's adequate financial
Page 4 of 14


﻿management, procurement, and auditing; (iv) through the operation of the Project's Grievance
Redress Mechanism; and (v) by supervising the implementation of community initiatives and results
assessments. Further information on the NEA's role and responsibilities is presented in Annex 3.
This component will finance studies, training, travel and limited procurement of software and
O
U         hardware.
The Brazil DGM will also benefit from the global component on knowledge sharing and networking
on REDD+.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Brazil DGM will act in synergy with the Brazilian Investment Plan (BIP) and the Global DGM
and will be focused on the Cerrado biome, which is strategic for economic and environmental
reasons as well as for food security. The Cerrado is the largest wooded savanna area in a single
country and extends over some 2.04 million km2, corresponding to nearly 24 percent of Brazil's
territory, in 11 states (Bahia, Goids, Tocantins, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais,
Maranhdo, Parand, Piaui, Rond6nia and Sdo Paulo) and the Federal District. The Cerrado includes
savanna, forest, low-grass savanna, wetlands and gallery forest ecosystems. It is one of the world s
25 richest regions in terms of biodiversity. Due to its high level of endemism and rapid loss of
habitat, the Cerrado is regarded as one of the 34 global biodiversity hotspots. It plays an important
role in maintaining connectivity between biomes because it borders nearly all other Brazilian biomes
(except for coastal ecosystems and pampas). Despite this biological wealth, less than 4 percent of the
biome's original area is protected by conservation units, it has no specific legislation to effectively
protect what remains of its remnants, and it continues to face increasing land-use change and
agricultural development in areas that have been considered priorities for conservation and
sustainable use by the MMA (Canhos et al. 2008).
The Cerrado is the home of substantial sociodiversity, plays a key role in the expansion of the
agricultural frontier and the growth of commodities and biofuel production, and is threatened by
deforestation and land occupation. About 25 million people reside in the region, most of them (83
percent) in urban areas. Although rural areas in the Cerrado are mostly occupied by more than one
million private landholdings (72 percent of the territory), 8.2 percent of the biome is under protected
areas, 4.3 percent is under indigenous lands, and 0.3 percent is composed of quilombola lands. Small
landholdings (78 percent of the total, containing just 11 percent of the agricultural area) are spread
throughout the biome and comprise many local communities: extractive populations (e.g.,
quebradeiras de c6co, babaqueiros), groups associated with specific ecosystems (e.g., vazanteiros and
chapadeiros), and peasants (e.g., geraizeiros). Indigenous peoples comprise 40 different ethnic
groups who speak different languages (Karajd, Aruak, J6, and Tupi-Guarani, among others) and still
maintain their cultural characteristics, perpetuating religious, political and social organization from
the pre-contact period. Over the past 30 years, the biome's vegetation is being rapidly transformed
due to agricultural expansion and the growing pressure to open up new lands to increase beef and
grain production for exports. Approximately 100 million hectares have been converted to cultivated
pasture or extensive agricultural areas. According to some indexes, over 65 percent of its original
area has already been heavily modified. About 40 percent of the biome's area is now degraded. This
ratio may increase further if inadequate agricultural expansion continues. Deforestation is now
proportionally more severe in the Cerrado than in the Amazon and less than 52 percent of the area
covered by native vegetation remains. Consequently, the Cerrado's relative contribution to GHG
emissions in the country has increased. Estimates indicate that deforestation in the Cerrado is
proportionally more severe than that of the Amazon Biome. These manmade pressures due to the
Page 5 of 14


﻿rapid expansion of agriculture have had a high environmental cost, including fragmentation of
habitats, invasion of exotic species, and loss of biodiversity, Indigenous peoples and local
communities have also faced increasing pressures to sustain their low-impact livelihoods due to the
expansion of the agricultural frontier in the Cerrado. This expansion has eroded the global benefits
O
for forest and biodiversity conservation. IPLCs play a significant role in conserving the biodiversity
of Brazil's different forest biomes due to: (i) their territorial extension; (ii) the variety of ecosystems
these biomes contain; (iii) the conservation status of these lands and their natural resources; (iv)
IPLCs' tendency to carry out sustainable activities in their territories; and (v) the connectivity that
their territories provide between protected areas in the different biomes.
As in other parts of the country , these pressures and threats can be conceived as being threefold: (i)
external threats, arising from land uses outside indigenous lands and traditional territories; (ii)
encroachment, arising from the extraction of resources by non-indigenous/non-traditional peoples
who encroach on their territories; and (iii) internal overexploitation, arising from the overexploitation
of resources by indigenous peoples/traditional peoples within their territories. In the Cerrado, the
main external threats faced by indigenous lands and traditional territories are related to the increased
occupation of areas surrounding indigenous and traditional territories in the past 20 years by
monoculture cultivation of grains (especially soybeans), intensive cattle-raising activity,
urbanization, and current/projected construction works, which have provoked aggradation and
pollution of rivers, death of plants and animals, changes in local climate, and changes in the diet of
indigenous peoples and local communities. The main drivers related to encroachment are logging and
timber extraction, hunting and trade in wild animals, and prospecting for mineral wealth. Indigenous
and traditional territories face internal pressures and the overuse of natural and forest resources,
which are related to (i) demographic growth, and (ii) the fact that many indigenous lands in the
Cerrado, even those with a large territorial extension, have been established in former agriculturally
degraded areas, thus reducing the availability of natural resources.
In summary, these external and internal factors have contributed in many cases to make the survival
of 'IPLC's traditional livelihoods and cultures more difficult, ineffective and even maladaptive. As
the stock of open lands traditionally used by IPLCs in the Cerrado for extensive livestock raising,
extractive activities, and "slash-and-fallow" agriculture has been reduced, the survival of their
traditional ways of living became harder, less effective or, worse, oftentimes maladaptive, leading to
overuse and consequently to the loss of cultural values including migration to cities, intergenerational
a         conflicts, and steady loss of traditional values and knowledge. The erosion of traditional values and
practices further contributes to the unsustainable use of land and of natural and forest resources. This
further undermines environmental conservation, traditional and low-impact livelihoods, and the
adaptive capacity of indigenous and local communities.
Indigenous lands alone have the potential to double the area of Brazil's forest biomes that are under a
conservation regime. They represent 69 percent of the total number of areas under some form of
protection in the Amazon biome and 58 percent in the Cerrado. Even though they are mostly located
in the Brazilian Amazon, indigenous lands play an important role in promoting conservation in other
biomes as well, both for their biological richness and for the connectivity they provide with other
protected areas (PAs). In the Cerrado, they can play a more important role at the landscape level. By
reducing pressures on biodiversity within indigenous lands from the use of forest resources and
improving ecosystem structure and function, these areas can help improve connectivity across the
landscape. Even though some of these indigenous lands may already suffer from environmental
degradation, given their location and remaining forest fragments, improving sustainable use and
recovering lands can lever their role as stepping stones for improving forest conservation across a
Page 6 of 14


﻿landscape.
The Project aims to help IPTCs address the challenges they face in the Cerrado and to reduce their
vulnerability through knowledge and capacity-building activities and the piloting of forest and
O
U         climate-change adaptation initiatives based mostly on the diversification of their livelihoods and the
sustainable use of their lands and natural resources. The BR-DGM is being designed mainly to
address the internal pressures faced by IPTCs. It will help to change the baseline scenario through its
highly participatory strategy for the empowerment of IPTCs and by supporting: (a) the capacity
building of IPTC organizations to help make them better able to voice their interests in climate-
change-related decision-making processes and to benefit from FIP and other REDD+ programs; and
(b) the implementation of on-the-ground "no-regrets" community-based adaptation (CBA) activities
of the IPTCs' choice that will promote economic activities, livelihood diversification and sustainable
forest/land use management systems and contribute to: (i) reducing IPTCs' vulnerability to the
pressures imposed on their forest landscapes in the short term, and (ii) promoting adaptive coping
strategies in the medium and long terms.
The BR-DGM has the potential to mitigate or promote adaptation to manmade- and climate-related
changes as well as to reduce their social and economic costs. Due to its participatory methodology
and by empowering IPTCs in decision-making arenas, the Project may also help to increase their
presence and voice in policies and programs related to forest adaptation, REDD+ and climate-change
adaptation that may affect their lives and livelihoods, as well as contribute to leveraging their role as
stepping stones for the improvement of forest conservation across a landscape.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSURR)
Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP   Yes         The proposed Project is a conservation Project,
U         BP 4.01                                    and it is proposed to be rated as Category B. The
proposed Project is expected to have a positive
impact on the environment as it seeks to promote
sustainable development and natural resources
management in Indigenous Lands and for the
traditional communities whose livelihoods
depend on the biome's natural resources. The
nature and scale of the proposed investments will
not have significant adverse impacts.
Notwithstanding these positive impacts, the
proposed Project will be working in some
sensitive biodiversity and dry forest areas and a
Programmatic Environmental and Social
Management Framework (P-ESMF) has been
prepared for the Global DGM. This P-ESMF has
been distributed to the members of the National
Steering Committee to information and feedback.
It is being tailored to include specific country-
level features and operational procedures to
Page 7 of 14


﻿screen, assess, mitigate and monitor
environmental impacts in, ensuring compliance
with World Bank operational policies during
project implementation.
This country-level-ESMF will include a Social
Impact Assessment that analysis the
socioeconomic context in which Indigenous
Peoples and Traditional Communities in the
Cerrado Biome are inserted, describe land tenure
issues, consider traditional livelihoods and main
cultural norms and worldviews (with an special
emphasis on gender issues) and address the main
pressures and threats they face in their traditional
livelihoods (with an special emphasis on climate-
change adaptation and social resilience).
The country-level ESMF will also: (i) raise the
potentially positive and negative impacts of the
eligible activities and define a number of
preventive and mitigating actions; (ii) identify the
principal impacts to be expected from activities
eligible for project support and indicate the
process to screen these environmental risks and to
mitigate and/or compensate them;. (iii) address
the possible capacity shortcomings with the key
stakeholders as well as the monitoring
requirements and procedures; and, (iv) include the
screening criteria and procedures for documenting
(i) voluntary land donations that may be needed
to carry out some activities under sub-component
1A and (ii) the broad community support to these
activities.
The country-level ESMF will be distributed to the
National Steering Committee, publicly
disseminated and consulted with key stakeholders
prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes          Activities under proposed Project should lead to
positive impacts on natural habitats, such as their
conservation and recovery. Given that OP 4.04 is
triggered and all planning activities must follow
World Bank policies, the project will identify
monitoring and management activities to prevent
or mitigate any possible negative impacts on
natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36              Yes          The Project will contribute to the conservation of
the Cerrado biome. It is expected to have a
positive impact by avoiding deforestation and
maintaining natural vegetation, along water
Page 8 of 14


﻿courses or in the vicinity of springs, protecting
environmental services and values of natural
vegetation. The ESMF to be prepared will
consider the requirements of OB/BP4.36
whenever restoration and plantation activities are
being planned.
Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes          The project would not finance any pesticides or
other chemical amendments that would trigger
OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of
pesticides would probably to be used in the short
term by a small portion of targeted small
producers. The need to use pesticides or
herbicides should be indicated in each sub-grant,
as well as the IPM measures to be adopted. When
the use of pesticides or herbicides is justified, an
analysis of potential negative impacts resulting
from the use of these chemicals and the risks
associated with the inappropriate handling or
storing of their containers should be conducted.
The sub-grants should also include measures to
reduce those risks, in compliance with Law No.
7802/89.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  Yes        Project implementation would not cause any
BP 4.11                                     negative impact on known physical cultural
resources (PCR). Proposed community initiatives
with expected direct and negative impacts on
known archeological, paleontological, historical
or other culturally significant sites will not be
eligible. However, this policy is triggered given
that some sub-project investments could result in
physical interventions with small earthworks
involving the chance finds of physical cultural
resources. The P-ESMF, the ESMF and the
Operation Manual include specific screening
provisions for evaluating potential impacts on
cultural resources and should provide specific
guidance on the chance finds procedures.
Brazil has a well-developed legislative and
normative framework, which is under Federal
oversight by the National Institute for Protection
of Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN)
and, for the case of Indigenous lands, the
oversight of The Indigenous Peoples Foundation
(FUNAI).
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  Yes          Since the project specifically covers indigenous
communities and will be implemented in known
locations of Indigenous Peoples in forest lands,
Page 9 of 14


﻿OP4.10 applies. As Indigenous Peoples will be
the overwhelming majority of direct project
beneficiaries, as project preparation will be
Q)                                                   carried out in a broadly participatory way
including an intensive process of consultation
with Indigenous Peoples, and as ruled by this
Safeguard Policy (OP 4.10, paragraph 12), no
separate Indigenous People Policy Framework
(IPPF) or Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) is
required. Meanwhile, the elements of an IPP/IPPF
will be included in the overall project design and
the Project Appraisal Document (PAD) includes a
brief summary of how the project complies with
OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No         One of the principles covered in the grant
4.12                                       mechanism is avoiding relocation and
displacement of Indigenous Peoples and
communities occupying forest lands. The criteria
for selection of activities ensure that no relocation
or restriction of access to resources takes place.
The screening criteria for documenting voluntary
land donations that might be needed for some
types of community initiatives in Traditional
Communities will be included under the ESMF,
but this type of transaction in itself does not
require the triggering of the Policy.
OP 4.12 has not been triggered also because there
will be no restrictions in access to natural
resources resulting from community forestry
projects (footnote 6, OP 4.12).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No          This policy is not triggered because the proposed
Project will neither support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
investments related with services of existing
dams.
Projects on International      No          This policy is not triggered since the project will
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       not affect any international waterways as defined
under the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No        This policy is not triggered as the project will not
7.60                                       work in any disputed areas as defined under the
policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 10 of 14


﻿The project interventions comprise mainly small-scale investments that may cause positive or
neutral impacts. This proposed conservation project is expected to have a positive environmental
impact because it seeks to promote sustainable development and livelihoods, forest and natural
resources management, and climate-change coping and adaptation strategies in indigenous lands
and local communities whose livelihoods depend on the biome's natural resources. Project
activities may also contribute toward reducing deforestation pressures on the remaining forests-
on which the livelihood of most IPLCs relies-and protecting headwaters and riparian zones by
reducing water and soil pollution.
Due to the community-demand-driven approach, the Project is not expected to bring any adverse
effects for beneficiary communities. Instead, it will support only activities that will contribute to:
(i) improve the livelihood of IPLCs; (ii) increase their social resilience, adaptive and mitigating
capacity to deal with the social and environmental pressures that they face and that harm their
social, cultural and economic survival; (iii) recover and preserve their traditional knowledge; and
(iv) strengthen the capacity of their representative organizations to plan their future life and to
promote the effective, efficient and sustainable management of their lands and natural resources.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The proposed Project will be working in various sensitive biodiversity and dry forest areas and a
Programmatic Environmental and Social Management Framework (P-ESMF) has been prepared
for the Global DGM and will serve as the Project's framework. The P-ESMF raises the potentially
positive and negative impacts of the eligible activities and defines a number of preventive and
mitigating actions. The country-level Environmental and Social Management Framework will deal
with specific country-level features and operational procedures to screen, assess, mitigate and
monitor environmental impacts.
O
The specific non-government organization which will implement the project (the National
Executing Agency - NEA) will be selected before Appraisal in a competitive basis and is not yet
decided at this stage. Selection criteria have been discussed with Indigenous Peoples, Traditional
Communities and Governmental partners and approved by them.
To be eligible, the Non-Governmental Organization may have at least two years of operation, legal
constitution and registration; it may also demonstrate previous and highly qualified experience on:
the financial management of projects and programs targeting IPLCs, the implementation of
projects and activities at the Cerrado biome; the provision of capacity building activities on socio-
environmental subjects to IPLCs; monitoring and evaluation of socio-environmental activities
implemented at Indigenous Lands and Traditional Communities; and on the implementation of
projects financed by Multilateral and International Agencies.
Selection criteria of sub-grants activities will ensure that no land is acquired nor any restriction of
access to natural resources will occur. Similarly, the activities will not be in areas of
environmental importance (e.g. protected areas).The physical investments would be mostly small
scale, and are not expected to have major environmental or social safeguards issues. The nature of
these investments will determine the choice of locations for physical investment.
Brazil has substantial experience with grants for environmental management programs in
Page 11 of 14


﻿indigenous lands and local communities. The Indigenous Lands Program (PPTAL), the
Demonstration Programs (PDA), and a number of other programs within the context of the Pilot
Program for the Protection of the Tropical Forests of Brazil (PPG7) have contributed significantly
to building expertise related to territorial environmental management of other population groups
O
and landscapes in addition to the Indigenous Lands. In consequence, Brazil has built large
institutional capacity for dealing with Safeguard Policies.
Site-specific assessments will be conducted and impact mitigation plans drawn up, as needed,
during subproject preparation which complies with the overall project safeguard framework.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main beneficiaries of the Brazil FIP-DGM are IPLCs and their representative organizations in
the Cerrado. Local communities include all social groups who self-assert a distinctive cultural
identity, maintain knowledge and practices transferred from one generation to the next by means
of tradition, maintain distinctive forms of social organization and cultural beliefs and norms,
traditionally occupy lands and territories, and rely on distinctive productive systems and low-
impact NRM strategies for their cultural, social, religious, ancestral and economic survival. The
Cerrado is home to 41 indigenous peoples and a multitude of traditional local communities,
including quilombola communities, extractive populations, and agricultural and pastoral
communities dependent on specific surrounding ecosystems. Capacity-building and institutional-
strengthening activities will also reach and benefit IPLCs of other biomes.
The proposed Project was prepared through an intensive consultation process with key
stakeholders: IPLCs from the Cerrado. Three regional workshops and a final seminar have been
carried out with the broad participation of men and women from Indigenous Peoples and
Traditional Communities in the Cerrado. The main features of the proposed project design-the
appropriateness of the proposed community demand-driven approach, the eligible activities and
proponent organizations, the size of community subgrants, the composition of the NSC, the
criteria for the selection of the NEA, the arrangements for social control, etc.-have been debated
and approved by self-appointed representatives from all indigenous peoples and many different
traditional populations. Two main representative forums of IPLCs-the National Commission on
Traditional Peoples and Communities (CNPCT) and the National Indigenous Policy Commission
(CNPI)-were also consulted during preparation.
The Programmatic Environmental and Social Management Framework (P-ESMF) was translated
to Portuguese and has been distributed to the members of the National Steering Committee (NSC)
for information and feedback. A country-level Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) will be prepared by the National Executing Agency (NEA) and will be consulted with the
NSC and other representatives of Indigenous peoples and traditional communities, approved by
the Bank, and disclosed both in country and on the Bank's website before appraisal.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           30-Jun-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Page 12 of 14


﻿Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           30-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          No
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           30-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Q)         Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ x] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a    Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Page 13 of 14


﻿Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[  No[X]    NA [
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[  No[X]  NA
in the project cost?
O
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[      NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[  No[X]     NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Alberto Coelho Gomes Cost
Approved By
Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                Date: 05-Nov-2014
Advisor:
Practice Manager/    Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)            Date: 09-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 14 of 14


