                                                                                     83668

                        INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        December 20, 2013


I. BASIC INFORMATION


 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Brazil             Project ID:              Pl26735
 Project Name:                Strengthening Public Management and Integrated Territorial
                              Development Technical Assistance Loan Project
 Task Team Leader:            Alessandra Campanaro
 Estimated Appraisal Date: July 17, 2013         Estimated Board Date: January 24,2013
 Managing Unit:               LCSDU              Lending Instrument:      Technical Assistance
                                                                          Loan
 Sector(s):                   Sub-national goverrunent administration (34%); Public
                              administration- Other social services (25%); Public administration
                              -Water, sanitation and flood protection (25%); General education
                              sector (8%); Health (8%)
 Theme(s):                    Other urban development (34%); Natural disaster management
                              (25%); Other social development (25%); Education for all (8%);
                              Health system performance (8%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00        No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:     48                       Total Bank Financing:   48
 Total Cofinancing:      0                        Financing Gap:          0
     Financing Source                                                                   Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0
    Total                                                                                      48
 Environmental Category: B
Is this a Repeater project? No
Is this a Transferred         No
project?

2. Current Project Development Objectives
The proposed PDO is to support the Borrower to improve service delivery through introducing
performance-based management information technologies and an Integrated Territorial
Development Approach in key public services.

3. Project Description

The main components ofthe project will be the following:
Component 1: Strengthening metropolitan management through integration and
coordination in urban development, housing, transport, environment and disaster risk
management. US$ 16.4 million        (a) Strengthening of the Borrower's metropolitan
governance framework through, inter alia: (i) monitoring and evaluation of territorial
development impacts; and (ii) the development of an integrated master plan for metropolitan
urban development.

        (b) Strengthening of the Borrower's metropolitan transport management capacity
through, inter alia: (i) the evaluation and consolidation of the existing transportation ticketing
system (Bilhete Unico ); (ii) the definition of an action plan for the revision of the AMTU- RJ' s
role; and (iii) the strengthening of the AGETRANSP institutional capacity.

         (c) Strengthening of the Borrower's metropolitan housing management capacity
through, inter alia: (i) the carrying out of technical studies to develop an institutional
strengthening proposal for the SEH and the CEHAB; (ii) the carrying out of technical studies to
design low income housing programs and integrate those programs with social programs; and
(iii) the design of an integrated plan for sustainable urban land regularization.

        (d) Improvement of the Borrower's disaster risk management capacity and early
warning system for high rainfall events through, inter alia: (i) the development and
implementation of hardware for the existing Borrower's early warning system to monitor and
respond to geological and hydrological disaster risks; (ii) the carrying out of a study to model
the hydrological disaster warning system, including basic protocols to be used by the Borrower
and its municipalities; (iii) the mapping of the Borrower's landslide and flood risks; and (iv) the
carrying out of training to various Borrower's disaster risk management teams.

Component 2: Improving living conditions in the most vulnerable social settings. US$ 23
million. (a) Strengthening of the Borrower's capacity to implement an integrated and evidence
-based medium-term social development strategy through, inter alia the support to the
Borrower's restructuring and strategic planning process for social programs by: (i) developing
and implementing a strategic plan for the SEASDH; (ii) carrying out technical studies to design
a model for a monitoring and evaluation system, and acquisition of information management
hardware and software; (iii) strengthening of existing public sector management procedures
and administrative systems; and (iv) strengthening the SUAS' management and effectiveness
capacity.

       (b) Enhancement of the Borrower's capacity to identify, locate and support missing and
involuntarily interned people through, inter alia: (i) the development of a software and a
methodology (for reporting, classifying and analyzing data on missing people) to implement the
PLID; and (ii) the extension of the MSM Information System to all the hospitals located in the
Borrower's territory.

        (c) (i) Strengthening of the Borrower's: (A) education management capacity including
evidence-based policy making capacity for secondary education; and (B) management capacity
on school infrastructure; and (ii) enhancement of the quality of secondary education, all
through, inter alia: (1) the expansion of SEEDUC's analytical and system management
capacity; (2) the evaluation of infrastructure conditions in the Borrower's secondary schools;
and (3) the development and implementation of a 4-year plan to build and refurbish necessary
secondary school infrastructure.

        (d) Strengthening of the Borrower's health monitoring and evaluation processes and
public hospitals' information systems through, inter alia:(i) the evaluation of the comparative
performance of different models of organizing and delivering primary health care; and (ii) the
analysis and restructuring of administrative and clinical processes in public hospitals.

Component 3: Strengthening core finance and taxation functions. US$ 6.1 million.
Development and adoption of new practices aimed at strengthening the Borrower's tax
administration and financial management systems through, inter alia: (i) (I) the carrying out of
technical studies to develop a methodology for estimating lost revenue due to tax waivers, (II)
the development of proposed revisions to the tax collection procedures, and (III) the design and
implementation of diagnostic mechanisms needed to implement best practices in debt
management; (ii) the implementation of a control system for the Borrower's Automobile
Property Tax (IPVA); (iii) the development of procedures, processes, manuals and databases to
improve the management and costing of public investment programs, to better assess medium
term implications of fiscal policy decisions; and (iv) provision of training for technical
specialists and managers.

Component 4: Project management. US$ 2.5 million. Provision of support for the overall
management of the Project. This component will be administered day to day by the SEOBRAS
UGP (see Section IV, A on implementation arrangements), however the decisions about its
funding allocation \viii be taken by the Coordination Committee. The project will support
project management and provide implementation support including technical, administrative.
and fiduciary support, support for monitoring and evaluation, data collection, and stakeholder
involvement.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region (RJMR) environmental problems are diverse and
comparative to its magnitude. Key environmental issues in the RJMR are related to a massive
urban development in an environmentally sensitive area. The RJMR area is characterized by a
diverse topography, with high mountains separating the coastline from the west side lowlands
(Baixada). A significant portion of the Region is formed by mountains and low lands, with
unfavorable conditions for urban development. Natural vegetation remains in the mountains
and steep terrains. Most low land has urban use.

The RJMR faces numerous environmental problems, such as unplanned occupation of steep
slopes and river margins, water quality degradation, air quality problems in specific areas and
progressive degradation of the remaining preserved Atlantic Forest spots. The recent landslides
in Niteroi and Nova Friburgo reinforce the importance of the ongoing State policies to improve
urban development planning, environmental management and risk mitigation.

The RJMR has Atlantic Forest ecosystems with high rates of biodiversity. Natural vegetation
still responds. for approximately one fourth of the area, including forests, mangroves, salt
marshes and beaches, essential to the environmental equilibrium. The most significant
remaining forest and conservation units are located in the foothills of the central mountainous
region or close to the shoreline, in swampy areas in the vicinity of the Guanabara Bay, and the
western city of Rio de Janeiro. The forests, marshes and mangroves are located in regions
where physical obstacles placed limits on expansion of economic activities or where they have
stagnated due to socioeconomic realities and political conditions, allowing native vegetation to
regenerate.

The RJMR shares with other metropolitan areas in Brazil the problems of water pollution, and
the need to improve sanitation, solid waste collection and disposal. Problems with sewerage and
solid waste collection services are aggravated by the region topographic conditions. Sanitation
coverage is not universal. It is higher in the affluent and consolidated portions of the RJMR, but
deficient in peri-urban areas, slums (favelas), occupied mainly by lower-income populations.

In summary, urban expansion in RJMR takes place in a unique and fragile natural environment,
characterized by diverse topography and encroachment of urban settlements into
environmentally sensitive areas, causing progressive environmental degradation. The GORJ
sector policies addressed by this project focus on the region urban degradation causes,
improving urban planning and environmental management.

During preparation, the Bank undertook a social assessment to explore the potential social
impacts of the project.. It relied on secondary sources - mostly social assessments and poverty
and social impact analyses carried out for previous DPL operations with the state and
municipality of Rio de Janeiro. These previous assessments relied on demographic and census
data, ethnographic studies of the conditions of daily life of poor people, youth, women and
vulnerable groups, and social assessment consultations.. The previous assessments show that,
despite having recently begun to tum the comer after decades of economic stagnation and social
deterioration, the State of Rio de Janeiro and its metropolitan region have not been able to
convert economic growth into widespread, improved social well-being. Although the
proportion of poor and extremely poor people in the State's population is smaller than in the rest
of the country, social and economic inequality remains high in the state of Rio de Janeiro. Both
metropolitan and non-metropolitan regions present relevant challenges to further reduce
poverty and improve well-being.

These assessments tend to concur with the proposition that lower incomes, poverty and extreme
poverty are closely and meaningfully correlated with race, generation and gender issues, lower
levels of education, more limited access to public services, inadequate housing and higher
vulnerability to violence and crime. Also, there is strong evidence that poverty and extreme
poverty are considerably more widespread in the metropolitan region and disproportionately
 and overwhelmingly affect female-headed households with children (a trend towards a
 feminization of poverty) and afro-descendants who reside in precarious settlements and at-risk
 areas. The metropolitan region has expanded in the last decade toward peripheral zones and
 vertically within the favelas in a unique and fragile natural environment. The absence of a
 formal housing market and state policies for low-income housing has led poor families to locate
themselves in underserviced peripheral areas. These "solutions" have increased social
exclusion and promoted "favelization" in most peripheral areas. Thus, the percentage of people
living in substandard housing under precarious conditions and in at-risk areas has increased
and, in recent years, at a rate three times faster than the growth rate of the city's population.
Additionally, the available data show that, since 1985, increasing numbers of precarious, poor
and informal settlements have fallen under the rule of drug lords and militias, with devastating
effects for the residents. Crime and violence are focused in these settlements and surrounding
areas, and victimize young people the most. Finally, this research, social assessment
consultations and public opinion polls have pointed out rampant violence and criminality -
closely related with drug dealing and addiction- are conceived of as the main social concerns
and the key obstacles to new business attraction, economic recovery and social development in
the state.

Previous research and previous social assessment consultations- reviewed on the social
assessment for this operation- show the metropolitan population agrees that (a) social and
economic inequality is the main issue in the metropolitan region of Rio de Janeiro and (b) it is
reflected in a spatial distribution of inequality that is reinforced by the lack of state investments
in public services and infrastructure in most settlements. The data available from qualitative
research and consultations show broad public support for policies driven towards urban
upgrading of favelas and the reduction of settlements in at-risk areas. Many studies also suggest
that the metropolitan population agrees that the re-taking of informal settlements previously
controlled by drug dealers and militias was essential for improving the living conditions of poor
residents, recovering their citizenship rights, and improving their participation in civil society.
Finally, the available sources reveal that the metropolitan population and, in particular, the
people living in violence ridden communities previously or currently controlled by drug dealers
and militias, strongly support the view that police activities should be complemented with other
social interventions, including policies to improve low-income housing, upgrade informal
settlements and promote social development. Thus, the feedback from residents of informal
settlements about UPP (Pacification Police Units) policies has been mostly positive, but they
remain concerned with the potential migration of crime and violence to other neighborhoods.
They express fears that UPP interventions may not endure and that drug traffickers and militias
might return and retaliate against residents. They also fear that traffickers might prevail over
both government and nongovernment programs that promote social and youth development,
strengthen citizenship rights among a population that has been socialized under the culture of
violence, and return drug users to their everyday family life.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                                          Yes            No
  Environmental Assessment                                                  X
  The proposed Strengthening Public Management and Integrated Territorial Development
  Technical Assistance Project is expected to have positive environmental impacts, given the
  focus on capacity building of key institutions of the Rio de Janeiro Government. The
  operation will support technical assistance related to sustainable urban development,
  housing and transport sectors institutional modernization. Institutional capacity
  improvement has important environmental and social implications, allowing the State to
  adopt sustainable practices, especially related to housing and land titling programs.
 The Project includes primarily conceptual studies and activities related to institutional
  strengthening, which are likely to have minimal or no direct adverse environmental
 impacts. The strengthening of the State's disaster risk management systems, the
 metropolitan master plan, the housing policy and the land management program are the
 only activities that may have indirect environmental implications.
 For this reason, the project has been rated category "B" and safeguard policies have been
 triggered for Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The Environmental Assessment
 Safeguard is mandatory to all projects that may potentially have an environmental or social
 impact. The Natural Habitats and Involuntary Resettlement are also triggered.
 The environmental and social assessments were carried out by the Borrower, assessing all
 sub-projects potential environmental and/or social impacts. The Environmental
 Management Framework and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) address
 sub-components screening and eligibility, and guidelines for the effective and timely
 implementation of environmental and social safeguards during Project implementation.
 These instruments include social and environmental conceptual frameworks for activities
 supported by the project, including conceptual studies that may have indirect
 environmental implications.
 The project will provide a broad-based and participatory arena for the establishment of an
 integrated metropolitan development strategy that will build upon and improve existing
 sector-based planning and management exercises that lack adequate communication
among the various players including a special emphasis on the environment. In addition to
the traditional (municipal) master planning processes, the proposed project will generate
value added by establishing medium- and long-term strategic development targets for the
metropolitan area that are linked to stakeholders, investment plans, time horizons, and
implementation indicators while taking environmental implications fully into account.
With respect to technical assistance activities to be provided under Components 1 and 2,
the State will ensure that the terms of reference are reviewed by the Bank and incorporate
applicable Bank safeguard policies. The project will support (through Component 1)
activities aimed at improving disaster risk management (DRM) capacity.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                      I x I
The project does not include conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats, and no
significant impact on natural habitats is foreseen. However, the Project includes housing
and land management related conceptual studies and policy formulation that may have
implications on natural habitats. The Natural Habitats Safeguards is triggered on a
precautionary basis, and must be applied if impacts on natural habitats are identified, or
anticipated, during Project implementation. The Secretariat of Public Works (SEOBRAS)
will be in charge of the metropolitan master plan and as such will ensure that the EMF, any
associated plan, and the RPF are taken into due consideration during project
implementation.
  Project activities will give preference to those that do not cause negative impacts on natural
  habitats. Where such impacts are inevitable the appropriate measures to avoid, mitigate
  and where appropriate compensate for them will be implemented.
  Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                  I         I     X
   None of the project's activities will directly or indirectly influence the management or use
  of natural or plantation forests.
 Pest Mana2ement (OP 4.09)                                             I          I     X
   The project will not support the procurement or use of pesticides or other agricultural
 chemicals, or lead to the increased use of such chemicals.
 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                              I        I      X
 The Project does not involve excavations, earth movement, flooding or other major
 environmental changes.
 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       I        I      X
 The Project does not affect Indigenous Peoples and this policy has not been triggered. A
 screening exercise- relying on official information available from the National Agency of
 Indigenous Affair (Fundayao Nacional do indio)- has not found the presence of
 Indigenous Peoples ~ith the four characteristics considered by this Policy within the
 Project Area. Indeed, indigenous lands in the state of Rio de Janeiro are found at the
 southernmost municipalities of Angra dos Reis and Parati.
 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                 I X I
 The project supports studies and technical assistance. Its potential to generate direct
 impacts related with involuntary resettlement is unexpected. However, the team has
 triggered the Involuntary Resettlement Policy in a precautionary mode.
 This precautionary approach was considered proper because adverse social consequences
 and disputes related with involuntary resettlement may arise from subsequent activities,
projects and/or programs designed and implemented under the state of Rio de Janeiro
government's disaster risk management and urban territorial development policies framed
according to the outcomes ofthe supported studies. Such policies and plans could involve
the resettlement of families living in precarious settlements and/or areas at risk of
landslides. The State will ensure that the terms of reference for relevant studies and
activities are reviewed by the Bank, incorporate applicable Bank safeguard policies and
these will inform and guide the proper handling of any involuntary resettlement.
After triggering the policy, the team has given advice to the client on the Involuntary
Resettlement Policy and has worked closely with the government of Rio de Janeiro and the
implementing agencies (Secretariat of Social Development, State Land Institute,
Secretariat of Housing, Secretariat of Public Works), which have properly prepared a RPF.
Three technical meetings were held between the team and these implementing agencies to
revise, improve and frame this RPF between July and December 2011. This framework
covers the gaps between the state regulatory framework and the Bank's Involuntary
Resettlement policy with regards to compensation of affected people without land tenure
rights, compensation of losses related with economic displacement, compensation
according with the replacement value, and provision of easily accessible and responsive
grievance mechanisms. The framework sets the principles and guidelines to be followed by
the government in the unexpected situations in which activities, projects, programs and
policies supported by the project and cause involuntary resettlement. The RPF has been
publicly disseminated on the project's website prior to appraisal.
  Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                         I       I X
  The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will project
  activities rely on the operation of any existing dams.
 ·Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                   I        I X
  The project will not finance activities related to international waterways.
  Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                            I        I X
  The project will not finance activities in disputed areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
A number of studies included under the housing and metropolitan governance aspect of the
project could potentially have indirect environmental and/or social impacts. These studies will
be developed in accordance with the EMF and RPF guidelines, taking into consideration the
Bank Social and Environmental Safeguards.

Adverse social consequences and disputes may arise from the government's disaster risk
management and urban territorial development policies that could involve the resettlement of
families living in precarious settlements and/or areas at very high risk of massive landslides.
The State of Rio de Janeiro's current practices of resettlement- as defined by State Decree
41.148/2008 (and its complementary legislation) and implemented in large programs such as
PAC - have been assessed in the preparation of the Metropolitan Urban and Housing
Development Policy Loan (Pl22391). The gaps between these practices and their regulatory
framework have been properly addressed and covered within the project's Involuntary
Resettlement Policy Framework.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Rio de Janeiro State is making significant progress to improve its environmental
management system. The Environmental and Social Management Framework proposes
institutional capacity strengthening measures and an institutional arrangement to implement the
Project. INEA is the State Environmental Agency and is fully capable of overseeing
implementation of the EMF, resulting plans,and the RPF. It will also be responsible for
activities under Component 1 which might potentially impact natural habitats. Each Project
Implementation Unit is responsible for their environmental management and will follow the
guidelines established in the EMF under guidance from INEA. Each Secretariat has its own
environmental staff and the Project implementation will have staff dedicated to following
compliance as stipulated in the EMF and also according to State and National legislation.

Other agencies such as the Secretariat of Housing, the Secretariat of Public Works, the State
Land Institute and the Social Secretariat have worked jointly to prepare the RFP for the project,
and are capable of handling monitoring and implementation of social safeguards issues that
may arise during project implementation. Additionally, the state of Rio de Janeiro has notably
improved its involuntary resettlement legislation and procedures in the past few years. Decree
41148/2008 introduces as its main guidelines: (a) the participation of the affected people in all
stages of the resettlement process; (b) the provision of resettlement options; (c) strong
mechanisms of communication with the population; and, (d) extensive consultation processes
with main stakeholders to address their concerns during implementation. These procedures,
guidelines and mechanisms potentially advance socially responsible resettlement processes and
are in accordance with most of the provisions of the Bank's resettlement policies. However,
they have been recently introduced in state practices in a learning-by-doing basis and there are
still some gaps between this state regulatory framework and the Bank's Involuntary
Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12), that have been properly addressed in the project's
Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 For this operation, the key stakeholders are the state agencies whose institutional capacity will
be strengthened through the supported activities. The State Agencies (Department of Mineral
Resources, Secretariat for Planning, State Land Institute, State Environmental Institute, State
Housing Company, Secretariat of Housing, Secretariat of Public Works, Secretariat of
Transport, Secretariat of Education, Secretariat of Health, State Public Prosecutor, and
Secretariat of Finance) have been involved in the discussion and preparation of all safeguard
documents; their capacity to meet safeguards requirements of the World Bank has been
assessed. Safeguards have been triggered just on a precautionary basis as most TA activities do
not have direct adverse environmental or social impacts, but a few may lead indirectly to
drafting of policies and/or regulations that are likely to have environmental and social impacts
when implemented through future programs or projects. By triggering such safeguard policies,
agreements have been reached with the client on the need to incorporate environmental or
social concerns that meet the World Bank· s requirements on the preparation of the terms of
references underlying project activities . In addition to this, the state has a well-developed
environmental policy framework and the necessary environmental institutional capacity to
minimize any negative impacts that may be associated with the project. As mentioned above,
the EMF emphasizes the use of consultative processes in case specific plans need to be
developed for any underlying project activity.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  12113/2011
Date of submission to Info Shop                                              12/19/2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the   N/A
 EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure                                                         12/20/2011


 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     12/13/2011
 Date of submission to Info Shop                                                 12/19/2011
 "In country" Disclosure                                                         12/20/2011


Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                      N/A
Date of submission to Info Shop
"In country" Disclosure


Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                   N/A
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to Info Shop
"In country" Disclosure


Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultnral Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 -Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X 1 No [ 1 NA [ 1
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager     Yes [X]       No [ l     NA [ l
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [X l     No [ 1 NA [ l
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04- Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes [     I   No [X 1 NA [ I
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [ 1     No [ 1          NA [X I
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?            Yes [ I       No [ 1         NA[X 1
1s a separate PMP required?                                           Yes [     I   No [       I   NA[X 1
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards        Yes [ 1       No [ 1         NA [X I
specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?Ifyes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 -Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [ I         No [   I       NA[X 1
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the           Yes [ 1       No [ 1         NA[X I
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [     I     No [ 1         NA [X I
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 -Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X I No [ 1                  NA [ I
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [X 1 No [        I       NA [ 1
Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and   Yes [ 1       No [   I       NA [X I
constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome     Yes [ I       No [ 1         NA[X 1
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it    Yes [ 1       No [   I       NA[X I
include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37- Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                  Yes [ I       No [ 1         NA [X I
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [ 1           No [ 1         NA[X 1
Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and            Yes [ I       No [ 1         NA [X I
 arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                 Yes [   I   No [ I   NA[X I
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification   Yes [ I     No [ I   NA[X I
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception? •                              Yes [ I     No [ I   NA [X I
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the              Yes [ I       No [ I   NA [X I
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to be
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in        Yes [ I     No [ I   NA [X I
the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X I         No [ I   NA [ I
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X I       No [ I   NA [ I
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [X I No[     I   NA [ I
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [X I No [ I        NA [ I
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes [X I No[     I   NA [ I
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with         Yes [X I No[     I   NA [ I
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Alessandra Campanaro
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:
