                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/08/2014                                   Report No.: AC7111
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P081567                 Original Project Name: Agricultural
                                             Diversification and Market Development
                                             Project
Country: Burkina Faso                        Project ID: P147978
Project Name: AF-Agricultural Diversification and Market Development Project
Task Team Leader: Nicolas Ahouissoussi
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 1, 2014      Estimated Board Date: May 27, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTA1                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Irrigation and drainage (33%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (33%);Crops
(17%);Animal production (17%)
Theme: Rural markets (34%);Rural services and infrastructure (33%);Trade facilitation
and market access (33%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             50
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             5.59
         LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES                                           6.58
         Foreign Private Commercial Sources (identified)                3.74
         Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                       15.91
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The objecive of the project is to increase the competitiveness of selected agricultural
subsectors that target national and regional markets, thereby contributing to shared
agricultural growth in Burkina Faso. The Project is financing improvements in the
performance of value chains for a range of agricultural and livestock products for which
Burkina Faso has strong comparative advantage.

3. Project Description
As the parent poject, the AF will comprise the three same components:
 Component 1: Improvement of ASP supply chains performance. The component aims
primarily to increase the technical and economic performance of targeted value chains,
improving their structure, strengthening the capacity of private actors to respond to
opportunities and market requirements, while helping to sustainably increase agricultural
productivity. This component includes the main thrust of the AF, which supports the
evolution of existing microprojects (MP) into viable, profitable micro-enterprises (MEs)
and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), the capitalization/dissemination of
successful experiences of the mother project, and the implementation of a range of
quality services to meet the specific needs of MEs and SMEs. Two lines of actions will
be pursued: (i) improving the competitiveness of value chains, and (ii) strengthening
inter-professional (IP) organizations to enable them to support collective missions.

 Component 2: Development of irrigation and marketing infrastructure. The component
aims to strengthen the links between producers and markets. In particular, the AF will
help complete the construction of infrastructure and promote the management and
operation of production and marketing infrastructure by the private sector. The AF will
thus contribute to addressing issues discussed during the initial stage, namely: (i) the lack
or inadequacy of infrastructure and equipment to support the marketing and export of
products, and (ii) inadequate infrastructure and technologies adapted to the development
needs of irrigated production in the targeted sectors. The component comprises two
subcomponents: (i) development of irrigation infrastructure, (ii) infrastructure
development and marketing.

 Component 3: Improving the institutional environment, regulatory framework and
provision of advisory services including project coordination and management through a
dedicated PCU (approximately US$ 13.0 million, including US$ 12.7 million IDA). The
AF will maintain support for: (i) a legal and regulatory framework conducive to private
investment, (ii) capacity building support services to industries to ensure quality control
and standards, (iii) the development of an improved policy environment of public and
private providers, (iv) better coordination, effective management, and adequate
monitoring and evaluation of the Project. The component consists of three
subcomponents: (i) improving the legal, regulatory and financial environment, (ii)
strengthening of support and support services sectors, (iii) coordination and monitoring
and evaluation of the Project.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The AF activities will be extended to the remaining four regions that were not included in
the parent project to ensure a full national coverage of all thirteen regions of the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)
   Mr Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the
implementation of activities that will be financed under this AF. Most of the adverse
environmental and social impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale
and site-specific. Hence, they will be manageable at an acceptable level.

  The project remains EA category B and will not trigger new safeguards policies due to
the fact that components and activities are the same as in the parent project. The
triggered policies are OP/PB 4.01; OP 4.09 and OP/PB 4.12. Safeguard instruments
(ESMF, IPMP and RPF) have all been updated and will be implemented as
guidance/guidelines for the activities during the Additional Financing phase.

  During the parent project's implementation, screening of sub-projects has taken place to
ensure proper identification and mitigation of any adverse impacts. The regional
implementation committees approve the screening results, as per the guidelines in the
operational manual of the project. In October 2011, in order to ensure that all the sub-
projects financed under the parent project were in compliance with Bank safeguards
policies and in line with the national regulatory framework, an Environmental and Social
Audit was also carried out by the National Agency in charge of environmental impact
assessment and safeguards monitoring (Bureau National des Evaluations
Environnementales et de Gestion de Déchets Spéciaux -- BUNED). These practices will
continue during the AF. The results of the screening process led to EA category C for
most of the sub-projects. Only one sub-project was classified as category B and an ESIA
(including an ESMP) was subsequently prepared to address environmental and social
issues related to the implementation of this sub-project. The irrigation infrastructure put
in place has not resulted in RAPs because the locations have been either donated by
communities or the sites have been administratively held by the government and
designated for public works.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The assessment of potential environmental and social adverse impacts does not foresee
long-term impacts associated to this project.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Not applicable.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given that the exact location of future investments are not yet known and activities are
diversified, the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF). That safeguard instrument contains standards, methods, and
procedures specifying how future activities whose location, number, and scale are
unknown will systematically address environmental and social issues. It includes: (i) a
systematic environmental and social impact assessment for all activities before selection
and implementation; (ii) procedures for conducting activity-specific ESIAs, Limited
Environmental Impact Assessment (LEIA) or Environmental and Social Management
Plan (ESMP); (iii) capacity strengthening and awareness-raising campaigns targeted at
relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and monitoring of project
safeguard measures; and (iv) establishment and implementation of a consultation
framework for the environmental control and monitoring.

 An Integrated Pesticide Management Plan (IPMP) has also been prepared to take into
account potential use of chemical products within agricultural activities. As the ESMF,
the IPMP gives guidance to protect population health and environment integrity in
promoting best practices.

 To manage land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or loss of livelihoods induced by
the implementation of activities and other microprojects, the client has developed a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). That safeguard instrument clarifies the
principles, organizational arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to
investments/microprojects to be prepared during project implementation. Investment-
specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared, as necessary, in line with the
RPF and submitted to the Bank for approval.

 All the above safeguard documents provide detailed mitigation measures to ensure
sustainability and compliance with Burkina Faso's regulations and legislations, as well as
with the World Bank environmental and social policies.

 Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach
based on the tools developed under the original project. ESMPs will be prepared as
needed for the small civil works expected to be undertaken under this AF. For works
with negligible impacts environmental measures based on national laws and regulations
will apply.
 The PIU does not currently have a specific environmental specialist andthe staff in
charge of monitoring and evaluation who benefitted from safeguards training during
Bank supervision missions has so far been responsible for safeguards implementation.
Moving forward, under this AF, the PIU will hire an Environmental and Social Expert to
oversee the implementation of the project safeguards instruments and coordinate efforts
at the national level. The PIU staff will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up with
any safeguard issues. The Bank's supervision missions will also continue to include
environmental and social specialists. Moreover, as part of capacity building activities
under sub-component 3.2, the project will help the Ministry of Environment to monitor
the implementation of the project's three safeguards instruments.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders concerned by the AF are constituted by irrigation agricultural farmers, site-
specific breeders, and agroforestry partners. At the national level, there are ministries in
charge of livestock development, agricultural activities, fisheries, and environment.
During the safeguard instruments preparation, the various stakeholder groups have been
consulted. During the updating of the safeguards documentation, new series of
consultations were held where all of these stakeholders have been consulted and their
recommendations, comments and suggestions taken into account in the safeguards
documents finalization. The latest consultation in the process of safeguard instruments
preparation was the workshop held in Ouagadougou in February 27-28, 2014 which
gathered 30 participants coming from all the targeted regions of the project.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03/06/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  03/19/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03/20/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03/06/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                  03/19/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03/20/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/06/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              03/19/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               03/20/2014
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the     Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                  Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Nicolas Ahouissoussi              03/19/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Abdoulaye Gadiere                 03/19/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis              03/19/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Martien Van Nieuwkoop
  Comments:
