                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                             APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 04/21/2014                                        Report No.: AC7123
1. Basic Project Data
Original Project ID: P128768                 Original Project Name: Burkina Faso
                                             Electricity Sector Support Project
Country: Burkina Faso                        Project ID: P149115
Project Name: Burkina Faso - Additional Financing Electricity Sector Support Project
Task Team Leader: Fatouma Toure Ibrahima Wane
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2014     Estimated Board Date: June 10, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTG2                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: General energy sector (100%)
Theme: Other rural development (50%);Other urban development (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             35
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              2.00
                                                                         2.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]      No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
This is an additional financing to the Burkina Faso Electricity Sector Support Project
(P128768) approved on July 31, 2013.

 There are no changes being proposed to the development objectives of the original
project. The original project's PDOs are to contribute to: (i) increasing access to
electricity, (ii) improving the reliability of electricity supply; and (iii) improving efficient
use of energy in targeted areas. The proposed activities that aim at : (i) expanding
electricity access in rural communities throughleast cost measures including grid
extension, installation of hybrid mini-grid and solar home systems and multifunctional
platforms for households, schools, health centers, and other productive activities; (ii)
providing technical assistance to the national utility SONABEL and (iii) support to the
government to help improve the environment for private participation in renewable
energy are all activities that will contribute to the ESSP's development objectives.

 The Additional Financing will apply the safeguards elements agreed upon for the parent
project. The project remains classified as category B, as its environmental and social
impacts are moderate and site-specific. Three Bank safeguard policies are triggered: OP
4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources; and OP
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The original project was approved on July 30th, 2013
and became effective on February 27, 2014, and therefore no civil works have been
undertaken yet. Given the type of activities the AF is financing, the existing safeguards
documents (ESIAs, ESMF and RPF) remain valid. The ESMF and RPF have been
updated to take account of the new activities being financed by the AF.

3. Project Description
The proposed activities will be linked to two components (2 and 4) of the parent project.
When combined the activities of the original and additional finances are presented as
follows:

 (a) Component 1: Improving the reliability of energy supply (original amount $US
15.39 million; proposed AF no allocation):

 •      Component 1 - original financing: supports the construction of two (2) turnkey
diesel power stations of at least 7.5 MW each convertible to heavy fuel oil to reinforce
the capacity in two (2) regional growth poles, and provision of technical advisory
services for construction supervision.

 •     The additional financing does not propose any activities under this component.

 (b) Component 2: Increasing electricity access in target areas (original amount $US
25.59 million; proposed AF $US 25.00 million):

  •    Component 2 - original financing: finances grid expansion and installation of
connections in about forty (40) communities throug (a) existing and new 33kV
transmission lines, and (b) the existing 34.5 kV Bobo-Dioulasso - Ouagadougou line.

 •     Component 2 - additional financing: will support electrification of about 80
additional communities through (a) grid expansion; but also through (b) hybrid mini grids
and solar home systems in remote and poor communities; and (c) multi-functional
platforms to foster income generating activities in small localities.

 (c) Component 3: Improving efficient use of energy in target areas (original amount
$US 4.70 million; proposed AF no allocation):

 •      Component 3 - original financing: supports activities that will help: (a) Strengthen
the institutional, legal and regulatory framework to support demand-side management
and energy efficiency initiatives, including public lighting. (b) Support investment in
energy efficient equipment. (c) Support awareness campaigns through the provision of
information, education, and communication to promote the rational and efficient use of
electricity. (d) Implement Lighting Africa activities including, inter alia: (i) provision of
capacity training on off-grid lighting in rural electrification strategies; (ii) develop public
service announcements and awareness campaigns to inform consumers of the benefits of
solar lanterns and other good quality products; and (iii) deploy around twenty five
thousand (25,000) lanterns in public schools focusing on those in off-grid communities.

 •     The additional financing does not propose any activities under this component.

 (d) Component 4: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development (original
amount $US 5.49 million; proposed AF $US 8.5 million):

 •       Component 4 – original financing: support activities to help: (a) Strengthen the
institutional capacity of the FDE, SONABEL, a DGE to support scaling up of energy
service expansion. (b) Strengthen the capacity of energy service providers including, inter
alia, energy services cooperatives, local communities, NGOs, and private sector small-
and medium-size enterprises. (c) Undertake specific studies to improve the energy mix,
more particularly in renewable energy in the medium term. (d) Provision of institutional
support to DGE, SONABEL and FDE. (e) Provision of support to DGE for coordination
of the Project.

 •       Component 4 – additional financing: will help provide support to: (a) SONABEL
for (i) the development and implementation of a strategic plan; (ii) a fuel consumption
audit; and (iii) the acquisition and implementation of customer management software ;
and (b) DGE for technical assistance to improve the environment for private participation
in renewable energy.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The two new power plants under component 1 will be constructed in existing power
generating facilities on land owned by the national electricity company (SONABEL) in
the cities of Ouahigouya and Fada N'Gourma. The sites are located in-town, surrounded
by residential and administrative settlements, and totally fenced. Apart from some trees
on the Fada N'Gourma site, no other natural feature is remarkable in the project locations.
Both the borrow pit sites and the location of the activities supported under component 2
are not yet identified.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
   Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified category B, as its environmental and social impacts are moderate
and site-specific. Three Bank safeguard policies triggered: OP 4.01 on Environmental
Assessment; OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources; and OP 4.12 on Involuntary
Resettlement.

 The environmental analysis has concluded that the overall environmental and social
impact of the project is positive, though there will be some adverse impacts during the
construction and eventual operation of the infrastructure. These negative but manageable
impacts are: loss of trees on the power station sites and vegetation on the right-off-way of
the grid lines; dust-induced air pollution in the project sites and vicinities during the
construction, including risks of temporary increase in allergies; involuntary destruction of
cultural assets (uncovered wealth, sacred woods, sacred site, etc.) in exploiting quarries
and material pits; socio-economic losses and damages in case of explosion and fire
during the exploitation; indirect pollution of the receiving environments by the operation
phase wastes (solid and used oil) if not properly handled; occupational health, security
and safety for the staff. Potential social impacts include loss of land, assets and/or
resources. No large and irreversible adverse impact during the project cycle was
identified.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
The mishandling of used oil and hazardous solid wastes resulting from the functioning of
the power stations may induce diffuse pollution of the surrounding environment,
especially if the wastes were disposed in areas close to water sources or in uncontrolled
discharges accessible to children and other vulnerable people.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
On the original project, the government completed its due diligence in compliance with
the Bank policies and its own legislation. The following environmental and social
safeguard instruments have been disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop prior to
appraisal: (i) the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the
mitigation of the risks associated to the expansion of electricity infrastructures in the 41
communities to be selected during the implementation phase; (ii) the Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Ouahigouya power station; (iii) the
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Fada N'Gourma power
station; and (iv) the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the management of the
compensation/resettlement issues that may arise during the expansion of the power grid
in the 41 communities.

 The implementation mechanism is approved through the above-mentioned document
and consists in a set of technical, institutional and capacity building measures. For the
power generator in component 1, the construction phase measures will be incorporated in
the bidding documents, carried out by the enterprises and monitored during the execution
of the civil works by the DGE in collaboration with the National EIA agency (BUNEE).
In the case of component 2, as soon as identified, all subprojects will be processed
through the screening procedure set forth in the ESMF and environmental and social
measures, including the preparation of a RAP, identified and duly applied.

 The borrower's institutional capacity in managing environmental and social safeguard
measures at appropriate international standards is weak and needs to be strengthened.
This conclusion came out of the assessment of the two bank-funded energy projects
currently under completion. A safeguard expert has being recruited and appointed within
the PIU of the PASE. This expert will continue working with the new coordination unit
(DGE). Further, capacity building will be provided to: (i) ensuring that the Department of
Quality, Safety and Environment (DQSE) of SONABEL is effective and fully functional
with adequate structural resources; (ii) the Directorate General of Energy (DGE) staff for
the integration of environmental measures in the workplans, and the monitoring of
environment related issues in energy activities. To support that, a total budget amounting
US$ 3.4 million is earmarked to support the implementation of the safeguards measures
and recommendations.

 The additional financing will include about 80 communities as described under section
C: electrification of about 80 additional communities through (a) grid expansion; but also
through (b) hybrid mini grids and solar home systems in remote and poor communities;
and (c) multi-functional platforms to foster income generating activities in small
localities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The local communities in rural areas, households of Ouahigouya and Fada N'Gourma,
small size entrepreneurs and private sector, local authorities are interested parties of the
project. Representatives of these groups were consulted in a series of consultations during
the preparation of the safeguard instruments from October 2012 to February 2013. The
draft reports of the power plant ESIAs were also extensively shared with the stakeholders
in February 2013. In general, specific consultations were organized in the localities of
Bobo Dioulasso, Fada N'Gourma, Ouahigouya, Dédougou, Gaoua, Poura and Kampti.
For the ESMF, stakeholders' consultations have been held in five out of the 12 regions
covered by the project intervention; subsequent consultations will take place once sites
and works are finalized. The approved version of the safeguard instruments have been
disclosed in-country and made accessible in public area for permanent consultation.
During the implementation of the component, the identification of the sites for the
expansion of the grid will be processed participatory under the leadership of the local
authorities in collaboration with the DGE.



B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/31/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/09/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/10/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  03/31/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              04/09/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               04/10/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          Yes
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name              Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Fatouma Toure Ibrahima Wane   04/14/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Maman-Sani Issa               04/03/2014
Social Development Specialist       Ms Paivi Koskinen-Lewis          04/03/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi         04/03/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Meike van Ginneken            04/17/2014
  Comments:
