                                                                                              94985

                         fflTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                         CONCEPT STAGE


D ate ISDS
p repared/Updated:        29 - August - 2014


I . BASIC INFORMATION

 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Burkina Faso             Project ID:              P149434
 Project Name:               Local Forest Communities Support Project (FYIS) (Pl49434)
 Task Team Leader:           Mbaipor Lucienne
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 15-January-20 15           Estimated Board Date:    15-May-20 15
 Managing Unit:              GENDR                    Lending Instrument:     Specific Investment Loan
 Sector:                     General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (80%);Public
                             administration-Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20)
 Theme:                      Decentralization (P);Participation and civic engagement (P);Other rural
                             development (S)
 Financing (in USD MiUion)
     Financing Source                                                                              Amour t
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                  oo.o p
     Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                         4.5P
     Financing Gap                                                                                        o.op
     Total                                                                                                4.s p
 Environmental Category      B - Partial Assessment
  Is this a Repeater project? No



 B. Project Objectives
 The proposed Project Development Objective is to develop the capacity and support specific
 initiatives of local communities living in and around forests in Burkina Faso and to strengthen the r
 participation in FIP and other REDD+ processes at the local level.
C. Project Description
•    The global DGM program document has been prepared and country-level projects will reflect
     key elements ofthe global design with country-specific features as necessary.
•    The DGM envelope for Burkina Faso has been established at US$4.5 million. The project will be
     implemented over a five-year period, from 2015 to 2019.




C. Project Description
     I.       Project Description
8.     The global DGM program document is being prepared and country-level projects will reflect
key elements of the global design with country-specific features. The indicative DGM envelope for
Burkina Faso is $4.5 million. The project will be implemented over a five-year period from 2014 to
2019.
9.        The project will have the following two components:
     •    Component 1 : Development of managerial, technical capacities and skills of local people and
          local communities: this component will be available to support ·the training in leadership
          development, conflict resolution and negotiations skills to ensure active participation in initiatives
          related to natural resource-based mitigation and adaptation to climate change, training and capacity
          development for securing and strengthening customary land tenure and resource rights and traditional
          forest management systems of indigenous peoples and local communities and for reducing cultural,
          social, economic and policy barriers to such rights and to the continuance and enhancement of
          traditional forest management systems ;

     •    Component 2 : Promotion of eco11omic activities and rural livelihoods : the grant will support in
          sustainable management and development of natural forests as well as restoration and natural
          regeneration of previously degraded or converted forests; economic activities and rural livelihoods
          practices such as putting in place infrastructures and equipment for production, transformation and
          conservation of product, modem livestock (breeding), support to forage crop.


Further details on activities and funding allocation will be developed during project preparation in
consultation with communities in the target areas, in discussion with the National Steering
Committee.



D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
          The project will have interventions at the national and sub-national levels. National level
          interventions will occur predominantly in Ouagadougou while investments at the local level
       will occur in 5 Regions and 32 communes (26 rural and 6 urban) that border classified fore t
       and woodland areas (East, le Nazinon, la Boucle du Mouhoun, Far-South and Bontioli). 11~
       exact locations for specific investments are not yet known.


E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Civil Society Organization current capacity to manage environmental and social World Ban~
policies remains limited. A broad capacity assessment will be carried out and measures taken. Tr~
Government and the Bank are preparing a Forest Investment Operation on which the current proje t
will be blended. Most of the policies trigger under the FIP project will be applicable to this projec .
The proposed project will support environmental and social training to Civil SoCiety Organizatio n
with the aim to ensure effective implementation of the Environmental and Social safeguards policie .
In addition, the National Execution Agency will receive adequate guidance from the Bank s
safeguards specialist project team.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
   •   Emeran Serge Menang Evouna, Environmental Safeguards Specialist (GENDR)
   •   Joseph Ellong, Social Safeguards Specialist (GSURR)



Safeguard Policies                  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP          Yes       The project activity under sub component 2 will
4.01                                              support sustainable management and development of
                                                  natural forests as well as restoration.and natural
                                                  regeneration of previously qegraded or converted
                                                  forests, economic activities and rural livelihoods
                                                  practices such as putting in place infrastructures and
                                                  equipments for production, transformation and
                                                 .conservation of product. These activities may have
                                                  environmental impacts even at very small and limite<
                                                  scale. An ESMF for the FIP-Decentralized Forest and
                                                  Woodland Management Project (Pl43993) will be
                                                  prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in the country
                                                  and at the InfoShop prior Appraisal mission.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04             Yes      While the project will take place in natural habitats,
                                                 project activities will not be undertaken near or inside
                                                 critical ecosystems. As the project will enhance the
                                                 quality ofthe management of forest and woodlands,
                                                 particular attention will be paid to these ecosystems.
                                                 The conception of the subprojects will avoid any threa
                                                 to critical ecosystem. The ESMF to be elaborated in
                                                 accordance with OP4.01 for: the FIP project will
                                                 provide guidance on avoiding or mitigating impacts or
                                                  natural habitats.   ·
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    Yes   No activity of the project is expected to promote timber
                                            exploitation or to finance activities which will
                                            contribute to destroy the forest. OP4.36 is triggered to
                                            underscore the attention that must be paid to aspects
                                            related to the protection of the forest resources during
                                            project preparation and implementation. Improving
                                            Forestry management policies is a primary focus of this
                                            project. While the project will explore integrated forest
                                            management as part of a strategy of increasing carbon
                                            sequestration potential the main expected result is
                                            improved forest management. The ESMF of the FIP
                                            project includes guidance on managing forestry issues.
Pest Management OP 4.09               No    This policy is not triggered but the project activities
                                            will encourage the use of biological pest management
                                            best practices.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP     Yes   This policy is triggered because the project will support
4.11                                        under Component 2, construction of infrastructures and
                                            forages that may need earth excavations. In addition,
                                            Burkina Faso has a rich cultural heritage that needs to
                                            be preserved. The ESMF that will be prepared for the
                                            PIP-Decentralized Forest and Woodland Management
                                            Project (P143993) will cover this aspect. Chance finds
                                            procedures will be incorporated into civil works
                                            contracts and buffer zones will be created to avoid any
                                            damage to cultural resources such as sacred forests and
                                            graveyards. The project implementation team wi II be
                                            extra vigilant to ensure that project activities do not
                                            affect such sites. In addition, the project will work
                                            closely with local populations who continue to apply
                                            r itual forest fires.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                            area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        Yes   No involuntary resettlement is anticipated; however,
4.12                                        because of the possibility for limitation of access
                                            (essentially related to the possible impact on trad itional
                                            transhumance corridors and grazing lands) a process
                                            framework for the FIP-Decentralized Forest and
                                            Woodland Management Project (P143993) will be
                                            prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in the
                                            targeted areas and at the InfoShop. This process
                                            framework will be applied to the DGM project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No    N/A
Projects on International Waterways   No    N/A
OPIBP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP      No    NIA
7.60
 Piloting the Use of Borrower           No       NIA
 Systems to Address Environmental
 and Social Safeguard Issues in
 Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP
 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
   QER tentatively scheduled for November 5, 2014

 B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
    specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
   The Project will use the safeguards documents of the FIP project which will be implemented in
   the same area as the PAPF. The project has been transferred to the GP team.



IV. APPROVALS

 Task Team Leader:           Name: Lucienne Mbaipor      '~~~
                                                           'hO - -      2   }~I     15
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:            f,Name: Benoit B   quet
                                            'Os'        .5n ~_ . C h~
                                                      -f"               Date:   ol/ 23 J20 J5
