                                                                               81587

                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information

Date prepared/updated: 10/11/2013

1. Basic Project Data

Original Project ID: P102284                 Original Project Name: Cambodia Second
                                             Health Sector Support Project
Country: Cambodia                            Project ID: P146271
Project Name: Additional Financing for the Second Health Sector Support Project
Task Team Leader: Laura L Rose
Estimated Appraisal Date: August 12, 2013 Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: EASHH                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Health (44%); Central government administration (24%); Sub-national
government administration (24%); Other social services (4%); Compulsory health
finance (4%)
Theme: Health system performance (33%); Administrative and civil service reform
(17%); Child health (17%); Population and reproductive health (17%); Participation and
civic engagement (16%)
SPF Amount (USD million): 0
GEF Amount (USD million): 0
PCF Amount (USD million): 0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund (USD equivalent)        13.44
                                                                      13.44
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple [X]          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [ ]      No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

The project objective is to support the implementation of the Government's Second
Health Strategic Plan (2008-2015, HSP2) to improve health outcomes through
strengthening institutional capacity and mechanisms by which the government and
Project Partners can achieve more effective and efficient sector performance. The
Additional Financing (AF) of the project reflects additional receipts into the Multi Donor
Trust Fund (MDTF) for a total amount of USD 13. 4million raising the total MDTF
envelope to USD 99.5 million. The additional funds are from a scheduled payment from
the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DfID) for GBP 4.7
million (USD 7.2 million) and an additional contribution from the Australian Agency for
International Development (AusAID) for AUD 8.5 million (USD 7.8 million). The total
contribution excludes USD 5.4 million allocation for the Bank-executed portion of the
MDTF, and the 1 percent MDTF administration fee.

3. Project Description

The original Second Health Sector Support Project (HSSP2) has a health system
strengthening focus, with four components that are aligned to the government's HSP2. It
includes: (A) Strengthening Health Service Delivery through: (i) the provision of
Service Delivery Grants (SDGs) and contracting for health services at provincial level
and below and (ii) investments for the improvement, replacement, and extension of the
health service delivery network. (B) Improving Health Financing which will support
(i) health protection for the poor through the consolidation of Health Equity Funds
(HEFs) under common management and oversight arrangements and expansion of health
equity fund coverage; and (ii) supporting the development of health financing policies
and institutional reforms. (C) Strengthening Human Resources will focus on (i)
strengthening pre- and in-service training; (ii) strengthening human resource management
in the Ministry of Health (MOH). (D) Strengthening Health System Stewardship
Function by supporting (i) development of policy packages identified, strengthening the
institutional capacity (in particular meeting the demands from Decentralization and
Deconcentration); (ii) private sector regulation and partnerships; (iii) supporting
governance and stewardship functions of the national programs and centers overseeing
the three HSP2 strategic programs; and (iv) empowering new structures for increasing
local accountability of health care providers to citizens.

The AF will support the following:

  •     Component A: Strengthening Health Service Delivery. Additional financing from
MDTF will allow financing of SDGs for 30 Special Operating Agencies (SOAs) through
June 2014, support for an additional six SOAs and capacity building. In addition,
financing will be provided for scaling up of the multiple micronutrient supplementations
of children under 2, strengthening facility based screening and management of acute
malnutrition. Further, the AF will continue to support improved service delivery and
implementation of the Non-Communicable Disease (NCD) Strategic Plan, support
scaling up of dengue control, including financing of larvicide; and continue support for
avian-human influenza (H5N1) surveillance and response at national, district, and
community levels.

 •       Component B: Improving Health Financing. In addition to supporting the current
activities under the Component, the AF will support expansion of HEFs; i.e, from 43 to
57 Operational Districts (ODs). The Korean Development Agency (KOICA) has
expressed interest in financing the HEFs in Kandal province, although decision to pool
with HSSP2 or parallel financing is yet to be finalized. The AF will also support further
strengthening and developing an institutional framework for health financing, including
making progress toward the establishment of national oversight institutions for HEFs and
social health insurance.
  •     Component C: Strengthening Human Resources. The AF will provide additional
financing to support the original project activities of strengthening pre-service education
of health professionals and improving the pre-service education at the Regional Training
Centers (RTCs).

 •       Component D: Strengthening Health System Stewardship Functions. The current
activities will continue to be financed with an increased focus on developing the social
accountability policy and framework, and scaling up of evaluation of social
accountability mechanisms (including community score cards), in line with government
plans for decentralization and deconcentration. It will support further strengthening of
private sector regulation and monitoring, with support from other HSSP2 partners.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Coverage will be national.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
   Ms Nareth Ly (EASHH)
   Mr Tep Makathy (EASTS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                             Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                            X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                     X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                     X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                 X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                               X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                              X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                         X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                  X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A.      Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.

The original project is classified as category B. The original project triggered
Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous
Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The same safeguard
policies have been triggered under the AF and implementation of the various safeguard
policies – described below – has been satisfactory. All were re-disclosed on September
24, 2013.
Environment:

The AF will provide continuing financing to existing activities and widen the
geographical coverage of activities already on-going under the parent project. The
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) is the instrument that describes the safeguards
against the main risks: civil works, including asbestos; health care waste management,
and pest management.

   •   Civil Works Impacts and Management: The project finances construction and
       rehabilitation of small health care facilities such as health centers, hospitals and a
       drugs and quality control testing laboratory. The experience in HSSP2 confirmed
       that civil works and the corresponding environmental impacts were minimal and
       temporary, limited to the construction phase, which has been mitigated through
       good construction practices. The impacts are monitored by the construction
       supervision firm, MOH officials and the task team. As with the parent project,
       The AF will not affect natural habitats and forests.

   •   Asbestos Management: The main activities that might have implications under the
       project were for asbestos generation and management of the construction of
       health care facilities. The environmental review suggested that asbestos in
       Cambodia is a problem in existing building containing fibre cement products.
       Since 2000, the government has banned the use of asbestos-containing fibre
       concrete materials, and construction is closely supervised to ensure that
       contractors will not use cheap asbestos-containing materials. The civil works
       contracts also contain a provision on the use of asbestos-free building materials.
       All constructions use clay roofing tiles.

   •   Health Care Waste. Guidelines under the existing Health Care Waste Generation
       and Management Plan are deemed adequate and compliance during HSSP2 has
       been good. The Guidelines incorporate best HCW management practices and are
       intended for practical application at health care facilities. Training of Trainers
       (ToT) on the Guidelines has been carried out by Department of Hospital Services
       (DHS) at provincial level. This training will continue under the AF.

   •   Pest Management. Control procedures are set out in the Pest Management and
       Monitoring Plan (PMMP). The project only supports purchase of larvicides
       (Abate/BTI) for dengue control. These are considered to pose very low risks to
       humans if used correctly and certified by WHO’s Pesticide Evaluation Scheme
       (WHOPES). The products are transported in safe containers provided by the
       vendors and used containers are disposed of according to best practice; they are
       not used for storage or other purposes.
Social:

Ill health is a leading cause and consequence of poverty in Cambodia. Health care
remains for many expensive, of poor quality and of difficult to access. Key social
development issues pertaining to health in Cambodia, include: (i) uneven distribution of
growth and significant difference between urban and rural and rich and poor households'
access to health services and outcomes; (ii) different health needs and challenges among
women and men; (iii) high vulnerability to poor health and poverty among the poor and
ethnic minorities and in remote and difficult to access areas; and (iv) limited capacity for
community participation in health service delivery. HSSP2 aims to ensure improved and
equitable access to essential quality health care and preventative services. Target
beneficiaries are women, children and the poor, all of whom are exposed to high health
risks and are disadvantaged in accessing affordable health care. Given the project's focus
on maternal and child health, children and women of reproductive age in particular are
expected to benefit from the project, which will extend the health network and making it
more affordable.

Under HSSP1, a social assessment was carried out and updated for HSSP2, to reflect
modifications to project objectives and procedures, as well as changes in the Cambodia
regulatory framework and World Bank policies. The updated social assessment for
HSSP2 took into account consultations with (i) MOH officials, project partners, and
NGOs; (ii) recent analytical work on equity, gender issues and ethnic minorities; (iii)
evaluations and monitoring of HSSP; and (iv) analytical work commissioned for HSSP.
The Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures has also been updated under
HSSP2 to ensure compliance with current World Bank policy and Cambodia laws.

   •      Indigenous People. Ethnic minorities face particular challenges in accessing
          health services and tend to be particularly vulnerable to poor health. Many
          minority groups live in rough-terrain - highland and border areas that are hard to
          reach, and are generally poorer than average. The sheer physical geography of
          these settings poses special challenges, as well as costs, in terms of accessing,
          providing and maintaining health care services. The Indigenous Peoples Planning
          Framework (IPPF) developed under the original project will continue to be used
          under the AF. The nature, scale and scope of impact that may occur on
          Indigenous Peoples (IP) under the AF are expected to be the same as those under
          the project, and IP communities will continue to benefit from the project. During
          the implementation of the original project, steps were taken to address issues
          found during preparation based on the free, prior and informed consultations with
          affected IP communities, including the translation of all communication materials
          into local languages, establishment of HEFs to cover the health expenses of the
          poorest, and the construction of new facilities in the areas where they reside.
          Regular exit interviews conducted with ethnic minorities found that they are
          satisfied with the services provided under the original project and that no negative
          impacts occurred to them under the project. Additional round of consultations
          will be conducted under the AF and an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be developed
          during implementation.
   •   Involuntary Settlement. The nature, scale and scope of the impacts on private land
       and assets that may occur under the AF are expected to be the same as those under
       the project. The Land Acquisition Framework Policy and Procedures developed
       under the original project will continue to be used under the AF. A comprehensive
       land titling verification of construction sites was carried out by MOH under the
       support of the Bank. It confirmed that almost all construction sites were on state
       land. In a few instances, private land was acquired; either through donations or
       against compensation at market prices agreeable to affected people, as per
       provision of the Land Acquisition Framework Policy and Procedures. According
       to the inventory, all plots of land acquired were less than 5% of the owners'
       properties, and hence no relocations took place.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated
future activities in the project area:
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or
minimize adverse impacts.
Project design under the AF will minimize any financing of new construction, while
strengthening existing medical waste management systems.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues.
Provide an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures
described.
The government has successfully implemented the numerous safeguard policies in place
during HSSP2. The same policies will be used in the AF. Therefore, borrower capacity
is assessed as strong.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders of the project are MOH policy makers, program planners and
managers who will benefit from systems strengthening and capacity building activities, as
well as from the project's endorsement of the MOH's HSP2. Ministry of Economy and
Finance continue to play an important role during implementation and monitoring. Civil
society and communities also play important roles in the monitoring of services to
increase public accountability. Civil society members are invited to attend important bid
openings and contract awards. Community score cards and facility exit surveys also
improve accountability to users of services supported by the AF.

The Government has updated their website on July 31, 2013 to take into account the AF
whereby the same safeguard instruments under the parent project will be adopted.
B.       Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/12/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/12/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/24/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/12/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/12/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/24/2013
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/12/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/12/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/24/2013
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 08/12/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             08/12/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              09/24/2013
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C.     Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when
the ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)          Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the          Yes
credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  Yes
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        Yes
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the          Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D.    Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                         Name                              Date
Task Team Leader:               Laura L. Rose                                   10/11/2013
Environmental Specialist        Tep Makathy                                     10/11/2013
Social Development Specialist   Satoshi Ishihara                                10/11/2013
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development
Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Sector Manager:                   Toomas Palu                                   10/11/2013

 Comments: This ISDS is for additional financing to the MDTF that co-finances existing
 IDA credit. There are no changes in project scope, in safeguard policies and arrangements.
