                                                                                90440

                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET

                                           APPRAISAL STAGE



I. Basic Information



     Date prepared/updated: August 28, 2014



   1.   Basic Project Data


     Original Project ID: P102284                    Original Project Name: Cambodia Second
                                                     Health Sector Support Program

     Country: Cambodia                               Project ID: P150472

     Project Name: Second Additional Financing for the Second Health Sector Support Program

     Task Team Leader: Laura L Rose

     Authorized Appraisal Date: July 18, 2014        Disclosure Date: September 8, 2014

     Managing Unit: GHNDR                            Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                     Financing

     Sector: Health (44%); Central government administration (24%); Sub-national government
     administration (24%); Other social services (4%); Compulsory health finance (4%)

     Theme: Health system performance (33%); Administrative and civil service reform (17%); Child
     health (17%); Population and reproductive health (17%); Participation and civic engagement
     (16%)

     SPF Amount (USD million):         0

     GEF Amount (USD million):         0

     PCF Amount (USD million):         0




                                                 1
     Other financing amounts by source:

             Borrower                                                                 0.00

             Free-standing Co-financing Trust Fund (USD equivalent)                 12.69

                                                                                    12.69

     Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment

     Simplified Processing                              Simple [X]           Repeater []

     Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP
                                                                                Yes [ ]      No [X]
     8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)




    2. Program Objectives


The Second Additional Financing (AF2) for the Second Health Sector Support Program (HSSP2) is
prepared to reflect additional donor receipts to support the Multi Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) of the
Second Health Sector Support Program (HSSP2). The additional funds consist of AUD 9.5 million
(equivalent to US$8.86 million) and US$4.5 million (US$1.25 million in 2014 and US$3.25 million in 2015)
from the Government of Australia and the Korea International Cooperation Agency (KOICA) respectively.
These funds will provide additional grant financing for the Program (US$12.69) and for Bank
management and supervision (US$0.67). The additional grant financing of US$12.69 million increases
the total MDTF envelope for the Program to US$112.23 and the total financing envelope for the HSSP2
to US$142.23 million, including IDA funds. The HSSP2 objective is to support the implementation of
Cambodia’s Health Strategic Plan 2008-2015 that aims to ensure improved and equitable access to, and
utilization of, essential quality health care and preventive services with particular emphasis on women,
children and poor. The original program objective is still valid for the AF2. The AF2 will allow continued
support to Health Equity Funds (HEFs) and Service Delivery Grants (SDGs) from July 1, 2014 to March 31,
2015. The original program also finances civil works and medical equipment that have not yet been
completed. Therefore, the original program closing date has been extended and the remaining funds
will be used in parallel with the implementation of AF2.



    3. Program Description


The HSSP2 has a health system strengthening focus, with four components that are aligned to the
government's Second Health Strategic Plan (HSP2). It includes: Strengthening Health Service Delivery
through: (a) the provision of SDGs and contracting for health services at provincial level and below; and


                                                    2
(b) investments for the improvement, replacement, and extension of the health service delivery
network. Improving Health Financing supports (a) health protection for the poor through the
consolidation of HEFs under common management and oversight arrangements and expansion of HEF
coverage; and (b) the development of health financing policies and institutional reforms. Strengthening
Human Resources focuses (a) strengthening pre- and in-service training; and (b) strengthening human
resource management in the Ministry of Health (MOH). Strengthening Health System Stewardship
Function supports (a) development of policy packages identified, strengthening the institutional capacity
(in particular meeting the demands from decentralization and deconcentration); (b) private sector
regulation and partnerships; (c) supporting governance and stewardship functions of the national
programs and centers overseeing the three HSP2 strategic programs; and (d) empowering new
structures for increasing local accountability of health care providers to citizens.



The AF2 will support the following:


         Component A: Strengthening Health Service Delivery. Financing of SDGs in 36
          Special Operating Agencies (SOAs).

         Component B: Improving Health Financing. Financing HEFs in 55 Operational
          Districts (ODs) and expansion into 6 additional ODs. These 61 ODs cover approximately
          2.2 million people or nearly 80 percent of the poor in Cambodia. Support to further
          strengthen and develop an institutional framework for health financing, including making
          progress toward the establishment of national oversight institutions for HEFs and social
          health insurance is being supported by a new programmatic health analytic and advisory
          assistance (P145030).

         Component C: Strengthening Human Resources. No additional funding.

         Component D: Strengthening Health System Stewardship Functions. No additional
          funding.
      4. Program Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the
         safeguard analysis



Program coverage will be national. Component A of the program finances SDGs of 36 SOAs in 14
provinces1. The 36 SOAs comprise 10 provincial referral hospitals and 26 ODs. Component B finances
HEFs in 61 ODs in 23 provinces2.


1
    Prey Veng, Takeo, Koh Kong, Kampong Cham, Tbong Khmum, Oddar Meanchey,Siemreap, Rattanakiri,
    Mondulkiri, Preah Vihear, Pursat, Battambang, Banteay Meanchey, Stung Treng.
2
    Phnom Penh, Prey Veng, Takeo, Koh Kong, Kampong Cham, Tbong Khmum, Kampong Tom, Kampong
    Chhnang, Sihanouk Ville, Kraite, Svay Rieng, Kampot, Kep, Kampong Speu, Oddar Meanchey, Siemreap,
    Rattanakiri, Mondulkiri, Preah Vihea, Pursat, Battambang, Banteay Meanchey, Stung Treng.

                                                      3
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


Mr Satoshi Ishihara (GURDR)

Ly Nareth (GHNDR)

Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)



 6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                            Yes         No

 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                       X

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                           X

 Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                    X

 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                   X

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                X

 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                             X

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                       X

 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                             X

 Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                        X

 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                 X




II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management



A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed program.


The Original Program is classified as category B given the activities related to health care
facilities construction and purchase of medical items such as syringes, pharmaceuticals, etc,

                                                4
which could generate additional health care waste (HCW) that needs to be properly managed and
disposed in line with good practices. The original program triggered the following safeguard
policies: Environment Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous
Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The same safeguard policies
are triggered under AF2. Although AF2 does not finance civil works, the Framework for Land
Acquisition Policy and Procedures and the Environment Management Plan have been updated
following lessons learned from HSSP2 and AF1. As preparation for AF2, the Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) was also updated taking into consideration findings from the social
assessment conducted based on free, prior and informed consultations with IP communities. All
were disclosed on June 25, 2014.


Environment:



AF2 will not finance civil works. However, the AF2 will continue to finance activities that will pose
possible environmental risks related to use of pesticides such as for control of vector-borne diseases
(e.g. malaria and dengue) and improper management of HCW. HEFs purchase the benefits directly from
hospitals and health centers that may use those funds to procure drugs and supplies along with
financing administrative costs. SOAs may also use part of their SDGs to support the administrative costs
of outreach activities which include using larvicides for dengue control.



         HCW. Guidelines under the existing HCW Generation and Management Plan are
          deemed adequate for AF2 activities and compliance during HSSP2 has been good. The
          Guidelines incorporate best HCW management practices and are intended for practical
          application at health care facilities. Training on the Guidelines has been provided to
          health facility staff all over Cambodia by Department of Hospital Services of the MOH.
          Compliance with the guidelines will continue to be monitored during regular program
          supervision, particularly maintenance of incinerators. Health facilities are expected to
          finance any cost associated with implementing the guidelines from the HEF payment and
          SDGs to the facility for health benefits.

         Pest Management. Control procedures are set out in the Pest Management and Monitoring
          Plan. The program only supports purchase of larvicides (Abate/BTI) for dengue control. These
          are considered to pose very low risks to humans if used correctly and certified by WHO’s
          Pesticide Evaluation Scheme (WHOPES). The products are transported in safe containers
          provided by the vendors and used containers are disposed of according to best practice; they
          are not used for storage or other purposes.


Social:




                                                   5
Ill health is a leading cause and consequence of poverty in Cambodia. Health care remains for many
expensive, of poor quality and difficult to access. Key social development issues pertaining to health in
Cambodia, include: (i) uneven distribution of growth and significant difference between urban and rural
and rich and poor households' access to health services and outcomes; (ii) different health needs and
challenges among women and men; (iii) high vulnerability to poor health and poverty among the poor
and ethnic minorities and in remote and difficult to access areas; and (iv) limited capacity for community
participation in health service delivery. HSSP2 aims to ensure improved and equitable access to essential
quality health care and preventative services. Target beneficiaries are women, children and the poor, all
of whom are exposed to high health risks and are disadvantaged in accessing affordable health care.
Given the program's focus on maternal and child health, children and women of reproductive age in
particular are expected to benefit from the program, which will extend the health network and making it
more affordable.

During the implementation of HSSP2 and the first additional financing (AF1), measures were

taken to address constraints of access to health care services identified by the indigenous peoples
(IP). During the preparation of AF2, social assessments (including free, prior and informed
consultations with IP communities) were conducted which confirmed continued support of IP
communities to program activities. The Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures
prepared during the preparation of HSSP2 was updated for AF2 taking into account the lessons
learned from the HSSP2 and AF1. The IPPF was also updated based on findings from social
assessment undertaken during this AF preparation.


       IP. The social assessment conducted during the preparation of AF2 found that IP communities
        still face particular challenges in accessing health services and tend to be particularly vulnerable
        to poor health. Many minority groups live in rough-terrain - highland and border areas that are
        hard to reach, and are generally poorer than average. The sheer physical geography of these
        settings poses special challenges, as well as costs, in terms of accessing, providing and
        maintaining health care services. The IPPF developed under HSSP2 has been updated under
        AF2. The nature, scale and scope of impact that may occur on IP under AF2 are expected to be
        the same as those under HSSP2, and IP communities will continue to benefit from the program.
        During the implementation of HSSP2 and AF1, steps were taken to address issues found during
        preparation based on the free, prior and informed consultations with affected IP communities.
        Such measures include: (i) building technical capacity of health facility staff at primary care level
        for providing quality health services to IP; (ii) providing SDGs, particularly to areas where most IP
        reside to improve the functioning of health facilities- 24 hours opening and improve staff
        attendance so that IP can access health care services at any time as needed; (iii) financing health
        outreach activities so that IP in remote and difficult to access communities can receive basic
        preventive and curative services; (iv) establishment of HEFs to pay for health care services on
        behalf of poor IP; and (v) construction of new health facilities for bringing health services closer
        to IP. Regular exit interviews were conducted with users, including those from ethnic minorities
        as part of the implementation of HSSP2 and AF1, which found that they are satisfied with the
        services provided and that no negative impacts occurred to them under the program.




                                                     6
      Involuntary Resettlement. Although no civil works is financed under AF2, the Land Acquisition
       Framework Policy and Procedures developed under the original program has been updated
       anticipating a potential third additional financing (AF3) that could trigger the policy. A
       comprehensive review of land acquisition conducted during the original program carried out by
       MOH under the support of the World Bank confirmed that almost all construction sites were on
       state land. In a few instances, private land was acquired (either through voluntary donations or
       land swap, or against compensation at market prices agreeable to affected people), as per
       provision of the Land Acquisition Framework Policy and Procedures. According to the inventory,
       all plots of land acquired were less than 5 percent of the owners' properties, and no physical
       relocations took place.


   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
      activities in the program area:



No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.



   3. Describe any program alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
      impacts.


Not applicable.



   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
      assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


The MOH carried out social assessments including free, prior and informed consultations with IP
communities during the preparation of AF2, and updated the IPPF based on the findings as well as the
experience of HSSP2 and AF1. The Land Acquisition Framework Policy and Procedures was also updated
in anticipation of the planned civil works under a possible AF3 to the HSSP2 which might finance civil
works. The MOH has gained some good experience implementing World Bank-financed programs with
its specific requirements such as those under the World Bank’s policies triggered by this AF2. The MOH,
with support from the World Bank, will continue to provide training to relevant stakeholders in
implementation of the safeguard policies triggered by the program.



   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
      safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



                                                  7
The primary stakeholders of the program are MOH policy makers, program planners and managers who
will benefit from systems strengthening and capacity building activities, as well as from the program's
endorsement of the MOH's HSP2. Ministry of Economy and Finance continues to play an important role
during implementation and monitoring. Civil society and communities also play important roles in the
monitoring of services to increase public accountability. Civil society members are invited to attend
important bid openings and contract awards. Exit surveys at health facilities will continue to be carried
out which will further improve accountability to users of services supported by the AF2.



The Government updated their website on June 25, 2014 to take into account the AF2 investments and
disclosed the updated safeguard instruments.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:

  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          Yes

  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         6/24/2014

  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     6/25/2014

  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      6/25/2014

  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:

  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          Yes

  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         6/24/2014

  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     6/25/2014

  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      6/25/2014

Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:

  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          Yes

  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         6/24/2014



                                                    8
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     6/25/2014

  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      6/25/2014

Pest Management Plan:

  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          Yes

  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         6/24/2014

  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                     6/25/2014

  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      6/25/2014

* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized
by the project decision meeting)


OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                    Yes

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM) review and     Yes
approve the EA report?

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?   Yes

OP 4.09 - Pest Management

Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                           Yes

Is a separate PMP required?                                                          No

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or SM?     Yes
Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the project team
include a Pest Management Specialist?



                                                   9
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples

Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as appropriate) been      Yes
prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager      Yes
review the plan?

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed and     N/A
approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework          Yes
(as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector Manager      Yes
review the plan?

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's             Yes
Infoshop?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and    Yes
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and
local NGOs?

All Safeguard Policies

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been     Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?   Yes

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the monitoring     Yes
of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower          Yes
and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?




                                                    10
D. Approvals



 Signed and submitted by:             Name                                        Date

                                                                                  September 3,
                                      Laura L. Rose
                                                                                  2014



 Task Team Leader:
                                      Surhid P. Gautam




 Environmental Specialist on behalf
 of RSS:                                                                          September 3,
                                                                                  2014



 Social Development Specialist:       Satoshi Ishihara                             June 18, 2014

                                      Ly Nareth

 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):


                                      Ruxandra Floroiu                             June 17, 2014



 Approved by:


                                      Toomas Palu
 Practice Manager:                                                                 September 4,
                                                                                       2014



 Comments: This ISDS is for the additional financing to the MDTF. The project scope is limited to
 financing HEFs and SDGs. There are no changes in safeguard policies and arrangements.




                                                  11
