                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      INITIATION/CONCEPT STAGE
.
                                                                          Report No.:    95452
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
02/26/15


I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Chile               Project ID:            P152820
    Project Name:                 Technical Assistance for Geothermal Development
    Task Team Leader:             Migara Jayawardena, Mariano González Serrano
    Estimated Date of             February 28, 2015
    Approval:
    Managing Unit:                                    Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                          Financing
    Sector(s):                    Other Renewable Energy (100%)
    Theme(s):                     Climate Change (50%)
                                  Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%)
    Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [     ]
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:     3.5                       Total Bank Financing: 3.5
    Total Complementary
                        (50)                          Financing Gap:
    financing (IDB):
    Financing Source                                                          Amount
    ESMAP                                                                     0.5
    Clean Technology Fund                                                     3
    Complementary financing (IDB)                                             (50)
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT Agencia de Cooperación Internacional – Ministerio de Relaciones
    Exteriores (AGCI)
        Total                                                                3.5
    Environmental                 B
    Category
    Is this a Repeater            No
    project?
    Is this a Transferred         No
    project?
.
    B. Project Objectives
    The project objective is to assist the Government of Chile to improve geothermal energy market conditions
    by removing key barriers, leading to sustainable investments in this sector. Specifically, the expected key
    results are the following:
         Draft geothermal concession law drafted and submitted for approval
         Create an incentive framework for the geothermal sector

    The proposed project forms a complementary part of a package of initiatives being undertaken by the GoC
    with development partners through the support of the CTF. For this effort to succeed, it will be important to
    simultaneously address some of the associated barriers that are hampering efforts to invest in geothermal
    exploration and preventing Chile’s significant prospects from being unlocked. These reforms should also
    help prepare the groundwork beyond the riskier resource confirmation. Consideration should be given to the
    investment climate for the full development of geothermal operations from surface reconnaissance through
    to operating power plants, with a view towards the progressive scale-up of development of the sector
    sustainably over the long-term. It is with these intentions that the GoC has requested the World Bank to
    bring to bear its global experience to assist the GoC to undertake a number of key reforms. The aim is to
    improve the market conditions and facilitate greater immediate as well as long-term investments in the
    sector, so that geothermal energy can eventually become a key pillar in an optimally diversified power
    generation mix.

    The proposed Technical Assistance for Sustainable Geothermal Development project will entail a number of
    activities that will be carried out under the two components described below in order to comprehensively
    address several key barriers to geothermal development in Chile:

    Component 1 - Improve policy framework and strengthen management capabilities for mobilizing
    investments in geothermal energy. Some of the envisaged activities under this component include:

        a) Legal and regulatory reform related to the geothermal sector, in particular the submission of a new
           geothermal concession draft law
        b) Strengthen the concession management system, including resolving issues related to the large
           number of existing undeveloped concessions, and improving the capabilities within GoC to oversee
           the progress of these developments
        c) Stakeholder engagement to raise awareness regarding geothermal development with local
           communities taking into account environmental and social considerations; and provide guidance to
           developers on compliance with international standards and domestic requirements

    Component 2 - Enhance market conditions for promoting sustainable development of the sector. Some of
    the envisaged activities under this component include:

        a) Develop a geothermal resource risk mitigation framework to help mobilize investments in
           exploration and production drilling
        b) Identify and address issues related to integration of geothermal power in the broader power market
           in Chile
        c) Identify and address ways in which the long-term competitiveness of geothermal can be improved
           including an industrial analysis for sourcing services from domestic sectors and exploring medium
           and low enthalpy uses that would expand the market for geothermal in the country.

    The World Bank will provide direct technical assistance by mobilizing and managing international
 specialists in geothermal energy development, carrying out analytical work to advise the GoC, and
 providing just-in-time support to the client. The GoC will secure the services of international and local
 specialists to assist them with key implementation activities under the proposed project. The specific
 breakdown of Bank-executed and client-executed activities will be finalized by appraisal of the proposed
 project. The project, by its design, includes flexibility and just-in-time support to respond to requirements
 that may arise during the reform that cannot be anticipated in advance.
Potential environmental and social issues will be summarized in the Project Paper prior to appraisal, based on
meetings in-country with relevant stakeholders and agencies (Indigenous Peoples Associations/Parks
Authorities/Environmental Regulatory Authorities/Water Resources Agency/Concession Owners/etc.).

Key environmental/social issues around the concessions (if any) will be identified and summarized in the
Project Paper, which will delineate next steps (in terms of review of ToRs under the project for envt/social
content).

The consultation process to be followed during appraisal will be delineated prior to appraisal and a
stakeholder engagement strategy that will be adopted during project implementation will be summarized in
the Project Paper.



 D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
 known)

  The project will address the geothermal policy framework for the country of Chile. Chile has geothermal
  resources throughout much of the Andes that extend north-south throughout the country. There is a
  concentration of geothermal resources identified in the far north and central-south regions, but it is possible
  that projects (including low enthalpy direct uses) may be developed in multiple regions in Chile.

  The project will entail direct technical advisory support to the Ministry of Energy, analytical and diagnostic
  studies, capacity building and institutional strengthening as well as information, engagement and
  consultation activities with key stakeholders. The project support will not include any physical
  investment or the implementation of any geothermal program on the ground. While the project is
  conceived as mostly technical assistance and direct advisory support at this stage, key policy and regulatory
  reforms and changes in the geothermal sector will be recommended for implementation in the future that
  will have downstream impact. The analytical and diagnostic studies as well as the engagement and
  consultations with key stakeholders that will be supported through this project will be used to manage any
  potential risks associated with future procedures/ frameworks being proposed for the geothermal sector in
  Chile.

 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
  The newly established Unit of Social Participation and Dialogue ( Unidad de Participación y Dialogo
  Social) in the Ministry of Energy aims to engage specifically with communities and respond their issues
  and concerns regarding energy projects, which may include concerns about land and resource use, and
  cultural heritage issues. In addition, the Division of Environmental Assessment and Public Participation
  from the Service of Environmental Assessment (Servicio de Evaluación Ambiental, División de Evaluación
  Ambiental y Participación Ciudadana) is the agency responsible for the administration of the
  Environmental Impact Assessment System and the public participation within the EIA framework. As part
  of the project, institutional capacity and inter-sectoral coordination will be assessed and strengthened in
  line with the direct technical support provided to the Ministry of Energy in integrating social and
 environmental considerations in the specific activities proposed.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Peter LaFere ( Social Development Specialist, GSURR)
 Noreen Beg (Sr. Environmental Specialist, GENDR)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                      Triggered       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP Yes                      The policy is triggered as the TA project intends to
4.01                                                    provide direct technical support to the Ministry of
                                                        Energy on developing provisions and guidelines on
                                                        issues in the geothermal sector, that have bearing
                                                        on environmental management issues relating to
                                                        the geothermal exploration and generation.
                                                        Existing country guidelines (including but not
                                                        limited to the Guía para la Evaluación de Impacto
                                                        Ambiental de Centrales Geotérmicas de
                                                        Generación de Energía Eléctrica, prepared in
                                                        2012, which serves as a guideline for
                                                        Environmental Impact Assessment for geothermal
                                                        energy generation and is generally consistent with
                                                        the World Bank Group EHS Guidelines on
                                                        Geothermal Power) and legislation referenced in
                                                        this guide, will be used as a basis.

                                                        The Project Environment and Social Specialists
                                                        will review Terms of Reference (ToRs) for all
                                                        studies prepared as part of the Project, (and will
                                                        also review the draft law) to ensure that all
                                                        environmental and social concerns related to
                                                        geothermal exploration in Chile are adequately
                                                        addressed. This work will include a review of any
                                                        stakeholder mapping exercises already conducted,
                                                        whether there are any special provisions under
                                                        existing law for geothermal development in
                                                        protected areas, etc.

                                                        With regard to the ToR for the analytical review of
                                                        the existing concessions already granted, social
                                                        and/or environmental concerns impeding the
                                                        development of geothermal in Chile, such as land
                                                        acquisition/land use/protected habitats, will be
                                                        examined, and proposals will be made as to how
                                                        such concerns might be remedied in future
                                                        concessions (and existing concessions in the event
                                                        that amendments to existing contracts are
                                                        permitted).
                                    The Project will explore the possibility of
                                    preparing a risk analysis, or gap analysis, to
                                    examine any shortfalls between international best
                                    practice and domestic regulations, standards, and
                                    guidelines.


                                    Inter-sectoral coordination with the relevant
                                    government agencies, particularly the MMA,
                                    (Ministerio de Medio Ambiente), will be
                                    sought in providing background information
                                    on environmental policies and regulations.


                                    A high-level Social Assessment will be conducted
                                    in order to scope and identify key issues with
                                    stakeholders and inform strategic planning in the
                                    geothermal sector. This social assessment will
                                    provide the basis to commence an interactive
                                    process with stakeholders on,(in addition to a
                                    discussion of land acquisition and property rights),
                                    areas of environmental importance such as the
                                    impacts of water abstraction during exploration
                                    and drilling; impacts of hydrogen sulfide emissions
                                    on sensitive receptors; and sensitivity around areas
                                    of cultural, archaeological, and historical
                                    importance.


                                    All TA activities, recommendations, and advice,
                                    will be consistent with the objectives and
                                    requirements of all World Bank environmental and
                                    social safeguard policies
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The policy is triggered as the TA project
                                    intends to provide direct technical support to
                                    the Ministry of Energy on developing
                                    provisions and guidelines on issues in the
                                    geothermal sector, that have bearing the
                                    management of natural habitats (in particular
                                    critical habitats and key biodiversity areas) in
                                    the potential areas of geothermal exploration
                                    and generation. Existing country guidelines
                                    (including but not limited to the Guía para la
                                    Evaluación de Impacto Ambiental de
                                    Centrales Geotérmicas de Generación de
                                    Energía Eléctrica, prepared in 2012) and
                                    legislation referenced in this guide, will be
                                    used as a basis . The Guide is generally
                                        consistent with the World Bank Group EHS
                                        Guidelines on Geothermal Power.

                                        All TA activities will be consistent with the
                                        objectives and requirements of all World Bank
                                        environmental and social safeguard policies.
Forests OP/BP 4.36               Yes    Given the possibility that geothermal
                                        development may take place in forested areas,
                                        the potential impacts of proposed strategies,
                                        incentives, and legislation on forests (both in
                                        terms of deforestation or effects on critical
                                        habitats within forests) will be assessed, and
                                        CONAF (Corporación Nacional Forestal)
                                        will be consulted.
Pest Management OP 4.09          No     The Project activities will not include purchase
                                        of pesticides or provide TA that could lead to
                                        increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP Yes   The policy is triggered as the TA project
4.11                                    intends to provide direct technical support to
                                        the Ministry of Energy on developing
                                        provisions and guidelines on issues in the
                                        geothermal sector that may have bearing on
                                        archaeological, historical, or culturally
                                        important resources located within the
                                        potential areas of geothermal exploration and
                                        generation. Existing country guidelines will
                                        be used as a basis.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes    The policy is triggered as the TA project
                                        intends to provide direct technical support to
                                        the Ministry of Energy on developing
                                        provisions and guidelines on issues that may
                                        affect indigenous peoples in the geothermal
                                        sector taking into account existing country
                                        guidelines and legislation (i.e. Indigenous
                                        Peoples Law no. 19,253). Specifically,
                                        technical advice will be provided in
                                        formulating procedures for engaging and
                                        consulting with indigenous peoples in the
                                        geothermal sector. Inter-sectoral
                                        coordination with the relevant government
                                        agency, CONADI (Corporación Nacional de
                                        Desarrollo Indígena), will be sought in
                                        providing policy advice regarding indigenous
                                                        peoples. Additionally, engagement and
                                                        consultations with indigenous peoples’
                                                        organizations will be carried out on the
                                                        proposed revisions in order to seek their
                                                        feedback. Such interactions will be
                                                        disseminated and documented.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes            The policy is triggered as the TA project
    4.12                                                intends to provide direct technical support to
                                                        the Ministry of Energy on developing
                                                        provisions and guidelines that may involve
                                                        issues of involuntary resettlement, land
                                                        acquisition and exploration in protected areas
                                                        in the course of proposing relevant legal,
                                                        regulatory and procedural reforms for the
                                                        geothermal sector. Existing country guidelines
                                                        and legislation regarding involuntary
                                                        resettlement and land acquisition will be
                                                        reviewed as part of the implementation of the
                                                        TA project.

    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No             The Project will not support the construction or
                                                        rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
                                                        investments which rely on the services of
                                                        existing dams.
    Projects on International            No             The Project will not affect international
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways as defined under the policy nor will
                                                        the Technical Assistance prepare any projects
                                                        that would directly utilize underground
                                                        geothermal resources.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No             The Project will not affect disputed areas as
    7.60                                                defined under the policy.
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

      A. Will an Appraisal stage ISDS be required? [Y/N]
        i. Explanation
       ii. If Yes, tentative target for preparing the appraisal stage ISDS

      B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
      The project entails a combination of direct technical support, reviews and studies as well as
      engagement activities with key stakeholders and relevant sector governments. Based on the
      technical discussions with the Ministry of Energy, specific studies will be identified in order to
      integrate the needed social and environmental aspects to support the proposed legal, regulatory
     and procedural changes. As per activity c in component 1 in the PCN, a communications
     strategy and a stakeholder engagement plan will be prepared as part of the project initial phase.

     C. The specific studies, their timing and disclosure should be documented in the
     appraisal-stage ISDS.


IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:                  Name: Migara Jayawardena / Mariano González Serrano
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards                Name: Glenn Morgan                                 Date: 02/26/2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager:                  Name: Malcom Cosgrove-Davies                       Date: 03/18/2015

 1
   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to
potentially affected persons.
