                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                           Report No.: 85733

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          04-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     China                  Project ID:              P117341
 Project Name:                HaJia Railway (P117341)
 Task Team Leader:            Gerald Paul Ollivier
 Estimated Board Date:        28-Mar-2014
 Managing Unit:               EASCS
 Sector(s):                   Railways (100%)
 Theme(s):                    Regional integration (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (50%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       5566.00                   Total Bank Financing:     300.00
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     Borrower                                                                                      5266.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                          300.00
     Total                                                                                         5566.00
 Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 2. Project Development Objective(s)
 The objective of the Project is to improve accessibility and mobility by responding to existing and
 anticipated transport demand along the Harbin-Jiamusi corridor through the provision of additional
 railway capacity and reduction of transport time for passengers and freight.

 3. Project Description
 The project will support the construction of a 343 km-long double-track, electrified, mixed use
 (passenger and freight) railway line between the cities of Harbin and Jiamusi (HaJia line) in
Heilongjiang Province in northeast China. The project will include construction of twelve new
stations, acquisition and installation of goods, maintenance equipment, and rolling stock, as well as
land acquisition and resettlement. Several additional short sections of track (in total about 25.5 km)
connecting to the existing stations at Harbin and Jiamusi are also included in the project.

The proposed Bank loan will finance the procurement of goods associated with the construction of the
line and with its track, electrification, signaling, and communication systems as well as operation and
maintenance equipment and possibly technical assistance on policy aspects. The scope of such
technical assistance, if any, will be identified during implementation.

In northeast China, road traffic can be disrupted in winter months by heavy snow, ice and thick fog for
up to 70 days a year. With the building of this new line a more reliable year round option will be
available. The rail distance for passengers as well as freight between Harbin and Jiamusi will be
reduced by approximately 164 km, from the existing 507 km to 343 km. The new line will offer a
rapid link between cities in northeast Heilongjiang and Harbin, and from the railway hub in Harbin to
the core of the Chinese high-speed railway network. This line will also provide a substantial increase
in capacity for passenger trains between these cities. The travel time for passenger trains will be
reduced from the current average of over 7 hours to less than two hours for express trains. Frequency
will also be greatly improved.

The existing mixed-use double track railway line between Harbin and Jiamusi takes an indirect
northerly route following an old alignment that was primarily built to service the coal produced in the
region. This existing line will continue to be used for freight traffic and local passenger trains, but
through passengers and a large volume of freight traveling from Jiamusi to Harbin and beyond will be
diverted to the new line. Thus more capacity will be made available on the old line, and the service
standards of both markets and both lines will be enhanced, allowing railways to compete more
effectively with transportation services offered by highways and airlines.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project is located in northeast of China in Heilongjiang Province between the cities of Harbin and
Jiamusi. The proposed alignment mainly traverses alluvial plain, low mountains and rolling hills.
Urban areas and agricultural areas are prevalent throughout the entire corridor. About 48% of the line
will be bridges and tunnels which significantly reduces footprint and farmland occupation.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Songling Yao ( EASCS )
Peishen Wang ( EASCS )
Ning Yang ( EASCS )

6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             The project includes the construction of
                                                               a high-speed railway line of about 343
                                                               km, which the project has the potential to
                                                               cause substantial social and
                                                               environmental impacts in terms of land
                                                               acquisition, loss of surface vegetation,
                                                               soil erosion, spoil material disposal and
                                               social disturbance during construction.
                                               The operation of the new railway line
                                               will also result in increased noise,
                                               potential safety concern and community
                                               severance impacts etc. The proposed
                                               project is classified as a Category A
                                               project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes   The proposed project will traverse
                                               through the experimental zone of a
                                               planned wetland protection area.
                                               Therefore, the policy is triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No    This project will not involve forestry
                                               sector activities and will not have
                                               significant impact upon forested areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    The project will not involve procurement
                                               of pesticide or have any impact on pest
                                               management practice. This policy is not
                                               triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes   There are some local farmers’ graves
                                               scattered along the alignment to be
                                               impacted by the project. These graves
                                               are considered as physical cultural
                                               resources as per Bank interpretation,
                                               therefore, OP4.11 is triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No    A social screening and the completed
                                               social assessment concluded that there is
                                               no ethnic minority village present in, or
                                               collective attachment to, the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes   The railway line and stations need land
                                               acquisition and resettlement. Based on
                                               the RAP, in total, about 14,342 people
                                               would be affected by land acquisition for
                                               construction. This would include about
                                               4,625 people (1,062 households) in rural
                                               areas affected by land acquisition (3494
                                               people/844 households) or demolition
                                               and resettlement (1,318 people/275
                                               households), including 187 people and
                                               57 households impacted by both, 5,167
                                               people (1,210 households) in urban areas
                                               affected by demolition and relocation,
                                               and 4,550 people impacted by the
                                               resettlement of 39 enterprises. About
                                               23,394 mu (1,560 ha) land will be
                                               permanently acquired (compared with
                                               2.7 million ha of arable land available in
                                               the two cities) and 12,819 mu (855 ha)
                                               of land will be temporarily acquired for
                                                               the project construction. Based on
                                                               estimates in the environmental
                                                               assessment, another 1,487 households
                                                               may need to be relocated to avoid
                                                               excessive noise and vibration impacts
                                                               during operation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No               The project does not involve any dam,
                                                               therefore this policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   The project does not involve
7.50                                                           international waters, therefore, this
                                                               policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No               The project is not located in any disputed
                                                               areas, therefore, this policy is not
                                                               triggered.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Impacts

Due to the large scale of civil works involved and project characteristics, the project has the potential
to cause substantial social and environmental impacts, especially during construction, which have been
thoroughly assessed and can be adequately avoided, minimized and/or mitigated with engineering
measures developed either in project design or included in the EMP and RAP for the project.
Manageable adverse impacts are primarily related to: (i) crossing sensitive sites, i.e. Longshan Forest
Park, Mayihe River wetland, and water resource protection areas for Yilan County ; (ii) community
impacts such as land acquisition and resettlement; (iii) noise, dust, soil erosion and social disturbance
during construction; (iv) noise, safety and community connectivity during operation.

There were a number of environmentally sensitive sites identified in the vicinity of the project corridor
during alternative analysis stage, including nature reserves and cultural heritage sites. The project
alignment has been carefully selected and fine-tuned to avoid most of them. However, due to the
necessity to access major economic centers and restriction on railway alignment curve requirements,
the proposed alignment will inevitably pass through or nearby three sensitive areas, including:

(1) The alignment will traverse the edge of a Longshan Forest Park through embankment and bridge,
with a length of 7.28km, including the Gaoleng station. The Longshan Park belongs to forest
harvesting farms of Fangzheng Forest Bureau, and is mainly for tourism and recreation purposes. The
Park comprises of a number of function zones, including Wanbaoshan Ecological Vacation Zone,
urban recreation zone, mountain relaxation zone, Xiangshui River rafting zone, natural forest tourism
zone. The zone where the alignment traverses is the urban recreation zone, which is mainly the
township built-up area and farmland, located far away from other tourism zones. The railway
construction and operation will not have adverse impact on the forest park in terms of scenic spots,
tourism and ecological function.

(2) The alignment will cross Mayihe river using an extra-large bridge. Currently, a wetland protection
area along Mayihe River is being planned by local government. The protection area plan has given full
consideration of the railway corridor by excluding the alignment corridor from both core and buffer
zones. The main natural wetland of Mayihe River is located at the estuary area which is 8 km away
from the alignment location. Current land use at the bridge location is all farmland. Therefore, the
proposed railway project will not result in degradation or conversion of natural habitat, will not result
in loss of biodiversity or change of plant community structure, and will have little impacts on river
hydrology.

(3) The proposed alignment will pass nearby the groundwater wells serving as the drinking water
source for Yilan County. However, the alignment avoids the protection zone for all wells. The distance
to the closest well is above 1.5 km, and over 400 m away from the boundary of the protection zone.
The alignment at this section is an embankment, which will be constructed well above the
groundwater level and thus has little impact on groundwater quality. It is also noted that groundwater
is recharged by the Mudanjiang River, where the railway alignment does not have blocking effects.

The project alignment selection has avoided all physical cultural resources through field survey,
consultation with relevant authorities and local communities, except for a number of graves. There are
about 648 household graves scattered along the alignment to be impacted by the project. These graves
were identified and consultations were conducted with concerned families. These graves are
considered as physical cultural resources as per Bank interpretation, therefore, OP4.11 is triggered. As
graves are a common aspect addressed under infrastructure projects in China, there are well
established national/local regulations governing the consultation, relocation and compensation, they
have been incorporated into the RAP in line with OP4.12. In addition, chance-find procedure has been
developed and included in the EMP, and will be enforced during implementation.

Social Impacts. The potential major social impact is from involuntary resettlement and a RAP with a
RPF was prepared to cover the following aspects: i) stations, ii) rail lines including the connection
lines, tunnels and bridges, iii) attached facilities such as power, sanitation, management houses, iv)
construction activities, such as access road, disposal/borrow areas, camp, etc. The project resettlement
planning indicates that the land acquisition and resettlement happens in ten counties and districts in
two municipalities.

In total, about 14,342 people would be affected by land acquisition for construction. This would
include about 4,625 people (1,062 households) in rural areas affected by land acquisition (3494
people/844 households) or demolition and resettlement (1,318 people/275 households), including 187
people and 57 households impacted by both, 5,167 people (1,210 households) in urban areas affected
by demolition and relocation, and 4,550 people impacted by the resettlement of 39 enterprises. About
23,394 mu (1,560 ha) land will be permanently acquired (compared with 2.7 million ha of arable land
available in the two cities) and 12,819 mu (855 ha) of land will be temporarily acquired for the project
construction. Based on estimates in the environmental assessment, another 1,487 households may need
to be relocated to avoid excessive noise and vibration impacts during operation.

A gender impact analysis was conducted as part of the RAP and SA, considering various angles such
as education, employment, decision making, rights and interests. The SA elaborated recommendations.
These included providing women with microfinance loans and training to help them develop small
businesses offering services at construction sites and later on at railway stations, encouraging the
hiring of women for railway operations, and giving them priority when recruiting staff. Women will
have access to at least one female worker in every resettlement group for their grievance.

IP screening, including interviews with counterpart staff and local people at the visited sites, did not
identify any ethnic minority group in project areas. A social assessment (SA) was prepared for the
project, including a screening of all the villages within a 5 km width belt along each side of the line
and concluded that no indigenous people, as defined by OP 4.10, are present in, or are collectively
attached to, the project areas. The project triggers social safeguard policies OP 4.12 and OP4.11, for
which the potential impacts and mitigation measures have been adequately addressed in the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and found acceptable to the Bank. The Resettlement Action Plan
has been disclosed locally and in InfoShop.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The railway will provide valuable opportunities for local development such as local business trade,
transportation and construction. Urbanization is expected around the terminal and station areas. CRC
has maintained extensive dialogue with local governments in the selection of locations of alignment
and terminal stations to ensure that they are fully in line with the local land use, socioeconomic
development and environmental plans.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The process of alignment selection has been an important environmental tool for this project.
Alternative analysis has been extensively conducted during project proposal, pre-feasibility
study/feasibility study and EA preparation. The analysis was conducted both at the regional level and
specific section levels within selected corridor, with comprehensive considerations of economic,
technical, environmental and social factors. Through this process, the selected alignment has avoided a
number of sensitive sites including nature reserves and cultural heritage sites. The major analysis
includes:

- Regional Corridors. During the project proposal and feasibility study, four corridors at the regional
level were studied, namely the Existing Railway Line, North Songhua River line, South Songhua
River line and a relative straight line between Harbin and Jiamusi in north Songhua River.
Comparative analyses of these four corridors were carried out considering the current environmental
and social situation, and development planning of the regional railways. In summary, the South
Songhua River line is the most efficient alignment, to effectively link the local economic hubs,
alleviate poverty and improve socio-economic development, while avoiding key environmental
sensitive areas. This alignment is fully supported by local governments.

- Alternative Alignment by Sections. Within the selected regional corridor, i.e. South Songhua River
line, alternative alignments for two sections have been studied to choose the optimal scheme in terms
of environmental and social impact, technical feasibility and financial and economic benefits.
Consultation with local governments and relevant authorities in charge of environmental sensitive
areas were conducted and fully incorporated into the alternative selection process. Considerable effort
has been made to avoid ecological sensitive areas, geological unstable zones, floodplains and
wetlands, relocation of houses, cultivated lands, and cultural resources in order to ensure the
environmental feasibility of the alignment. The final alignment thus minimizes environmental and
social impacts, avoids natural hazards, and connects the economic hubs in the region.

On the social side, some critical measures were taken to minimize impacts from land occupation and
house demolition. First, bridges and tunnels will be constructed for more than 48 percent of the
alignment to significantly reduce permanent land occupation. Second, realignment modification to
minimize impacts on density urban area and house demolition.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
CRC has prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), an Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) including a Resettlement Plan Framework (RPF) for the
project. These documents meet the Bank requirements of OP 4.01, 4.04, 4.11 and 4.12 respectively.

Mitigation Measures. To address potential impacts, CRC requested the Third Railway Survey &
Design Institute (TSDI), a Class A licensed EIA consultant in China, to prepare an Environmental
Impact Assessment with guidance and advice from the Bank’s environmental team. In summary, a
three-fold approach to minimize environmental and social impacts has been adopted:

- Avoidance: Alternative analysis has been carefully conducted to avoid the environmental and social
sensitive areas to the extent possible, as one of the most important mitigation measures to minimize
potential adverse environmental and social impact. The selected alignment led to reduced house and
structure demolition, especially in the urban areas, and has avoided a number of sensitive sites,
including nature reserves and cultural heritage sites.

- Reduced footprint: The project has been designed with state-of-the art engineering. Bridges and
tunnels will be constructed for 48 percent of the alignment (45 percent bridges, 3 percent tunnels). As
such, it reduces the ecological footprint and the need for land acquisition.

- Comprehensive mitigation. Detailed environmental design plans (green corridors and landscaping),
environmental management plans, and resettlement action plans have been prepared in order to
minimize or compensate for unavoidable impacts from the project.

Environmental Management Plan. A stand-alone EMP has been developed based on the findings of the
EIA report. The EMP detailed the environmental management and supervision organizations and
responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of
EMP implementation. EMP measures to be implemented by the contractors will be incorporated into
bidding documents and contracts to ensure effective implementation. EMP implementation will be
managed by HRC under the supervision of CRC. An environmental management unit has been
established in HRC with dedicated environmental staff. The contractors and supervision engineers will
need to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the
EMP.

Compensation and Restoration Measures. The RAP provides for livelihood restoration in line with
OP4.12. Compensation for permanently and temporarily acquired land will be conducted according to
the provincial land regulation and Bank Policy stated in the Resettlement Action Plan. No village,
except two, will lose more than five percent of their land. The two villages will lose less than ten
percent of their farmland and have designed compensatory measures for affected farmers. Livelihood
restoration for affected farmers includes allocation of reserved collective land to land losing farmers
through land readjustment, or non-agricultural resettlement in the form of cash compensation,
employment and skills training when alternative land is not available. Social security will be provided
for those that meet applicable policy standards. The cash compensation to affected people covers
resettlement allowance plus land compensation. Temporarily used land will be paid annually
according to the agreed standard in the resettlement plan, and will be restored and returned to the
affected farmers.

People who lose rural houses will be compensated at the full replacement cost of the house plus a plot
of land provided by the village committees. People who lose an urban house will be compensated in
cash according to replacement value, or with replacement houses, which municipal governments are
constructing, and will receive full replacement costs including relocation expenses and transition fees.
The 39 affected enterprises will be compensated based on a commercial evaluation. About 27 of these
will be moved out with compensation to rebuild and restore production, including a relocation fee and
compensation for losses due to resettlement. For enterprises, which do not plan to rebuild, the
resettlement department and the enterprises should give a public notice to staff six months in advance
to facilitate their transition towards new jobs, and should provide free training and recommend new
jobs. Affected staff will be compensated for shutdown/transition and will have the priority to get new
jobs after the enterprises are relocated.

All compensation will be based on agreements to be reached with the affected farmers, urban citizens
and enterprise owners after meaningful consultation. Infrastructure restoration will be directly
financed and conducted as part of contractor’s contracts. The concerned counties and cities have
confirmed their concurrence with the compensation rates. The total resettlement estimated cost is 2.5
billion CNY.

Monitoring and Evaluation. Environmental monitoring reports will provide key and timely
information twice a year focused on environmental impacts and mitigation to the borrower and the
Bank to evaluate the success of environmental management. Both internal and external monitoring is
planned for resettlement implementation. HRC, together with the local resettlement offices, will be
responsible for the internal monitoring and supervision of compensation payment, housing
reconstruction, land acquisition, living restoration and appeals. CRC will prepare monitoring reports
every six months and will submit them to the World Bank till the end of the implementation of the
RAP. CRC will then submit a post-resettlement evaluation report to the World Bank. In addition, CRC
will entrust the external monitoring and evaluation to an independent monitoring agency. External
monitoring reports will be given to CRC every six months till the end of the implementation of the
RAP.

Capacity. MOR and its successor, CRC, have many years of experience with Bank projects. HRC and
local governments will be trained to enhance their implementation capacity in accordance with the
EMP and RAP, which include detailed internal and external monitoring arrangements for their
implementation. External consultants on environmental aspects and land acquisition will monitor the
implementation of both these plans by all parties involved and provide guidance to HRC accordingly.

Grievance Handling. A contact point has been set up to collect and respond to grievances and the
contact information, including contact agencies, contact persons and telephone numbers, for this
grievance channel have been made public as part of the consultation. The RAP indicates that any
grievance should be rapidly handled through the HRC resettlement management system, external
monitor, local government system, or even court system.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation. Public consultations were conducted in accordance with the Bank’s OP4.01 and OP4.12
during the EIA and RAP preparation in 2010, as well in 2012 and 2013 for the project design changes.
These consultations were conducted through a combination of opinion surveys and public meetings in
all townships, village committees and affected villagers’ homes. Stakeholders such as local authorities,
civil society, and the affected population were consulted through diverse ways like television,
newspaper, meetings, and focus groups on land acquisition matters. Local governments were consulted
on the alignment of the railway line and location of stations. All the affected villages are informed,
investigated and consulted. Specific public concerns raised during the consultation have been
incorporated in project design, the EMP and RAP.
Disclosure. The Safeguards documents have been disclosed in accordance with the Bank’s policy and
were sent to Infoshop. Information related to the EA has been disseminated using posters and bulletins
in townships and villages, a local newspaper (Heilongjiang Daily) and through the internet. The draft
EIA document was disclosed on August 10, 2010 and on February 5, 2013 through the website of
TSDI as announced in the Heilongjiang Daily, as well as at the Harbin and Jiamusi Provincial
Environmental Protection Bureaus and the HaJia Railway Company. Information disclosure on project
land acquisition and resettlement was distributed in the affected villages and communities during the
resettlement impact investigation and planning process. After project design changes, the updated EIA
and RAP were locally disclosed again on August 12, 2013 and September 7, 2013 respectively. The
final Chinese and English versions of the EIA and EMP documents were disclosed in InfoShop on
November 27, 2013 and November 26, 2013 respectively. The final English and Chinese versions of
the RAP were disclosed in InfoShop on December 11, 2013.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  22-Nov-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               26-Nov-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the   13-Dec-2013
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                        12-Aug-2013
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  22-Nov-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                               11-Dec-2013
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                        07-Sep-2013
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [    ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager    Yes [ X ]    No [   ]   NA [    ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or              Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation   Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural              Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]        No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional             Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with         Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard   Date:3/5/2014
Sector Manager:             Name: Abhas k. Jha     Date: 3/5/2014
