                                                                                                   95945
                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           IS-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       China                 IProject ID:                  jPll 1421
 Project Name:                  China: Anhui Medium Cities Urban Transport Project (P 111421)
 Task Team Leader(s):           Yuhui Jiao
 Estimated Board Date:          20-May-20 I0
 Managing Unit:                 GTIDR
                                                                                .
 Sector(s):                     Urban Trai:-sport (990A>}, Public administration-Transportation (1%)
 Theme(s):                      City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                    No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        307.00                      Total Bank Financing:        j100.00
 Financing Gap:             0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
     Borrower                                                                                            207.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               100.00
     Total                                                                                               307.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?

  2. Current Project Development Objectives
  The development objective of the project is to improve mobility on selected main corridors of the
 .municipalities of Anqing. Huaibei, Lu an and. Wuhu in Anhui Province in a safe and efficient manner.
  Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
3. Project Description
Project Description
The project is composed of four components. A detailed description can be found in Annex 4 of the
PAD. Briefly:
I.      The Integrated Corridor Development Component (IC) Component (total cost USS 207 .4
million, World Bank proposed loan USS 72.3 million) consist of improving the capacity, public
transport service and traffic safety on key corridors in the Project Cities.
2.       The Local and Freight Access (LA) Component (total cost US$ 81.S million, World Bank
proposed loan USS 19 .9 million) consists of construction of selected access roads in the Project Cities.
3.       The Public Transport (PT) Component (total cost USS 17.4 million, World Bank proposed loan
USS 7.S million) consists of constructing maintenance facilities, bus terminals, bus depots and stops in
the Project Cities.
4.       The Capacity Building (CB) component (total cost USS 1.0 million, World Bank proposed loan
USS 1.0 million). This component includes international study tours and training as well as technical
assistance related to the project components.

For restructuring
Since there are four citites included in Anhui Medium Cities Urban Transport Project, each city has one
or more project components listed above. In particular, Wuhu only had the integrated corridor
development component. This component consisted of Jiuhua Road improvement,· Yijiang Road
Improvement, and Third Ring Road development. With the current restructuring, the components at
the other project cities (Huaibei, Anqing and Luan) remained unchanged. The integrated corridor
improvement at Wuhu is replaced with three urban roads improvement within the current curb-to-curb
scope; resurfacing the parking lots at two existing bus depots; procurement of clean-fuel buses and
maintenance equipment; and the implementation of advanced public transport system (hardware and
software).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project includes investments in the central cities of the Municipalities of An Qing, Huai Bei, Lu An,
and Wuhu in Anhui Province. All are medium sized cities with population less than 1 million. They are
located in temperate zone with annual precipitation ranging from 800-I 300mm. The project areas of
these cities are on flat terrain long inhabited without critical natural habitats.

S. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Peishen Wang ( GTIDR)
Xin Ren ( GENDR)
Zhefu Liu ( GSURR )

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No
Pest Management OP 4.09                       No                         ..

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        Yes
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
1.SO
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Sa/egulll'd Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irrevenible impacts:
The project includes the installation of bus-exclusive lane and bus-bay on existing urban roads, the
procurement of clean-fuel buses and equipment for bus maintenance, and the installation of intelligent
bus dispatching system in Wuhu. As a standard urban transport project, environmental impacts will be
mostly construction-related, such as noise and dust, construction waste disposal, damage of vegetation,
soil erosion, sewage discharge, traffic impact, social disturbance and safety, and indirect impacts caused
by resettlement and industries relocation. There is no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts
envisioned in the project.

Environmental Assessment.       The project lias been designated as 'Category B' as per OP4.0l by the
Bank due to its limited but material environmental impact. Each project city has developed an
Environmental Assessment (EA) in Chinese. A consolidated EA (CEA) was prepared in English and
Chinese, by experts from a top-level certified EA institute, Anhui Provincial Academy of
Environmental Science. Four city-specific standalone environmental management plans (EMPs) were
also prepared in Chinese and English in order to facilitate implementation and supervision. Both CEA
and the four EMPs cover possible adverse impacts, mitigation measures and environmental monitoring
and training based on experience of similar projects in China.

Physical Cultural Resources. The CEA has analyzed all protected areas and physical cultural
resources in the project areas which are mainly Nanhu wetland park in Huaibei (discussed above) and an
ancient Yingjiang temple in Anqing. The project in Anqing rehabilitates a road abutting the boundary
wall of this temple, a Provincial Level protected cultural relic. The EA investigated the site, assessed
the nature and extent of impacts from the project, and consulted and obtained consent from the
responsible authority (Anqing Bureau for Cultural Relics and Religion). The EMP proposed concrete
measures to mitigate impacts during construction.

For restructuring, the proposal from Wuhu actually has reduced coverage compared to the original
project, as it involves only improving existing roads without widening and upgrading the existing bus
depots. Therefore, the project would remain a "Category B" reflecting the limited extent and duration of
any adverse environmental impacts. No new environmental safeguard policy is triggered.

A new environmental assessment (EA) was prepared for the restructuring activities by the original EA
consultant for the project (Anhui Provincial Academy of Environmental Science) and approved
domestically. Based on it, a new environmental management plan (EMP) was developed, following the
requirements of the original EMP, and considered acceptable to the Bank.

The updated EA and EMP for Wuhu restructuring were prepared according to OP 4.01. The
implementation of original EMP in the other three project cities (Huaibei, Lu'an and Anqing) was rated
as moderately satisfactory. Therefore, the responsibilities and functions of the executive unit and
monitoring unit for environmental management plan implementation are clearly specified for the
restructured project component design, implementation and operation stages. Furthermore, the
environmental monitoring plan and output are developed.

Involuntary resettlement. The project will affect 1S villages/urban communities in 11 townships/urban
community units in Wuhu, Anqing, Luan and Huaibei municipality. The project will require the
permanent acquisition of20S9.9 mu (137.3 hectares) of land, including 1,089.4 mu in Wuhu (52.9
percent), 20 mu in Anqing (1.0 percent), 362.S mu in Luan ( 17.6 percent) and 588.0 mu in Huaibei (28.S
percent). In the collective land acquisition, 813.61 mu is paddy field (39.S percent); 320.49 mu of dry
land {IS.6 percent); 52.53 mu of vegetable plots (2.6 percent); 27.S mu of garden plot {1.3 percent); 44.2
mu of woodland {2.1 percent); 351.1 mu of water pools (17.0 percent); 324 mu of housing plots {15.7
percent); 13.3 mu of other rural land occupied by buildings (0.6 percent); J 13.21 mu of unused land (5.5
percent). Some temporary land use would be required during project implementation by contractors and
mitigation measures will be.taken. The municipal resettlement office will supervise these activities.

The project will affect 5,480 people in peri-urban areas, including 1, 104 in Wuhu {20. l percent), 348 in
Anqing (6.4 percent), 2,332 in Loan {42.6 percent) and 1,696 in Huaibei (30.9 percent). 538 families
with a population of 1,808 people will be affected by land acquisition {accounting for 33 percent of the
total affected populations); 285 families with a population of 1,287 people will be affected by both land
acquisition and demolition (accounting for 23.5 percent of the total aff'.ected population); and 640
families with a population of2,056 people will be affected by structure demolition only (accounting for
37.S percent of the total affected population); excluding 11 enterprises with 158 employees (accounting
for 2.8 percent ofthe total affected population) and 92 people out of3 public institutions (accounting for
1.7 percent of the total affected population) and 85 people out of 16 shops are to be affected (aceounting
for 1.6 percent of the total affected population).

For the restructuring
The project components in Anqing, Liuan and Huaibei will not be changed and only the component in
Wuhu will be restructured to support the improvement on the existing Changjiang, Yinhu and Zheshan
roads, and also two bus depots as Taogou bus depot and Bus Company depot by resurfacing those
parking lots in the depots. The screening of the resettlement impacts were conducted by the task team
and concluded that no land acquisition and resettlement relocations would be incurred on the existing
Changjiang Road, Yinhu Road and Zheshan Road. The upgrade of the bus depots will be constructed on
existing Taogou bus depot and Bus Company depot by resurfacing those parking lots. The existing
Changjiang Road, Yinhu Road and Zheshan Road were constructed a decade of years ago, and the
existed bus depots were constructed S years ago. The due diligence reviews concluded that the
resettlement works done at that periods were in consistence to the national and Anhui provincial
resettlement policies. The resettlement works in Anqing, Liuan and Huaibei were carried out by the
engaged PMOs in the cities and the implemented resettlement policies up to the Bank last mission are in
consistence to the RAPs. The RAPs are still valid to be implemented up to the Closing of the Bank loan
and the satisfactions to the Bank.
2. Describe any potential indil:ect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The project is not expected to cause any significant indirect or long-term impacts. Potentially the most
significant long-term negative impacts could be those related to increased automobile use:- including air
pollution, noise, and road safety. The bus depots built by the project will also generate wastewater.
These impacts are mitigated by the proposed improvements in public transport and pedestrian and
cyclist facilities on the key corridors where road capacity is being improved.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
"impacts.
Alternative Analysis. Analysis of different design alternatives were undertaken for all project cities
including a 'without project' scenario. Annex 9 of the PAD provides detail. At a design level,
comparison was made for different road alignments ofSanhuan road in Wuhu in tenns of resettlement,
environmental impacts and engineering aspects. A slightly longer alignment with fewer impacts on
green area and resettlement was selected. For the Tuohe road in Huaibei, an alternative alignment as far
as practicable from the Nanhu urban wetland park was chosen so as to minimize the impact on the park.
Different lane configuration was compared for rehabilitation of Jiefang road in Luan, Huaihai road in
Huaibei, Huxin road in Anqing and building of new Sanhuan road in Wuhu. In all cases, alternatives
with less land occupation, fewer lanes for automobiles and more green belt were recommended.
Three types of building material currently available for urban roads in China were compared from an
environmental, technical and investment perspective: modified asphalt, concrete and noise-reducing
road surface. Noise-reducing surface is recommended for road sections with large amount of sensitive
receptors so as to reduce negative impacts and modified asphalt surface for the rest.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Issues
The project's negative impacts could be readily avoided and mitigated by sound project design and
construction management and operation practice. They were analyzed thoroughly in the EA for each
city. Two rounds of public consultations have been carried out for all project components and the
feedback were incorporated into EA documents and design alternatives. An Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) was designed for each project city detailing comprehensive mitigation
measures to address these impacts. The EMPs will be incorporated into bidding documents and civil
work contracts to ensure their implementation.
The EMP defines institutional arrangement for its implementation and supervision mechanism, specifies
mitigation measures for all potential adverse impacts, and includes an environmental monitoring plan
and a training plan with budget e5timate. Key elements of the EA and EMP are summarized in the
following paragraphs.

Air pollution and dust. Dust is the major air-borne pollution during construction. Major measures
typically adopted in similar projects include frequent water spraying on construction sites and access
roads, covering trucks and materials on site, and timely clean-up. More attention is needed near sensitive
receptors.
The result of modeling shows that although concentration for NOx and CO will meet relevant standards
in future, they will increase as the traffic flow increases after the project roads are in operation. A
review of existing air pollution management in each city reveals that automobile air emissions are
mainly controlled through compulsory annual inspection of vehicles, ban of those non-compliant onto
road and road-side spot check of emissions during major campaigns. Major measures proposed by the
CEA are to strengthen road-side spot check, speed up the phase-out of non-compliant polluting vehicles,
tighten vehicle testing and maintenance, improve public transport to divert traffic volume, and increase
tree belt along roads t~ absorb air emissions.

Noise and Vibration. Major measures include careful scheduling of construction activities near
sensitive receptors such as school, hospital and residential areas. High-noise and vibration machines will
be avoided whenever possible, in particular on the site near Linjiang temple in Anqing. Maintenance of
equipments will be carried out according to relevant domestic requirements to minimize heavy noise and
vibration due to mat-function. The construction supervision team will use portable noise meters to
monitor routinely. The modeling results suggest that noise level in many project roads may exceed
relevant standards within urban planning red-line due to traffic increase. To deal with the impact,
development along new roads will be carefully planned not to add new sensitive receptors within
red-line. As necessary, based on ex-post assessments, noise barriers will be set up and noise insulation
windows be installed to protect sensitive receptors.

Spoil and Solid Wastes. The earth work balances were established for all project cities according to
domestic requirements on EA. Sites for disposal of spoil, garbage and demolition wastes were
identified including their location, status and capacity. Measures were proposed to ci>ntrol water and soil
erosion control potentially caused by these activities on these sites. During operation, solid waste will be
mainly generated from the bus depots and will be collected separately and disposed of respectively in
municipal landfill or facilities for hazardous and oily wastes.

Wastewater. Construction wastewater and that from workers camp will be treated first by on-site septic
tank to remove oil and solids before channeling into sewage system and eventually treated by the
municipal wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). Discharge into nearby water bodies will not be allowed
as per domestic regulations. During operation, wastewater will be generated mainly by the bus depots
facilities in Huaibei, Luan and Anqing which will all be connected to municipal sewage system. The
effluents will first to through on-site sedimentation tank to remove solid and septic tank to remove oil
before channeling into WWTP for treatment.

Ecological Impacts. Major impacts will be water and soil erosion caused by temporary land
occupation, spoil and borrow, and change of green belt. In addition to those measures in earth work and
dust control, other measures are careful balancing loss and increase in green area and protecting existing
trees.

Fuel Facility Risk Management at Bus Depots. The fuel storage and filling facility at the bus depot ·
will be designed and operated according to relevant domestic technical norms and requirements on
safety and environment. An emergency response plan and safe operation measures will be in place and
training will be provided to the staff on implementing the plan and measures.

Indirect Environmental Impacts. Resettlement of residence and relocation of industries due to the
project might have indirect environmental impacts if not managed properly. The EA provides an
inventory detailing number of people resettled and industries relocation, their nature, potential site
contamination, and conditions in receiving areas (e.g. served by municipal sewage and garbage system)
to ensure no new pollution will be transferred and induced to other areas as a result of the project.

Impacts on Cultural Properties. In Anqing city, a provincial level cultural heritage site, Yingjiang
Temple, is located by the western side of Huxin Road with about Sm green belt and pedestrian sidewalk
in between. The main entrance of the temple is on the other street. Although no widening of the road is
needed for this section, the construction activities associated with the rehabilitation (e.g. vibration and
noise of vehicles or equipment) may potentially risk affecting the temple due to its close proximity.
The EA team has reviewed the site, assessed the nature and extent of potential impacts on it, consulted
with and obtained consent from the responsible authority (Anqing Bureau for Cultural Relics and
Religion) and developed necessary protective measures in the EMP.For the overall project, standard
chance-find procedure was included in EA and EMPs.

Social Disturbance. Urban road work will have impacts on traffic flow and bus route, increase
difficulties to access stores, workplaces, services and business, and affect road safety. Most of these
negative impacts are of temporary nature and can be mitigated through well planned traffic diversion
and prior infonnation on construction schedule to the public. Safety shields will be set up wherever
necessary.

Environmental Management Plan (EMP). These EMPs are largely similar in structure, supervision and
management mechanism and mitigation measures, but different in monitoring plan and additional
measures to deal with specificity of individual city. The EMP outlines the institutional arrangement and
responsibility.of each party in EMP implementation for the project. It envisages that overall
responsibility for ensuring EMP implementation rests with the provincial PMO with routine operation
by PMO at each city. Therefore each PMO should have at least one staff in charge ofEMP
implementation, supervision and reporting. The EMP specifies mitigation measures in tabular fonnat for
easier reference during implementation and supervision corresponding to major negative impacts as
identified above during design/preparation, construction and operation phases. It also designs
environmental monitoring plan for major negative impacts discussed above including indicators
monitored, sampling method, location, frequency, as well as requirements and suggestions on
monitoring agency. To ensure effective EMP implementation by PMO staff, contractors, workers and
supervision team, a budgeted training plan was proposed with their budget as integral part of the project.
The environmental monitoring and training plan should be integrated into the overall implementation
plan and budget of the project.

Resettlement.

The Anhui provincial PMO contracted Hehai University to guide the resettlement inventory aspect
survey and the development of resettlement action plans in each project city. Hehai University has
significant past experience working on Bank supported projects. The PMO has led the detailed
socioeconomic survey on the resettlement inventory aspects in the four engaged municipalities and also
analyzed the negative impacts. The RAP has been reviewed by the Bank and has incorporated the results
of the impact analysis; the location of the housing reconstruction and the mitigation measures to the
village facilities affected by the project through public consultation and participatory approaches. The
task team visited all of the municipal social affairs departments and learnt that some municipalities have
already launched social security policy to benefit the displaced farmers who are affected by land
acquisition. Some initiated the concept of benefiting to the displaced farmers by social security policies
which are beyond land compensation. The task team visited the 4 engaged municipal land and provincial
land department in Anhui. That compensation data information, social security programs issued by
some municipalities and to be issued by the municipalities, including the compensation to be issued in
the near tenn, have been incorporated into the resettlement action plan.

All of the project components will be located in urban downtown and peri-urban areas. The RAP sets up
two concepts to ensure restoration of incomes for fanners' who lose land:
a.       Development of the farmer's remaining fann land to vegetable land as a strategy that insulates
incomes from the decline in total land;
b.       Ensuring that the displaced farmers will receive replacement cost for their land loss.
Moreover, displaced farmers will receive replacement cost for land; plus basic monthly income as the
income loss of their farming land and their retirement programs if they are willing to invest their social
security programs and the project entities could support certain funds for support.
In order to enhance women's roles in family income restoration activities, women are entitled to endorse
the expenditures of their compensation as one of the policies in the RAP.

The independent monitoring institute as Hehai Universtiy will be contracted continuo~sly to supervise
the project twice a year.
Assessment of borrower's capacity to plan and implement the measures: One of the project cities, Lu
An has just completed a World Bank financed project on sewage treatment plant headed by the same
PMO staff who appeared to be quite familiar with the WB procedures and requirements. There is also
considerable institutional capacity and knowledge of World Bank Safeguard policies at the Provincial
level where there is alot of experience with World Bank financed investments. In addition, the technical
assistance and capacity building component of the project is designed to provide training for project
cities in project management and EMP implementation following the ~etailed training plan designed by
the CEA. Both the provincial and city authorities are committed to carrying out the necessary actions
in accordance with the Bank safeguard policies.

The.EMP implementation of the original project has been moderately satisfactory mainly because
environmental monitoring required by the EMP for each project "city has been delayed to various
degrees. The external environmental monitor hired by tlie Provincial PMO has carried out supervision
fairly well and reported in the semi-annual monitoring and progress report to the Bank. The Bank team
has conducted supervision including environmental safeguard regularly.
S. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation with potential beneficiaries and other stakeholders were of crucial importance in the EA
process. Following China's law on EA, methods used included posting of public letters in project areas,
publishing notices in local TV channel and radio, placing notice in local government offices, organizing
meetings and interviews with project affected people, and distributing questionnaires.

Public disclosure: The first round of solicitation of public opinion was announced in government
website of each city during November-December 2008 with a brief description of the project, its
objectives, potential environmental impacts and the name of institute that will conduct the EA process.
The second round was conducted during April-May 2009 when the draft EA was ready for each city.
During this roµnd, Luan and Huaibei posted the fult" EA on the same website and Wuhu and Anqing at
the offices of city construction bureaus. Subsequent public consultation was carried out during the same
period in all project cities.

Public consultation. More than 400 persons of wide range of background were interviewed, surveyed
or consulted through meetings and questionnaires. The majority was unsatisfied with current traffic
conditions, associated noise and air pollution thus believed the project was necessary for improving
mobility and urban environment. The major negative impacts of the project were perceived to be noise,
air pollution, solid wastes and water pollution in descending sequence. Despite of these concerns, more
than 90 percent of surveyed supported the project and generally concurred with the measures proposed
by the EA.

EAIEMP for restructuring were publically disclosed and consulted in Wuhu. The Chinese language
EAIEMP were disclosed locally in Oct 30, 2012 followed by consultation in November surveying
about 100 affected people of different background. The majority supports the restructuring project and
their feedback were incorporated in the final EMP. The English version EMP was sent to the lnfoshop
for disclosure on Nov. 13, 2014.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   1O-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                l 3-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  18-May-2009
Date of submission to lnfoShop                                               22-May-2009
"In country" Disclosure
If the project triggen the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country dbclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators al the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [XJ       No [ J NA [ J
If yes. then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes [X]      No[ J NA [ ]
(PM) review arid approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ J   No [X)     NA [ J
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [XJ     No[ J NA [ J
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [XJ     No[ J NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X]       No[ ]      NA [ J
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [XJ     No [ J NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]       No [ J NA [ 1
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [XJ     No [ J NA [ J
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [XJ     No [ ]     NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [X 1    No [ l   NA [ 1
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [X 1    No[ 1 NA [ 1
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X 1    No ( 1 NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader(s):           Name: Yuhui Jiao
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor:                                             Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:                                                Date:
