                    INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                               UPDATED for
                      PROJECT RESTRUCTURING STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/04/2014                                    Report No.: 87832
 .
1 8 &SIC' P rojec
              ' tD a t a
Country: People's Republic of China          Project ID: P092618
Project Name: Second Liaoning Medium Cities Infrastructure Project
Task Team Leader: Suhail J. S. Jme'an
Appraisal Date: October 27,2006              Board Date: June 26;2007
Managing Unit: EASUR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Sewerage (37%); Water supply (41%); Solid waste management (22%)
Theme: Pollution management and environmental health (P)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):           173.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):              0.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              5.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER                                                   240.80
                                                                    418.80
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        SimpJejXJ          Re~aterJl
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery} . YeslJ          No[X]

2. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve the performance and sustainability of
water supply, wastewater, and solid waste services in the LMC-2 cities. Enhanced
wastewater and solid waste services will also help reduce pollution into the Bohai Sea
and contribute to improving Bohai Sea water quality.

3. Project Description
The Project currently supports improvements in three sectors covering 7 medium cities in
Liaoning Province summarized as follows: i) Wastewater (US$157.44 million) in Panjin,
Yingkou, Fushun, and Gaizhou; ii) Water 'supply (US$172.24 million) in Panjin,
Yingkou, Anshan, Haicheng, and Xingcheng; and, iii) Solid Waste (US$84.39 million) in
Panjin and Fushun.

Component 1: Wastewater Infrastructure component covers four cities and includes the
construction of new and rehabilitated wastewater collection systems in all four cities; the
construction of new wastewater treatment plants in Yingkou, Panjin, and Gaizhou; and
the rehabilitation of riverbank in Gaizhou.
Component 2: Water Supply Infrastructure component covers five cities and includes the
renovation of water distribution pipelines in all cities; installing around 200,000 water
supply meters; upgrading treatment plants in Anshan and Haicheng; and the construction
a new water treatment plant and transmission lines in Yingkou.

Component 3: Solid Waste Infrastructure component includes the construction of new
sanitary landfills in Panjin and Fushun; closure of existing open dump in Fushun; and
solid waste collection and transfer works and equipment in Panjin.

Component 4: Institutional Development component covers the following activities:

   •   Design Review, Advisory and Construction Management Technical Assistance.
       This assignment also includes assistance in the development and implementation
       of asset management planning for water supply and wastewater.

   •   Public Utility Program which includes training and capacity building in public
       utility regulation and management at both the national and provincial levels. It
       also pilot activities in LMC-2 cities to demonstrate new approaches in utility
       benchmarking, private-sector participation, and utility regulation.

   •   Solid Waste Technical Assistance to prepare strategic solid waste sector studies
       for Fushun, Yingkou, and Panjin.

   •   Water Pollution Control Planning to prepare strategic wastewater sector studies
       for Fushun, Yingkou, Gaizhou and Panjin.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
Location: Liaoning is a coastal province Northeast China. It covers a total area of
145,900 km2 and has a total population of 42 million. The province has jurisdiction over
14 cities, 17 county level towns and 17 counties. The provincial capital is Shenyang. The
Liao River Basin (LRB), with a total catchment area of220,000 km2 accounts for 48% of
the total land area of Liaoning Province. The rivers in the basin drain through 11 of the
most important industrial urban centers and cross large areas of agricultural land before
discharging into the Bohai Sea.

Climate: The climate in the basin is characterized by distinct seasons. Spring and summer
are mild and the winter period from November to March is extremely cold, with
minimum temperatures -in January as low as -30C. This is reflected in the long frost
periods for the project cities, ranging from 130 to 150 days. The average annual
precipitation in the LRB is between 350 and 1200 nun and increases from northwest to
southeast.

Water Resources: The combination of the dry season and sub-zero periods during winter
result in extremely low flows in the rivers, with low dilution of organic pollution. The
phenomenon is exacerbated by the reduced self-cleaning capacity of the river and the low
  efficiency of WWTPs beCause of the low temperature, resUlting in high pollution levels
  in the rivers during winter. The denomination of LRB in Liaoning Province includes 3
  independent river basins that discharge into the Bohai Sea: the Liao River proper, the
  Daliao River and the Xiaoling River. The available water resources in the LRB are
· limited. Average surface water resource in the catchment area is 535 m3 per capita per
  year, which is only 20% of the national average. Water resource available for agriculture
  is 220m3 per mu (3,300 m3 per hectare) or 12% of the national average. River flows in
  the LRB vary dramatically in different months and seasons. In a typical year, July and
  August flows amount to 60% of the annual flow while that in the driest month (February)
  amounts only to 0.1% of the yearly total. In many stretches of LRB rivers in Liaoning
  province, there is little natural flow whereas wastewater flows are discharged from
  various industrial, municipal and area sources during the dry season (December to
  March).

 Bohai Sea: Bohai,Sea is a part of China's coastal waters and is a marginal sea in the west
 part of the Pacific Ocean. The Bohai Sea is a semi-closed water sYstem which connects
· with the Yellow Sea through the Bohai Strait. It consists of three bays, Liaodong Bay,
  Bohai Bay and Laizhou Bay. Yingkou and Yingkou EDZ are next to the Bohai Sea
  coastline, Panjin is 30 km from Liaodong Bay. Before the 1980s, more than 200 species
  of fish and shrimp were recorded in the Bohai Sea.More than 100 species could be caught
  through normal fishing activities. The annual fishing production was ranging from 500 to
  700 thousand tons, which accounted for 30% of China's fishing production. Because of
  sand beach formations shellfishes were an important part of the production and marine
  culture developed rapidly. However, since the 1980s, increasing pollution of the Bohai
  Sea coastal area and over-fishing have resulted in' a strong decline of the fisheries. China
  has drawn up a great marine environmental protection plan to control pollution in the
  Bohai Sea area and to restore the favorable ecological environment there. The Bohai Blue
  Sea Action Program should be put into practice in three stages: 2000-2005, 2006-2010
  and 2011-2015. The program aims to halt disCharge of industrial wastes, to monitor
  environmental pollution and to restore the damaged ecological system in the sea. LMC-2
  is a major contribution to the achievement of this program.

 Ethnic Minority Communities: Liaoning is a province with many ethnic minorities; about
 51 ethnic minorities including Hans, such as Man Zu, Mongols, Hu Zu, Korean and Xibo
 Zu. There are 6. 7 million minority group people accounting for 16% of the total
 population in Liaoning province. The ethnic minority counties, whose population
 accounts for over 4()0/f, of the local population, are Xing~heng, Suizhong, Yixian,
 Kaiyuan and Xifeng; the others are scattered. In the municipalities of Anshan, Fushun,
 Yingkou, Panjin and Huludao (Xingcheng), minorities are not living together so LMC-2
 does not concern ethnic minority communities.

 WATER SUPPLY: The total annual volume of water resources in LRB is estimated
 23.511 billion m3. In normal years, the amoWlt of water available for use is 10.567
 billion m3. Utilization mtio of surface water is 81.2% and of groundwater is 43.1%.
 However the water is still in short supply: the annual amount of water supplied is 7.836
 billion m3 while the annual water demand is 8.370 billion m3.
WASTEWATER: The surface water in Liaohe basin is heavily polluted; about 72%
rivers within the province exceed the minimum permitted surface water quality of
Category V (worst quality class). The total wastewater discharged within the province
was 1.92 billion tons, of which 0.89 billion tons came from industry. The total COD load
discharged was 546,000 tons of which 185,000 tons or 34 percent came from industry.
Much of the industry fails to meet the standards for discharge water quality. The
seriousness of the pollution within the Liao Basin has resulted in over 400 factories being
closed down. The wastewater treatment ratio is only 40%; the remaining untreated
wastewater is discharged directly to the nearest watercourse.

WASTE MANAGEMENT: The urban residents in Liaoning Province are generally
provided with waste collection systems consisting of daily refuse collection and daily
street sweeping. Treatment facilities in the Province are strongly under sized compared to
requirements. Disposal of solid waste is mostly done in simple dumping sites, without
any pollution control measure. Sites are not lined nor are leachate collected for treatment.
Only few sanitary landfills have been developed in the Province in Dalian, Anshan and
Liao.yang. Present production of solid waste in Fushun, Panjin and Yingk:ou represents a
total of about 2,000 tons/day.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Ms Chongwu Sun, Sr. Environment Specialist (EASCS)
   Mr Aimin Hao, Social Development Specialist, (EASCS)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                             X
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                 X
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                                  X
Indigenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)                         X
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                   X
Projects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project aims to improve the overall water environment, solid waste management and
related health issues of Liaoning Province by: reducing pollution to the Liao River Basin
and Bohai Sea through the construction of wastewater collection and treatment systems
and the installation of leachate treatment systems as part of landfill development and
closure; and by improving water supply distribution and wastewater and solid waste
collection and disposal. The sustaiDabillty of these benefits is likely to be enhanced
through the technical assistance components which aim at improving financial
performance of water, wastewater and solid waste companies.        '

Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)

The Environmental Assessment (EA) and Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
assessed the impacts associated with the different subprojects and suggested mitigation
measures. These are summarized below:

Construction-related impacts: The truVor environmental impacts of project construction
activities include those associated with construction site management (dust, erosion,
noise, waste and spoil management, worker safety, disease) and rehabilitation of sewage
and 'water pipelines (traffic disturbance, safety and chance finds of cultural property).
Mitigation measures were· developed and included in an environmental management plan
that would be included in construction contracts. The mitigation measures included
chance find procedures for cultural property in compliance with OPN 4.11.

Design and Operation of Water Supply Systems: The water supply subprojects will
involve construction and upgrading of water treatment plants, network construction,
rdlabilitati;on and upgrading, installation of meters and raw water . abstraction and
distribution. The major issues identified by the EA were sludge disposal, chlorine
leakage and wastewater production from the workers. Disposal procedures for the sludge
would be the same as the wastewater treatment sludge and measures to reduce the risk of
chlorine leakage and to treat wastewater from the workers were included in the EMP.

New water resources: Both Haicheng and Yingkou water supply projects will result in
the abstraction of additional raw water. Haicheng will increase groundwater abstraction
by 130,000 m3/d, and a comprehensive· hydrogeological report has confinned the
availability and quality of the additional groundwater resources, Haicheng has received
provincial permission for the increased abstraction. Yingkou will increase its water
abstraction by 70,000 m3 by tapping into the Shimen reservoir which is currently used
for irrigation and flood control purposes. A water balance study by the Y'mgkou Water
Resources Bureau confinned that sufficient water is additional water is available {or the
                                                      a
project, and the district government has entered into raw water supply contract with
Yingkou Water Supply Compmy.

Design and Operation of Wastewater Systems: The wastewater subprojects will involve
the construction and upgrading of wastewater treatment plants; and the construction,
rehabilitation and upgrading of the collection and drainage network. The main issues
identified in the EA were sludge production, and odor and noise associated with WWTP
operation. Odor control measures will include ventilation systems, a buffer zone (100m)
around the plant, deodorizing measures in air and in situ and efficient storage and
transport of sludge. Noise mitigation measures include housing pumps and Other loud
equipment inside and a sufficient buffer zone (100m) around the plant
Design and Operotion of Sanitary Landfills: The project will fmance the construction of
sanitary landfills in Panjin and Fushun and the closure of an open dump (Fushun). The
new landfill constructed has been designed as modem sanitary landfills. Some of the key
environmental issues highlighted in the EA and EMP are:

LaDdfill sites: The sites were chosen from several options based on a variety of
considerations including environmental. The key cltaracteristies of the sites are:

     • Panjin: The site is located in an abandoned residential area for oil field workers.
       Cummtly there are no residents in the area or the vicinity. The nearby farm fields
       and ecologically important wetland are not impacted by the landfill construction
       and operation.

     • Fushun: The new sanitary landfill will be an extension of the existing open dump
       and the project will integrate its site remediation .and · closure with the
       establishment of the new facility. The site is located within 500 m of two villages
       comprising 238 households. These villages wm be resettled to avoid impacts of
       the solid waste facility. The site is adjacent to an area used for storage of coal
       shale overburden from local mining ·activities. The landfill operation is not
       anticipated to impact or be impacted by these activities.

Environmental controls during ~on: The newly constructed lancUills will contain
-(using clay or HOPE liners), collect, recirculate, and treat (onsite and municipal.WWTP)
the leachate. Monitoring of groundwater for contamination will also be undertaken.
Passive venting oflandfill gas will be done using vent stacks to prevent its aceum~ation
in the landfill.

Open dump closure: The project will close the open dumps in Fushun.

In Fushun the open dump closure will be i.n,tegrated with the development of the new
landfill. Contouring and capping of the existing waste deposit area will be done using a
clay liner and environmental control systems will be installed as described above for the
new site. To avoid potential impacts on the nearby villages, they will be resettled to an
area further away from the landfill and the monitoring of groundwater will be done in the
area. Future land use will be limited to the new sanitary landfill ~ons until its final
closure.                                                             '"

The Yingkou EDZ solid waste component will be cancelled from the project.

 Panjin Solid Waste Subproject: The Panjin solid waste subproject was added to the
 project at a relatively late date. Although the landfill site and basic approach for the
 project is confirmed, the Feasibility Study and subproject EA cannot be finalized before
.overall project appraisal was completed. Bank acceptance of the Feasibility Study, EIA,
 and RAP was specified in the legal agreements as conditions precedent for starting
 construction of the project.
 During project implementation, the above mentioned landfill in Panjin was built by
 counterpart fund financing. As a consequence, it was agreed that the Bank loan would be
 reallocated to finance construction of two solid waste transfer stations and procurement
 of solid waste transportation vehicles in P&l\iin, as a new component financed by the
 Bank loan. An EIAIEMP was prepared to assess possible impacts at the sites of the
 transfer stations and along transport ro~ mainly noise, odor and safety issues. As part
 of the assessment, related Jllitigation measures have been proposed tO tackle the
 environmental issues. In. addition, environmental monitoring has been carried out on the
 landfill site, according to the EIAIEMP prepared for the landfill. The Bank task team
 reviewed the monitoring report and found it complies with national regulation and
 requirement

 Shortly after project appraisal in May 2006 Gaizhou added a ~1 package (OWW/1.4)
 for the rehabilitation ofXiangshui.River and three interconnected sections of the Old City
 Moat em_  bankments. The scope of this package i~ to improve 4.246 km of riverbanks
 consisting of 1.504 km ofXiangshui River and a total of2.742 km for the northern, and
 southern sections of the Old City Moat. Subsequently, and EIA and RAP were produced
 for this package and both were reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in· the Bank's
 InfoShop.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OPIBP 4.12)

 Individual RAPs for each ofthe subprojects involving land acquisition and resCttleinent
 were prepared in Chinese by the respective design institutes, assisted by the respective
 PMO, house demolition offices, land resources bureaus, affected villages and
 communities, and potential displaced persons. The RAPs were prepared in complianCe
 with OP 4.12 Invohmtary Resettlement and describe in detail the impacts, affected
 populations, consultation process, rehabilitation measures, budget, and implementation
 and monitoring arrangements. There are no resettlement impacts identified for the
 remaining four subprojects based on their designs and a brief note was prepared for each
 of them to exPlain why there are no resettlement impacts.

 Efforts have been made to minimize the resettlement impacts during project planning and
 design. The resettlement impacts have been significantly reduced through optimizing ·the
 project design and implementation arrangements. These are described in tbe analysis of
 alternatives in the environmental assessment section. In the process of project design, the
 project owners and design institutes assessed possible linkages with ongoing or previous
 activities and found no linkage. On the. basis of individual RAPs, a Summary
 Resettlement Report was ~uced in both Chinese and English.

  Resettlement Impacts: The original project affected 5,853 persons, with resettlement ·
' impacts are scattered in 23 villages of 8 districts or counties and 5 municipalities. The
  impacts in each village are minor, except in Fushun. The physical resettlement impacts
  include: (a) 1,689 mu (1.12 ba) ofpennanent land; (b) 14,347 m2 of housing demolishing,
  and (c) 1.091 mu (73 ha) of temporary use of collective land. In addition to the. foregoing
  munbers, Gaizhou's package OWW/1.4 which was not included in the original RAPs
affects 57 households with 171 people in three communities (Minhe, Shengli and Luxi).
In addition 618.25 m2 storage huts and 164.62 m2 of toilets will be demolished. In
addition 436 trees, 24 poles and 8 public toilets will be affected.

The following basic principles were adopted for resettlement planning:
   • Acquisition of land and other assets, and relocation of people, will be minimized
       as much as possible.
   • All project affected people residing, working, doing business or cultivating land
       required for the project as of the date of the b!iseline surveys are entitled to
       rehabilitation measures sufficient to assist them to improve or at least maintain
       their pre-project living standards, income-earning capacity and production levels.
       Lack of legal rights to the assets lost will not bar them from entitlement to such
       rehabilitation measures.
   • The rehabilitation measures due to land acquisition are: (i) agricultural land for
       land of equal productive capacity; (ii) compensation for land acquisition and
       resettlement subsidy for the farmers affected by land acquisition; and, (iii) other
       forms of assistance.
   • Replacement of agricultural land will be, as much as is possible, similar to the
       land that was lost.
   • Plans for acquisition of land and other assets and provision of rehabilitation
       measures will be carried out in consultation with the affected people.
   • Financial and physical resources for resettlement and rehabilitation will be made
       available as and when required.
   • Institutional arrangements will ensure effective and timely design, planning,
       consultation and implementation of the Resettlement Plan.
   • Effective and timely supervision, monitoring and evaluation of the
       implementation will be carried out.

Compensation Standards
The compensation for land acquisition includes land compensation, resettlement mbsidy,
and young crop compensation. The land acquisition compensation is calculated based on
annual production value according to the Law of Land Administration. The compensation
rates of structures are determined based on their replacement cost. The detailed
compensation rates are included in the RAPs.

Rehabilitation Measures

Persons affected by housing demolishing: 238 households in two villages will be
relocated within the same village due to expansion of the landfill in Fushun.
Consultation with affected households indicated they would all like to construct their own
housing. To meet their requirements, housing plot and 700yuan/m2 cash compensation
will be provided to affected persons.

Persons affected by permanent land acquisition: Loss of collective land will not severely
impact local residents as they derive less than 10 percent of their income from
agriculture. Land compensation for collective land will be paid to the village committees
for public use. The resettlement subsidy will be paid to the affected households.

Persons affected by temporary land use: The persons affected by temporary land use will
receive young crop compensation according to annual production value of the land. The
compensation rates are higher than the production value of the land in all cases. The
construction contractors will be responsible for land recovery for cultivation.

Affected public infrastructure: Compensation based on replacement value will be paid to
the relevant government agencies or local governments to restore the affected
infrastr.ucture and services.

As mentioned above, during project implementation, landfill in Panjin Solid Waste
subproject was completed by counterpart financing, and the loan will be reallocated to
finance building two solid waste transfer stations and purchase a fleet of solid waste
transportation vehicles. Based on TI approval of these restructured activities, the client
was requested to finalize the RAP for the newly constructed solid waste transfer stations,
and conduct due diligence review for the completed landfill in Panjin. As a condition no
work will be allowed to commence until the Bank has reviewed the RAP and due
diligence review for the completed landfill.

It is important to pay close attention during the next 12 months to the progress of land
acquisition and construction of the two solid waste transfer stations, as this newly
proposed activity was raised in relatively late stage of the project, and the client has about
one year to complete the task.

Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)

The Shimen Reservoir will be used as the water supply for Yingk.ou subproject, and is
located at the upper reach of Daqinghe River in Gaizhou County. The dam and was built
in 1971 with a height of 46. 7m and a reservoir capacity I 01 MCM. The design flood
criteria was 1 in 50 (1150) years, and check flood criteria was 11200 years. The main
structural features include a main dam of clay-core embankment type, a spillway and a
bottom outlet, and a small hydro only operational in irrigation season. The upstream dam
slope failed due to an earthquake in 1975, and repair works were carried out in the same
year. In 1986, following instructions from the Ministry of Water Resources, the design
and check floods for the dam were raised to 1/200 and 1110,000 floods, respectively by
adding a second spillway and riprap was placed on the upstream slope. However, some
problems remained after the 1986 rehabilitation including dam slope stability, bottom
outlet leakage, and cracks on the guide-walls of the 1st spillway.

Dam Structural Integrity. As a result of a dam safety enhancement campaign initiated by
the Liaoning Provincial Government in 1999, Shimen Reservoir Management Bureau
requested the Provincial Design Institute to conduct a strengthening design which laid out
the following measures: (i) maintain the 11200 year flood as design flood and lower the
check flood to 1/3000 year flood (1110,000 year flood was considered too high for this




                                                                                                 .2. \I.
                                                                                                 ~
dam); (ii) upstream dam slope strengthening and shot-crete treatment of left abutment;
(ill) bottom outlet leakage treatment; (iv) heighten and extend the guide )Valls of the 1st
and 2nd spillways respectively, plus building the tailrace channel for second spillway; (v)
upgrade leakage monitoring instruments; {vi) rehabilitate th~ access road to the dam site;
(vii) upgrade the gates and hoists for the bottom outlets; (viii) relocate the sub-station and
rehabilitate the transmission lines. Construction work started in 2000, and as of 2006
some works have been completed, and with final completion acceptance expected in
2008. A World Bank team visited the dam site, and a Bank dam safety expert has
discussed the issues with the Oaizhou City Water Resources Bureau. The LMC-2 legal
agreement includes a covenant that requires Liaoning to contract an independent dam
safety expert to review and comment on the overall·dam safety upgrading program and
complete the works to the satisfaction of the Bank and the responsible dam safety
regulatory agency in Liaoning by June 1, 2009.

Dam Operations: The Oaizhou ·water Resources Bureau has provided the Bank team with
the existing O&M manual and the Emergency Preparation Plan (EPP). The LMC-2 legal
agreement includes a covenant requiring the Bureau to update these documents after the
completion of the dam safety remedial works, and submit to the Bank for review and
comment. In particular, the documents should include the following:

    •   O&M Manual: Improve and make available to opCrating staff, · the rules/
        proCedures and tecbnicallsafety requirements for operation, m&intenance and
        surveillance (monitoring and inspection) of the dam in accordance with the
        relevant Chinese Government's technical criteria for large embankment
        dams/reservoirs. Contingency plan: Improve the annual Contingency Plan for
        Flood Control Dispatch of each dam by adding inundation maps corresponding to
        different flows up to design flood for varioUs failure modes, and emergency
        communication with the local flood control commanding offices and communities
        in the threatened areas.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long tenn impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
                                .
 The project will, combined with other initiatives in .the province, contribute to the long
 tenn environmental improvement of the Liao River Basin and Bohai Sea. The program is
 consistent with the marine environmental protection plan to control pollution in the Bohai
 Sea. In particular, the Bohai Blue Sea Action Program aims to halt discharge of industrial
·wastes, to monitor environmental pollution and to restore the damaged ecological system
 in the sea.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) conside:red to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

Alternatives considered in project design: The proj~t was designed as part of a
comprehensive approach to environmental management in Liaoning Province. The basic
project design and components were chosen to improve the waste, wastewater and water
  supply sectors and as a result considered the environmental and social benefits of these
  interventions in their conceptualization. The social and environmental impacts of
. different alternatives were considered during subproject and weighed with other
  economic, financial and technical factors. Below is a summary of the major alternatives
  considered, the important envirQnmental and social issues associated with those
  alternatives.

     • No project alternative: No project alternative would result in continued pollution
       from wastewater and solid waste leachate; environmentally unsound collection
       and disposal of solid waste; poor water supply systems; and inefficient use of
       water resources.
     • Water supply pipeline alignments: The project consi~ the impact of different
       water supply pipeline alternatives on traffic, roads and land acquisition. In most
       cases the relative environmental and social impact of different alternatives was
       negligible and therefore cost and technical considerations were major factors in
       subproject design.
     • Water treatment plants: Alternatives for water treatment plant sites and processes
       were considered in light of their ability to meet drinking water standards and the
       impact on land occupation along with other factors including cost, and water and
       energy usage. The small land acquisition and ability to meet drinking water
       standards were important criteria in the choice of rapid sand filtration over slow
       sand filtration as a tieatment process under the project Land occupation was also
       a IJU\ior consideration in the siting and layout for the Haicheng and Yingkou water
       treatment plants.                ·
     • Wastewater collection system alignments: Alternatives for sewerage pipeline
       alignments considered the impact on traffic, land acquisition and resettlement
       along with other factors such as cost, and ease of construction and operation. In
       Fushun and Panjin reduced resettlement impacts was a key factor in choosing the
       final alignments.
     • Wastewater treatment plant siting: Alternatives for siting of the. WWfP were
       limited due to land availability and cost. Selection was based in part on the
       following criteria: located in the downstream part of town, has low wind
       frequency in summer, adequate geological conditions and land availability, has
       minimal fannland removal and available land for buffer zone, and convenience in
       terms of transportation, water, power supply and waste disposal. Consideration of
       alternatives in Panjin resulted in a site that was further away from the residential
       areas and in Ylngkou the site that was chosen involved less resettlement.
     • Wastewater treatment processes: The major environmental consideration in
       evaluating alternatives for wastewater treatment processes .was the design eftluent
       standard. Two options were considered for these subprojects: i) Class· 1-A
       standard (10 mg/1 BOD and SS; O.S mg/1 Total-P; and 15 mgll Total N) which is
       the highest effluent standard; and ii) Class 1-B which is slightly lower (20 mgll
       BOD and SS; 1.0 mg/1 Total-P; and 20 mg/1 Total-N). The Provincial EPB has
       received direction from SEPA that all new wastewater treatment plants in critical
       water resomce areas (such as the Liao River Basin) should adopt Class lA
       standards to minimize nutrient pollution. A World Bank analysis showed that use
       of Class IA standard results in around 15% increase in cost, with a decrease in
       2% in COD and 12% decrease in phosphorus and nitrogen. It was agreed that
       LMC-2 project would finance plants designed to meet Class IB standards, and the
       cities would overtime upgrade to Class lA as required. The reasons for selecting
       Class IB standard in the interim period are: i) cost savings could be used to fund
       expansion of the collection systems which results in greater pollution reduction;
       ii) the wastewater utilities are financially weak and increasing operational costs
       may impact their operational sustainability; and iii) programs to reduce nutrients
       in the Bohai Sea should focus on both municipal wastewater treatment plants as
       well as agricultural run-off, and not focuses exclusively on high municipal
       discharge standards. In terms of the treatment process chosen to meet Class 1B
       standard, SBR and A2/0 processes were compared and there were only minor
       differences in land occupation and therefore other factors such as cost and
       operational familiarity and ease were more important considerations in the choice.
   •   Wastewater sludge disposal options: The options for disposal of wastewater
       treatment sludge that were considered included composting and landfilling. The
       major consideration was the quality of sludge, as much of the wastewater in the
       project cities. comes from industrial sources that may include toxic metals and
       other pollutants. Although initial tests indicate the sludge will be adequate for
       agricultural use, the project took the precautionary approach of landfilling the
       sludge and only allowing composting if proper monitoring is undertaken to ensure
       standards for use are met. Panjin and Fushun will have new modem sanitary
       landfills financed under the LMC-2 which can accommodate the sludge. Gaizhou
       and Yingkou will dispose of its sludge in a new (non-Bank fmanced) sanitary
       landfill which is under implementation.
   •   Solid waste disposal: Three options were considered in choosing solid waste
       disposal technologies: open dumping, landfilling, and incineration. All of the
       subprojects chose sanitary landfilling over incineration and open dumping as the
       technology can meet environmental requirements at relatively low cost and ease
       of operation.
   •   Siting of sanitary landfills: Alternatives were considered in the selection of sites
       for the sanitary landfills. In Fushun initial plans to site the landfill near the coal
       tip site next to the existing landfill were abandoned as that site is now reserved for
       oil refinery development. Three additional sites were considered including a site
       connected directly to the existing landfill and two other sites located in farming
       areas. The site next to the current landfill was chosen largely due to its limited
       land acquisition and low capital cost and the feasibility study's assessment that
       with some resettlement and good engineering the site would be environmentally
       safe. In Panjin, three options were considered and the final site was chosen
       largely due to the limited relocation and displacement of economic activities and
       confirmation by the feasibility study report that the relatively shallow
       groundwater can be safely accommodated through good technical design.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
LUCPRO will have overall responsibilitY for coordination with and reporting to the
World Bank on safeguards issues of the LMC-2 project. They will also provide training,
coordination and advice to the Environmental and Resettlement Management Divisions
of the subproject PMOs. LUCPRO has extensive experience with the implementation of
World Bank projects and ensuring safeguard compliance. LUCPRO has administered
over five World Bank~financed projects in the urban environment and transportation
fields since the early 1990s. LUCPRO bas experienced environmental and resettlement
specialists who oversee safeguard implementation at the subproject level. All of the
prefecture level cities (Fushun, Anshan, Yingkou, and Panjin) have in the past
implemented Bank projects and have PMO with resettlement and environmental
specialists. The county-level cities under the project (Ymgkou ETZ, Haicheng, and
Xingcheng) will need additional training on safeguard issues. An independent
resettlement monitor will be contracted under the project, and LUCPRO will prepare
semi-annual environmental management reports for the Bank supervision teams.

S. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during the course of environmental
impact assessment. The first round was carried out in all 6 cities in September 2005, and
the second round in December 2005. The primary objective of the first round was to
gather infonnation on public concerns about the Project, while that for the second round
was to communicate the EIA findings and proposed mitigation measures and confinn
public acCeptance and satisfaction. Both rounds of public consultation focused ·on the
project-affected people and beneficiaries of different age groups, genders, educational
backgrounds and occupations as well as other stakeholders. In addition, there have been
many rounds of consultation with gov~ent agencies, local governments, non·
government organizations and other stakeholders of the project to discuss Project
locations, scope, environmental and socio-economic concerns and environmental
management and mitigation plans. The consultation exercise covered three fonns:
bulletins in the press, public opinion questionnaires and surveys of the public.
Throughout the process of public consultation, a telephone hotline has been set up and
maintained in each PMO to address EA-related issues of concern for the stakeholders. .

Public consultation and participation also has played a key role in fonnulating the RAPs.
The affected residents, business people and district governments participated in the
census, inventory and fonnulation of the livelihood rehabilitation strategy, measures·and
relocation sites, and their feedback has been incorporated. Each RAP contains a list of
major consultations. Public .consultation and participation will continue during the RAP
implementation. Project information will be provided to the affected people through TV,
radio broadcast, newspapers, bulletins and posters. The RAP will be summarized into a
resettlement infonnation booklet (RIB) and distributed to every affected household.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
I




    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other at Appraisal:
      Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/2512006
      Date of"in-country" disclosure                               0112512006
      Date of submission to lnfoShop                               01/25/2006
      For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                    12/19/2006
      SU!l1J!I8IY of the BA to the Executive Directon
      For new components after Appraisal:
      Date of submission ofEIA for Panjin's SW Transfer Station 12/19/2013
      Date of"in-country" disclosure for Panjin's SW Transfer
      Station      -                                                  1212013
      Date of submission to InfoShop                                1212012013
      Date of submission ofEIA for Gaizhou's GWW/1.4               01/03!2014
      Date of"in-country'' disclosure for Gaizhou's GWW/1.4          0112014
      Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/10/2014 ·
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process at Appraisal:
      Date of receipt by the Bank                                  07/0312006
      Date of "in-country" disclosure                              07/03/2006
      Date of submission to InfoSbop                               07/03/2007
      For new components after Appraisal:
      Date of submission of RAP for Panjiri's SW Transfer
                                                                    12/19/2013
      Station
      Date of'4jn-country" disclosure for Panjin's SW Transfer
                                                                     1212013
      Station
      Date of submission to InfoShop ·                              1212012013
      Date of submission of RAP for the Gaizhou's GWW/1.4          02/' 7/2014
      Date of'4jn-country" disclosure for Gaizhou's GWW/1.4        02/26/2014
      Date of submission to lnfoShop                               0212412014
    * If the projed triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
    the respective issues are to ·be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Asses.sment/AJ&ditlor EMP.
    If in-country disclosure ot any of the above documents is not expected, please
    explain why:



    C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Cotpomll! Level (to be fiUed in when the
    ISDS is finalized by the pTOject decision meeting)

    OPIBP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stan:d-alone EA (including EMP) ~rt?             Yes
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)       Yes
    review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the ~MP incorporated in the ·     Yes
    credit/loan?
    OPIBP 4.12 - Involuntary-Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process           Yes
  framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector      Yes
  Manager review the plan?
  OPIBP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
. Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                         Yes
  Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts    N/A .
  (POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
  Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements Yes
  been made for public awareness and training?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's     Yes
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a     Yes
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities  Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the         Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the           Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                                          Date
Task Team Leader:                     Mr. Suhail J. S. Jme'                    03/0312014
Environmental Specialist:             Ms. Chongwu Sun                          03/03/2014
Social Development Specialist .       Mr. Aimin Hao                            03/03/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:                                      o?sf;x> I;).0 'Lf-
  Comments:                                                           03/2.-V /ZPI 'f
Sector Manager:                     fiMr.
  Comments:
