                                                                                                           89197

                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                        RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
.




.




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:              1-Jul-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                       China                   Project ID:                  P091950
    Project Name:                  CN-Guizhou Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development
    Task Team Leader:              Meskerem Brhane
    Estimated Board Date:          October 21, 2008
    Managing Unit:                 EASCS
    Sector(s):                     General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
    Theme(s):                      Other environment and natural resources management (40%);Other
                                   social development (40%);Other urban development (20%)
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                      No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                    Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:         91.40                       Total Bank Financing:        60.00
    Financing Gap:              0.00
        Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
        Borrower                                                                                             31.40
        International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                60.00
        Total                                                                                                91.40
    Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred          No
    project?
.


.




    2. Current Project Development Objectives
    The project development objective is to assist Guizhou Province in increasing economic benefits to
    local communities (including minority groups) through increased tourism and better protection of
    cultural and natural heritages.
    Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
    The PDO as currently defined raises a significant issue of attribution and has therefore been revised.
    Specifically, increase in economic benefits to local communities cannot be attributed to project
    interventions given the rapid economic growth of Guizhou Province over the last five years.

    The proposed new project development objective is to assist Guizhou Province in protecting cultural
    and natural heritage, improving basic infrastructure, and fostering tourism development for the benefit
    of selected communities (including ethnic minority groups).
.




    3. Project Description

    The project had been in problem status since February 2012 when it was rated Unsatisfactory due to
    slow implementation progress arising from complexity of project design, ambitious scope and wide
    geographic coverage. The pace of project implementation improved remarkably following the midterm
    review of January 2013. A Level 1 restructuring is proposed as the PDO is being revised. Additional
    changes include: i) modification of some subcomponents/activities; ii) simplification of
    implementation procedures; iii) updating the Results Framework to monitor project impacts in line
    with the revised PDO; iv) extending the Loan Closing Date; and (v) amending the legal agreements to
    incorporate the above changes and introduce implementation flexibility and clarity by moving
    procedural matters to the Operations Manual.

    Two activities have been added under the restructuring: i) technical assistance to local communities to
    conserve their intangible cultural heritage assets and ii) construction of an Intangible Cultural Heritage
    Center in Danzhai. Several other cultural centers, similar to what is being proposed under the
    restructuring have already been constructed under the project.

    Two subcomponents are being dropped: (a) the museum for the Dingxiao National Geo-Park
    subcomponent since the local government has not been able to propose a realistic design that can be
    completed within the life of the project and also secure counterpart financing; and (b) the Provincial
    Tourist Information and Service Center because of the inability of the local government to locate
    suitable land.

    The restructured project comprises four components, as summarized below.

    Component 1: Ethnic Minority Cultural Heritage Protection (US$ 50.55 million), including (a) small
    scale infrastructure facilities in villages and towns; (b) protection of unique historic buildings and
    establishment of cultural and visitor centers; (c) pilot rehabilitation of traditional private houses; and
    (d) intangible cultural heritage protection (arts, crafts and music, etc).

    Component 2: Natural Heritage and Scenic Site Protection and Development (US$ 20.10 million),
    including improvements to infrastructure and tourism facilities in: (a) Guanling Geo-Park in Anshun
    Municipality; (b) Wanfenglin National Scenic Area in Qian Xinan Prefecture; and (c) Shibing Sanmu
    River Scenic Area in Qian Dongnan Prefecture.

    Component 3: Tourism Gateway Town Facilities (US$ 18.79 million), including the construction of:
    (a) three county-level tourist information centers in Qian Dongnan Prefecture; and (b) a Guizhou
    Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development Center in Guiyang.

    Component 4: Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support (US$ 1.81 million), including:
    (a) technical assistance for project implementation and capacity building; (b) PMO strengthening and
    training for tourism sector staff; (c) revision of the Guizhou Tourism Master Plan and development of
    guidelines for the conservation of traditional buildings and environments in minority villages; and (d)
    tourism promotion in Qian Dongnan Prefecture.
    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    Guizhou is located in southwest China and borders Sichuan, Chongqing, Hunan, Guangxi, and Yunnan
    Provinces. It has a total area of 176,100 km2, and an average altitude of 1,100 m. About 92.5% of
    Guizhou is mountainous and has hilly areas, and 61.9% is featured with Karst topography - the most
    outstanding characteristic of Guizhou’s physical environment. Guizhou is located in the subtropical
    monsoon zone, characterized by a warm and humid climate.

    Guizhou has an abundance of surface water which principally comprises two river systems, the
    Yangtze and Pearl River basins. Surface water quality is generally good according to national
    standard; however, the water quality at the urban sections of the rivers is a serious environmental
    issue.

    Guizhou has one of China’s most pristine environments. Botanical resources of the province are well
    known for a large amount of rare flora, ancient trees of historic and cultural value, and a wide spread
    of planted forests. Guizhou also provides habitat for a range of wildlife. Protected fauna include
    Golden Monkeys and birdlife. Investigation shows that there are no protected ancient trees or rare
    flora in project towns/villages. Some of the project locations have ancient trees which are far from
    construction sites or are well protected. No significant impacts are anticipated.

    In 2004 Guizhou’s population of 39 million comprised 26% of urban residents. Guizhou is the home to
    49 ethnic minority groups with a population of 13.39 million, which accounts for 36.77% of
    Guizhou’s total population. Ethnic groups whose population exceeds 100,000 include the Miao, Buyi,
    Dong, Tujia, Yi, Gelao, Shui, Hui and Bai.
.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Ms. Xin Ren ( EASCS )
    Mr. Mark C. Woodward (ECSSO)
    Mr. Jun Zeng ( EASCS )
.




    6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No
    Pest Management OP 4.09                       No
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        Yes
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 Yes
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           Yes
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
    7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
    and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Project implementation has been challenging due to the complexity of project design, ambitious scope
    and wide geographic coverage. The safeguards instruments (EMP, RAP and IPP) designed under the
    project are adequate and effective. An independent and external environmental monitor has been
    providing satisfactory and regular monitoring reports. Some challenges related to safeguards include
    implementing some of the recommendations of the environmental monitor, especially as it relates to
    management of construction sites and the delay in recruiting an independent and external social
    safeguards monitor. Both of these challenges are now being addressed following the midterm review
    mission. First, a more proactive supervision by the Provincial Project Management Office and Project
    Management Consultant is resulting in the implementation of the recommendations of the external
    monitor. Second, the loan will finance the social safeguards monitor whose recruitment is now being
    finalized.

    The restructured project addresses the sustainable development of Guizhou’s cultural and natural
    heritage, and has been delivering positive benefits in improved preservation and conservation of the
    heritage. The project has been instilling a commitment to, and practical experience of, sustainable
    approaches to tourism development amongst the government and the public in Guizhou, resulting in
    enhanced cultural heritage appreciation, environmental sustainability and economic development of
    isolated populations.

    The project has also been delivering positive environmental and social benefits. The local
    environmental conditions are improving; social and economic benefits are being realized by
    accelerated development of service industry and increasing number of tourists. Economic development
    driven by tourism enhances incentives for the protection of natural and cultural heritage.

    The project components have caused a variety of short-term impacts, such as dust, noise, and soil
    erosion, etc. However, those impacts are relatively minor and the developed instruments are proved to
    be sufficient and measures have been taken to reduce the impacts to acceptable levels.

    Resettlement impacts have been limited. In most cases, land needed for the village project was
    obtained through land adjustment or donation. Facilities built under gateway and scenic area
    subprojects used mostly empty state owned land. For the temporary resettlement of some occupants in
    Huangping Jiuzhou, a due diligence report was prepared, which a Bank review found to be satisfactory
    and demonstrates that the resettlement process was handled appropriately.

    Majority of beneficiaries of the project are minorities including Miao, Dong and Buyi.

    The new activities are similar to the investments already identified in the original project; as a result,
    the disclosed safeguard instruments remain valid.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
    the project area:
    The project has been causing a variety of short-term impacts during construction phase, as described
    above.
On the other hand, during the operation phase, some longer-term environmental impacts and issues
might be appeared, such as inappropriate solid waste collection and disposal, and noise management.
However, many of the concerns have been addressed in the design of the facilities. The local capacity
of environmental management is being strengthened through the TA component supported by Bank
loan.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Impacts of “with and without the project” have been analyzed during the preparation of EA
documents. Analysis reveals that the proposed project would promote sustainable development of
tourism industry in favor of the protection of Guizhou’s cultural and natural heritages and poverty
alleviation. Adverse impacts will be avoided or mitigated by implementing the EMP prepared.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

To address the safeguards issues, a comprehensive EA/Environmental Management Plan (EMP),
individual EMPs for each subcomponent, a consolidated RAP including a resettlement policy
framework have been developed. Social assessment has been carried out and free, prior and informed
consultation with affected minority groups was conducted during project preparation and a community
participation and operational manual has been prepared.

The borrower’s capacity in implementing the developed measures developed in the safeguard related
instruments has been improving. The overall compliance of safeguards has been satisfactory, yet the
monitoring and evaluation of RAP are delayed. Under the restructuring, the RAP monitoring will be
supported by Bank loan. An external resettlement monitor is being recruited and expected to start
working soon.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental Safeguards

In the preparation of EA safeguard documents, two rounds of public consultation were carried out
through questionnaire surveys, expert consultations, household interviews and public hearings during
the preparation of the project. The first round was conducted when preparing EA terms of reference
(TOR) in April and May, 2007, while the second round was when completing a draft EA report in
November and December, 2007. Participants in public consultation were mainly from individuals who
would be potentially affected by the project, organizations/institutes, NGOs and experts.

Information on the project and potential environmental impacts has been publicly disclosed through
various means, such as the Internet (www.ghidri.com.cn) and local newspaper (Guizhou Daily, Jan 30,
2008).

Social Safeguards

Public consultation and participation was a key element in resettlement planning. Free, prior and
informed consultation with minorities in the project areas was conducted through the process of social
assessment. As a result, a community participation and operational manual has been developed. The
resettlement action plan and resettlement policy framework have been publicly disclosed through local
media (Guizhou Daily, April 24, 2008, and Qiandongnan Daily, April 3, 2008). These documents can
be accessible through internet (www.gz-travel.net and www.mdlyw.com) as well as in the PMO
    offices. The government at different levels have committed for implementation. .
.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  04/22/2008
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               12/06/2008
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the   10/17/2008
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
    China                                                                        01/30/2008
    Comments: Information on the project and potential environmental impacts has been publicly
              disclosed through various means, such as the Internet (www.ghidri.com.cn) and local
              newspaper.
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  05/20/2008
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               12/06/2008
    "In country" Disclosure
    China                                                                        04/03/2008
    Comments: The resettlement action plan and resettlement policy framework have been publicly
              disclosed through local media (Guizhou Daily, April 24, 2008, and Qiandongnan Daily,
              April 3, 2008).
    Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  05/20/2008
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                               12/06/2008
    "In country" Disclosure
    China
    Comments:
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
    IPP elements have been incorporated into overall project design. Therefore individual IPP
    disclosure is not required.
.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]     No [      ]   NA [   ]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in     Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural             Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the           Yes [ X ]   No [ ]     NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been   Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with        Yes [ X ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:        Name: Meskerem Brhan
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: IName: Peter Leonar~   r..~   Date: 01_-_q)_- ~<(]
Sector Manager:          Name: Abhas K. Jha                Date:   0) -0 1 - ')_..() f\,.(
