                                                                                                 82590

                           mTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                        RESTRUCT~GSTAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                                    Report No.:

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:              8-Nov-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 l. Basic Project Data
 Country:                          China                 IProject ID:                  IPI00968
 J>roject Name:                    Shanxi Coal Bed Methane Development and Utilization (PI00968)
 Task Team Leader:                 Ximing Peng
 Estimated Board Date:             19-May-2009
 Managing Unit:                    EASCS
 Sector (s):                       Thermal Power Generation (99%), Public administration- Energy and
                                   mining (I%)
 T heme(s):                        Climate change (70%), Pollution management and environmental health
                                   (30%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                         No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                   Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:           204.30                      Total Bank Financing:         80.00
 Total Cofi nancing:            124.30                      Financing Gap:               0.00
    Financing Source                                                                                  Amount (m$)
    Borrower                                                                                                47.30
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                   80.00
    Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                                      77.00
    Total                                                                                                  204.30
 Environmental Category:           A - Full Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a T ra nsferred           No
  project?


 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The objective of the project is to assist Shanxi Province in increasing the production and utilization of
 CBM/CMM to replace coal as a fuel for thermal use and to reduce GHGs and local air pollutants
 associated with coal combustion.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Not applicable.

3. Project Description
The prqject would comprise the following two components:

    (a) Investment Component: The investment component would include: (i) the exploration and
        development ofCBM production wells with an estimated annual production capacity of260
        millio n Nm 3 ; (ii) construction of collection pipelines, gathering station(s), and transmission
        pipelines required for the above-mentioned production of CBM; and (iii) construction of a
        LNG plant with an estimated production capacity of 200,000 tons per year.

    (b) Technical Assistance Component (TA): The technical assistance component includes two sub-
        components: (i) a technical assistance program to assist the project entity in developing the
        capacity to construct and operate the facilities efficiently and safely, and to expand business
        activities in the area of CBM/CMM development and achieve long-term financial
        sustainability; and (ii) a technical assistance program to assist the key stakeholders in Shanxi
        province to enhance the institutional and technical capacity for policy making and
        implementation to scale up CBM/CMM industry in Shanxi.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to tbe safeguard analysis
(if known)
The investment component (i) and (ii) will be in Libi Block, representing an approximate area of 50
km 2, which is located in vicinity of Libi village, Qinshui County, Shanxi Province. The LNG plant is
located in the east of Guxian River and the south of Dongshan Village, Duanshi Town, Qingshu i
County, representing an area of 71,775.3 m2• Both the Libi Block and the LNG plant are in an area
known as the Qinshui Gas Basin, a sedimentary coal basin located in southern Shanxi Province. The
area is sun·ounded by mountains with a terrain of low hills and with an obvious continental climate
characterized by long winters and short summers. This area has been explored sporadically over the
years for both conventional oil and gas and coal mining. There are currently a number of rigs drilling
in the immediate area to explore the coal bed methane as a viable and economic energy resource for
the area.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

   Mr Feng Ji, EASCS, Environmental Specialist
   Mr. Youxuan Zhu, Consultant, Social Specialist


6. Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.0 I        Yes              See Section TI A( 1)
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No               See Section II A( I)
Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No               See Section Il A(l)
Pest Management OP 4.09                     No               The project will not include any
                                                             procurement of pesticides or pesticide
                                                             application equipment; nor introduce any
                                                           new pest management practices, or
                                                           expand/alter existing pest management
                                                           practices; nor lead to substantially increased
                                                           pesticide use and subsequent environmental
                                                           and health risks. This policy is not
                                                           triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No                   See Section II A( I)
Ind igenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10             No              There are no ethnic minority communities
                                                           in the project affected areas. The policy of
                                                           OP/BP 4. I 0 is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        Yes              See Section II A( I)
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No              The project will not f'inance construction or
                                                           rehabilitation of any dams as defined under
                                                           this policy. This policy is not triggered.
Projects on International Waterways        No              Not applicable.
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No              Not applicable.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, signific~mt and/or ir reversible impacts:

E nvironmental Issues and Impacts

The project will result in environmental benefits as this project supports the utilization of coal bed
methane to reduce coal consumption in China, indirectly contribute to improve the safety of mining
operations over the long term, and help to achieve significant reductions in China 's greenhouse gas
emission.

The project will potentially cause a variety of short-term impacts during construction, e.g. drilling
mud, drilling cuts and wastewater generated from well drilling, dust, noise from machinery and
veh icles, air pollution from compressor exhaust gases, spoiled materials, temporary occupation of land
and damage of trees and greens due to the construction of gas collection stations, CBM wells and
access roads, and impacts from construction camp activities. A series of mitigation measures have
been planned to reduce the impacts to acceptable levels, including proper disposal of drilling mud,
drilling cuts and wastewater, water spray on construction sites on dry and windy days. adequate buffer
zone to reduce noise to nearby villages, use of low noise construction machines, proper disposal of
spoiled materials, compensation for temporary land occupation and environmental management
system for the construction camps. All mitigation measures related to contractors will be included in
the bid documents and the contracts so that they will be part of the contractual obligations for the
contractors. In addition, mandatory training wi II be provided to all contractors and construction
supervision companies for enviro nmental policies and standards, mitigation measure implementation,
and site environmental supervision and reporting. Regular environmental supervision of all
construction sites will be provided by construction supervision companies as well as environmental
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Various alternative prQject designs and sites have been identified, evaluated and compared by the EA
consultant, in close consultation with project company and its technical consultant. Alternative
treatment processes for the CBM produced water, alternative gas gathering stations sites, completion
methods for CBM wells, alternative LNG sites, and alternative routes for pipeline connecting the
Central Collection Station and the LNG plant have been evaluated. Environmental and social
considerations have been given in the analysis of the alternatives and those with the least adverse
environmental and socio-economic impacts have been recommended for the project. During project
implementation, directional wells technology has been adopted as one of the options in order to further
reduce the impacts on land disturbance.

4. Describe measures taken by tbe borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement tbe measures described.

Environmental Safee;uard Issue

Environmental Impact Assessments (E!As) for each of the project components were prepared by the
Coal industrial Taiyuan Design Research Institute (CITDRI) and were approved by Shanxi Provincial
Environmental Protection Bureau (SPEPB) in 2008. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and
EA Summary for the project were prepared. The EIAs were prepared in compliance w ith applicable
Chinese regulations and standards, as well as safeguard policies of the World Bank. During project
implementation, a supplementary EA and EMP were prepared for the relocated gas drilling sub-
component, in compliance with applicable Chinese regulations and standards, as well as safeguard
policies of the World Bank.

An organization structure has been established which identifies institutions to be involved in the
environmental management, mitigation measure implementation, environmental supervision, and
environmental monitoring, etc. The organizations with a role in environmental management include
the project company, engineering design consultants, construction supervision companies, contractors,
environmental monitoring agencies as well as regulatory agency. The EMP outlines in detail the
specific responsibilities of each of these organizations in project construction, operation and
maintenance, as well as the relationships among these organizations when it comes to environmental
management for the project. The Borrower's capacity to plan and to implement the mitigation
measures is deemed adequate.

As of June 2013 , construction activities were mainly for the LNG plant. Environmental monitoring
was conducted by external monitoring institutions. Progress reports for the ongoing project were
prepared by the project company. confinning that safeguards-related activities were satisfactorily
implemented and that there were no significant outstanding environmental safeguard issues.

Social Safeguard Issue

For the land acquisition impact, a RAP was prepared based on detailed impact survey, social economic
survey and consultation with affected people in 2008. For gas development sub-component, a total of
491 mu of land areas would be acquired permanently with 114 mu being farm land. About 81
households and 274 persons would be affected. In add it ion, l ,513 mu of land areas would be occupied
temporarily during construction.
Accord ing to the RAP, the proposed compensation tor acquired fannland was set at 23 to 27 times of
annual average output value by following most recent national laws and local regulations. These rates
were considered as adequate by local governments and villages. In terms of economic rehabilitation,
most of affected people would be provided with replacement farmland by using vi llage reserved lands.
The compensations would be paid directly to affected villages to improve farming conditions, and
develop other income generation activities. For temporary land occupation. the affected households
would be provided with adequate compensation for the lost yield during occupation; and the project
company would be responsible for restoration of cultivated land into their original productive
conditions.

A supplementary RAP was prepared for the relocated gas drilling sub-component in 2013, following
the same legal framework and compensation policies adopted in the original RAP. The new gas
exploration area with 50 square kilometers is located to the southwest of the original site. Less than
half of the land areas are forest lands, belonging to Duanshi Forest Farm and Dajianshan Forest Farm,
as well as individuals from 6 villages in Longgang Town and Zhengzhuang Town. The remaining land
to be acquired include both farmland and waste land from the same villages. According to the project
feasibility study, the new gas exploration and collection component will include construction of 323
wells with 91 opening, one gas storage substation (called No 5 Zhengzhuang Station), and 80
kilometers of gas collection pipelines. During construction, a total of 51.3 km of access roads will be
constructed. The construction of these facilities will involve certain amount of land acquisition.

According to the supplementary RAP, only gas storage station will involve permanently land
acquisition with 17 mu of unutilized land area in Libi Village. For construction of other facilities, they
wi ll involve temporary land occupation of I,487 mu. Among them, 720 mu is for gas collection
pipelines; 305 mu for developing gas wells; and 436 mu for construction of access roads. About 44%
of affected land areas are woodland, and 56% as farmland or other rural land. Most of affected land
areas arc located in six villages (Libi, Mayi, Changbai, Zhangzhuang, Wanzhe, and Mingshui) and two
state owned forest farms (Dajianshan and Duanshi). In terms of compensation standards, all of them
are either the same or higher than that in the original RAP. Due to new provincial regulation,
compensation for wood land is much higher than that in the previous RAP.

The resettlement implementation responsibilities belong to both the project company and local
governments. A resettlement office has been set up within the project company, which is responsible
for coordinating overall resettlement planning and implementation activities. The actual
implementation will be carried out by Qinshui County Land Resources Bureau which is responsible
for conducting site survey, keeping records, organizing consultation, managing and allocating the
resettlement funds, signing compensation agreements with affected villages, and being a main channel
of grievance for the affected people.

Implementation o[the RAP

At present, the land acquisition for LNG plant sub-component and the linkage component of gas
transmission pipeline were fully implemented, and land acquisition for gas drilling sub-component has
just started due to change of location for the sub-component.

The land acquisition for LNG plant site had been implemented in 2008-2009. A total of 112.3 mu of
land areas had been acquired, which was significantly less than that in the RAP ( 180 mu). According
to external monitoring reports, a total of CNY3.16 million of compensation were paid to two affected
villages (Dongshan and Jinfeng), based on a set of compensation standards either the same or higher
than that in the RAP. During the construction period, additional 130 mu land was occupied
temporarily for related facilities. Following the RAP, a total of CNY751 ,740 were provided to two
affected villages and individuals. Besides compensation, LNG plant project has brought considerable
social benefits to the affected village through employment and business opportunities and most
villagers experienced large increase of income in the past few years, from only CNY 4,780 in 2008 to
CNY7,600 in 2012, an increase of about 60%.

For linkage gas pipeline component, connecting No.5 Zhengzhuang Station and Central Treatment
Station with 34 km and passing through 15 villages from Longgang, Zhengzhuang, and Duanshi
Towns, the construction was carried out by NCB PC in 2012. About 900 mu of land areas had been
temporarily occupied during construction. According to the external monitoring report, compensations
based on the rates indicated in the RAP were paid to affected villagers with no problems reported.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Environmental Safeguard. The key stakeholders are Shanxi Energy CBM Investment Holding Co.,
Ltd. which was renamed as Shanxi CBM Co., Ltd (SCBMC) in 2013, Jincheng Monitoring Station,
and Shanxi EPB. Project affected people from local villages were consulted during EA TOR stage and
again during draft EA report stage. Concerns over impacts of project activities were addressed in the
EA and opinions for mitigation planning and environmental management were incorporated into the
EA documents. These EA documents in draft were disclosed in local village associations in December
2007. The project information and access to these documents were announced through local
newspaper on December 26, 2007 and through public notice in the local villages on December 10,
2007. Summary project background, major EA findings and mitigation measures where appropriate
were also distributed during the public consultation to the affected people to provide the basic
information about the project and about the project adverse impacts to the public. The final EA
documents were disclosed in local village associations, PMO of the project company, and its website
on May 14, 2008. The draft supplementary EA and EMP, prepared for the relocated gas drilling sub-
component, were distributed during project public consultation to the pr~ject affected people in May
2013. The supplementary EA rep01t was disclosed at the local village associations with a notice
published on Qingshui Daily, and disclosed at the project company website on May 29, 2013. The
supplementary EA and EMP were disclosed in the Bank's Infoshop on August 20,2013.

Social Safeguard. ln the process of identifying resettlement impacts, formulating compensation
policies, and preparing the resettlement action plan, extensive consultation and community
participation were organized by the project company in the project affected areas. Survey results
showed that about 98% of local residents support this project; and 73% believe that the project will
benefit them. More efforts will be made during the resettlement implementation to encourage further
participation by the resettlers. To ensure that all compensations will be used effectively, they will be
delivered directly to affected villages and the use of such funds will be approved by all villagers and
monitored by the township governments. The content of the supplementary RAP was also disclosed by
distributing resettlement information booklet to affected village groups, disclosing it in the project
company we bsite, and making it available in the concerned villages and state forest farms in July
2013. The supplement RAP was disclosed in the Bank' s lnfoShop on July 15 2013.

Safety. As the project involves the production, transmission and liquefaction ofCBM, which possess
the same characteristics as conventional natural gas, and is explosive and easy to catch fire, the safety
issue is a major concern for the project during construction and operation periods. A Safety
Management Plan (SMP) was prepared as part of the feasibility studies. The SMP was reviewed and
evaluated by National Risk Assessment Center for Petrochemical Projects (NRACPP), a third party
certified by the State to conduct independent assessment of the safety measures proposed for high risk
projects, and was reviewed by the Bank team.

The SMP took into account the entire spectrum of potential safety risk areas throughout the
production, transportation and processing chain . The key risk is the leakage ofCBM into atmospheres
to mix with air, and then catch on with natural or artificial fire to cause explosion. The other
significant safety risks are associated with the design, construction and operation of the LNG plant.
Major mitigation measures include the proper design, procurement and construction of gas pipelines,
processing equipment and storage tanks to prevent erosion and leakage; forbidden of artificial fire in
the project area, design and procurement of electric equipment and switches to prevent electric fire,
installation of detector-alarms and automatic fire-extinguishing and water-spray cooling systems;
installation of an emergency release stack; adoption of lighting arresters and blast-proof electrical
equipment, switches, and lighting apparatus; and strict enforcement of safety management regulations,
rules and procedures, and adequate training of contractors, operators, safety supervisors and managers.


B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management a nd/or Physical Cu ltural Resources policies, the
respective issues arc to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Both the supplemental EA/EMP and RAP were disclosed locally and in the Bank's InfoShop. The
supplementary EA report was disclosed at the local village associations with a notice published on
Qingshui Daily, and disclosed at the project company website on May 29,2013. The supplementary
EA and EMP were disclosed in the Bank's lnfoShop on August 20,2013. The supplementary RAP
was also disclosed in the project company website on July 3, 2013, and in the Bank's InfoShop on July
IS 2013.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnfor mation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X J        No[ )      NA [ J
Bank's Infoshop?
I lave relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [X J      No [ )     NA [)
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected gro ups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional            Yes [X J    No [ J     NA [ 1
responsibi Iities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
llave costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [X J    No [ )     NA [ 1
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include      Yes [X J    No [ )     NA [)
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X]     No [ 1       NA [ 1
the bon-ower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Ximing Peng
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Josefo Tuyor, Acting RSA              Date: I I/08/20 13




                                ~~
Sector Manager:                Name: Mark R. Lundell                     Date:

                                 ~~                                            (( {ll{26t 3
