                         ENTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                               RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project resb'ucturing

                                                                                Report No.: ..88178
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           19-May-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       China                 IProject ID:                 IPI01829
 Project Name:                  Xining Flood and Watershed Management (PIOI829)
 Task Team Leader:              Ximing Zhang
 Estimated Board Date:          02-Jun-2009
 Managing Unit:                 EASCS
 Sector(s):                     Flood protection (60%), Other social services (20%), Public
                                administretion- Water, sanitation and flood protection (12%), Wastewater
                                Collection and Tmnsportation (8%)
 Theme(s):                      City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (47%), Natural disaster
                                management (28%), Water resource management (22%), Land admini
                                stmtion and management (2%), Participation and civic engagement (I%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                    No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:         207.41                     Total Bank Financing:       110o.oo
 Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
     Borrower                                                                                            107.41
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               100.00
     Total                                                                                               207.41
 Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The development objective of the project is to improve the protection of property and safety of people
 from flood events and bring about sustainable utilization of land and water resources within Xining
Municipality. The POO is to be achieved through the provision of (a) a greater level of flood protection
and enhanced flood management; (b) improved wastewater collection; (c) improved soil and water
conservation of catchments; and (d) institutional strengthening and capacity building in Xining
Municipality.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)


3. Project Description
The Project would deliver the PDOs through a combination of both structural (flood control
infrastructure) and non-structural (software) investments. The structural investment would (i) fund the
rehabilitation/modernization and strengthening of works for flood protection and control systems (dikes,
waterway improvements, pumping stations, bridges, water control structures and access roads), in
selected watersheds in the project area; and (ii) fund the completion/extension of the waste water
collection systems in key areas, as an importaitt environmental initiative aimed at improving the water
quality in the rivers within the Xining Municipality including the counties.                 ·

 The non-structural activities:

(i) would bring about a bottom-up, participatory approach to sustainable watershed management,
through an initiative that would see the establishment of a new partnership between the governments
(City, District and County) and local communities. Based on the successful experience in similar
operations in China, the initiative would see the establishment of watershed based community
associations that would partner with government to prepare and implement sustainable watershed
management plans. Greater community involvement would be developed through the establishment of a
new partnership between governments and the community and the creation of Water and Soil
Conservation Associations (WSCA). The concept is that these new community organizations would
assume responsibility for the planning and implementation of a sustainable watershed conservation plan
for their particular area and based on principle of the community leading the planning and
implementation process with the relevant government agencies, supplemented by technical assistance
were necessary. The project would typically fund the external technical assistance, all small works (e.g.
silt control structures, waterway improvements and erosion control, catchment treatment activities,
access culverts, fencing, livelihoods activities to offset land use restrictions -e.g. animal husbandry).

 (ii) top down measures would seek to enhance the flood management of the main river systems,
through capacity building of the Xining Flood Control and Drought Relief Office (FC&DRO), thus
establishing continuity of flood operations under the well perfonning FC&DR offices at Provincial and
Central levels;

 (iii) bring about further reductions to the impact of flooding on human life and property, through the
development of flood forecasting and warning systems, as well as emergency preparedness plans. The
development of these systems for the Municipality would provide the continuity link to the flood
forecasting and warning systems at the provincial level and in turn be linked to the flood forecasting and
warning system at the River Basin Level through the Yellow River Basin Commission (YRBC) and at
national level, through Ministry of Water Resources_ and the national FC&DRO; and (iv) the
non-structural measures would also include activities to strengthen operations and maintenan9C (O&M)
of the flood control assets through capacity building and training.

 Options. The options considered for the project were: (i) a traditional approach involving only a
top-down approach using government institutions funding only structural activities; or (ii) in addition to
(i) above, the inclusion of non-structure! activities such as flood management, forecasting. mitigation
and for the management of opemtions and maintenance (O&M) of flood control assets and a focus on
the sustainability aspects of the investments; (iii) a community driven, participatory approach that would
focus on watershed management only, involving greater community participation in the management of
lower level works and the land use of the watersheds.

 Therefore the tmditional or piece meal options (i)-(iii) above have been rejected in favor of a more
integmted approach, involving a balance of both structuml a! and non-structuml measures and a
combination of top down, bottom up, participatory approaches to flood and watershed management.

Restructuring activities

This Project Paper introduces the following proposed changes in the Xining Flood and Watershed
Management Project ("Project"): (a) reduction of certain Project activities and addition of new Project
activities (see Table 1) which include construction of dike improvement, wastewater collection pipes,
ecological improvement and landscape for the river reach between the intake ofDananchuan Reservoir
and Xijiazhai Bridge; 7km of dike improvement and wastewater collection pipes from Kangjia Bridge to
Chaoyang Power Station; and 2.2km of dike improvement from Menyuan Bridge to river junction of
Huangshui River; and I km valley improvement upstream; (b) change in Project costs, and reallocation
of Loan proceeds; and (c) updating of the results framework. The restructuring is justified by the fact
that the Project specific activities were selected and designed in 2008, and the implementation of the
project has coincided with the fast growth of economic and social development of the greater Xining
city. As such, a number of domestic comprehensive plans and progmms have implemented some
priority activities identified in the Project financed by the Bank. The purpose of the restructuring,
therefore, is to allow the Loan to be fully utilized and achieve most benefits in the remaining Project
implementation time.


4. Project location and salient physical characteristies relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The proposed new activities include (i) about !Skm extension of the improvement works along
Nanchuan River from Da'nanchuan Dam to Xiejiazai Bridge; (ii) about 3.5km of dike strengthening
works along Bei-Chuan River from Kangjia Bridge ot Chaoyang Hydropower Plant Outlet; (iii) about
one km extension of dike works from Menyuan Bridge to the River Inlet); and (iv) about one km of gully
management works upstream ofDujia Gully. These activities located east and north part ofXining City
within Xining Municipality, Province of Qinghai, People's Republic of China.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Daniel R. Gibson ( OPSPQ )
Zongcheng Lin ( EASCS )
Qingtao Xie ( EASWE )
Songling Yao ( EASCS)
John Morton ( LCSDU )
Feng Ji ( EASCS )
Yan Sun ( EASCS)
6. Safeguard Policies                      Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01        Yes            This policy applies because of the scale
                                                          of the investment in civil works
                                                          envisaged and the potential
                                                          environmental impact on river ecology
                                                          both positive and negative.
Natural Habitats OPIBP 4.04                No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No
Pest Management OP 4.09                    Yes
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11     No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              Yes            One Tibetan village was found in the area
                                                          of the original project, and so the policy
                                                          was triggered, and an EMDP was
                                                          prepared and implemented.

                                                          The ethnic minority screening in the area
                                                          of the new proposed activities did not
                                                          find any ethnic minority. The existing
                                                          project EMDP will apply in the event any
                                                          EMs are found during project
                                                          implementation.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        Yes            The original project caused land
                                                          acquisition and resettlement and a RP
                                                          was prepared and is being implemented.
                                                          And further a possible restriction of
                                                          access was primarily identified and so a
                                                          PF was prepared.

                                                          The new proposed activities also result in
                                                          additional land acquisition and          .
                                                          resettlement, and so a supplementary RP
                                                          was prepared.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  Yes            This policy applies because there are at
                                                          least 18 dams higher than ISm
                                                          commanding the project area,
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60     No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and i.mpacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social Aspects:
On the original project:
Resettlement: Resettlement impacts are expected to occur both in urban/peri-urban areas where flood
control improvements will cause land acquisition, and in rural areas where upstream erosion and
sedimentation control measures may result in restricted access to resources. Flood control works will
cause land acquisition totaling 1,635 mu (about 109 hectares). This includes 1229 mu (about 82
hectares) of agricultural land and 339 mu (about 23 ha) of state-owned land. Impacts on farmer
household land holdings and incomes are generally minor. Housing demolition will total about 30,000
square meters, affecting 132 households. In addition, 22 enterprises will be affected by partial loss of
land or ancillary structures, but none will require relocation. In all, 3,840 persons are to be affected by
flood control works.

For communities in or around the 17 gullies involved in upstream erosion and sedimentation control
measures, a participatory planning process has led to preliminary identification of benefit programs to
offset restrictions of access to resources, primarily hillsides used for grazing. In all, 44 villages are to be
involved in the participatory watershed management process. The erosion and sedimentation control
measures will not result in any land acquisition or demolition of structures.

Indigenous People: During project screening, it was determined that ethnic minority households would
not be affected by flood control measures in urban or peri-urban areas, but would be a large proportion
of households affected by erosion and sedimentation control measures in rural areas. While many
communities reflect ethnic intermingling, one potentially affected village is primarily Tibetan and
another is primarily Hui. Because of long periods of interaction in the general vicinity of urban Xining,
most of the minority households residing in the project are largely acculturated into the broader social
system, and commonly speak Han Chinese rather than a traditional minority language. A social
assessment was undertaken, including a process of a free, prior and infomied consultation with
potentially affected communities. The consultation processes, in the context of the participatory
watershed management component, showed that area residents broadly support project objectives.
Communities also were directly involved in identifying and designing benefit programs intended to
offset restrictions on access to resources. The new added subprojects will not affect ethnic minority. The
ethnic minority screening in the area of the new proposed activities did not found any ethnic minority, so
there is no new IPPIIPPF is needed.


On the proposed new activities:
The new resettlement impacts in the supplementary RAP covers 607 mu of collective land to be
acquired with impacts on 1349 persons in 344 households, as well as 1304 mu of state-owned land
without impacts on any individual or entity. The new activities will not pose substantial changes in the·
overall project risks or warrants a change in the original environmental categorization (Category A) or
trigger new safeguards policies.

Environmental Safeguards Issues:

Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.0 I): The project is considered a category A for Environmental
Assessment based on the environmental impacts identified du ring project identification. In accordance
with the policy, an environmental impact assessment was developed that included an analysis of
regional environment, project area baseline environment and anticipated project-related impacts. It also
includes an environmental management plan that includes mitigation measures for the impacts along
with arrangements for monitoring, responsibilities, budget and capaCity building.
Pest Management (OP4.39): The reforestation and revegetation activities and greenhouse operation will
result in an increase in the use of pesticides in the project activities, although none will be procured as
part of the project. Consistent with the provisions of this policy, an integrated pest management plan has
been developed for the project to reduce impacts and ensure safe handling, storage, and treatment of the
pesticides.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11): A total of38 important cultural sites were identified to be
proximate to the project areas. The boundruy of the closest site is some 800 m from the construction site
and the environmental assessment concluded that they would not be adversely impacted by project
activities and therefore the policy is not triggered. As part of the EA some precautions were incorporated
in project EMP to ensure the sites closer to construction areas are not affected. Chance finds procedures
were also included in the environmental management plan that outlined procedures to be taken if
important cultural property is discovered during construction .

Natural Habitats (OP 4.04): A review of the critical natural habitats, including protected wetlands in
Qinghai Province has indicated that all the national and provincial listed significant natural habitats are
well far away from project affected area with the nearest distance of some 20km and that no critical
natural habitat will be affected by the project activities. The riverine areas where the dike strengthening
and wastewater collection pipelines is to be constructed do not support important aquatic habitats or fish
species that are economically or ecologically significant and do not contain any significant wetlands.
Some marginal natural habitats, includirig reforested river banks, shrubs and grassy areas exist in these
river reaches. The project design includes infrastructure design measures to ensure that impacts to these
areas are minimized and also activities to enhance the river banks through reforestation and landscapes
development. Reforestation in the watersheds will be completed on marginal land that has already been
converted by human activities. Considering the very minor significance of these habitats and the
inherent measures included in project EMP to preserve them it was considered not necessruy to trigger
the Natural Habitats Policy.

Forests Policy (OP 4.36): The project will finance large scale plantations as part of the efforts to prevent
soil erosion in the watershed management areas. The project will be re-vegetating the areas using
non-invasive species (all local common species) in degraded land that is not a critical natural habitat or
important ecologically. Strict tree species selection procedures are developed in watershed management
programs, which will be closely supervised and monitored by the project EMO/PMO. With these basic
environmental conditions and project design and management measures in place it was considered not
necessruy to trigger the policy.

Environmental Assessment:

The project is considered a category A for Environmental Assessment based on the environmentai
impacts identified during project identification. Potential issues identified by the EA that are important
to consider in order to ensure adverse impacts are avoided or minimized .include: the impacts of
resettlement activities; im!Jacts of dike strengthening on riverine ecology; impacts on river flows and
downstream flood control; impacts on public health; impacts of general construction nuisances; solid
waste and spoil handling and disposal; soil erosion control in gully areas during construction; use of
pesticides for pest management in reforestation and greenhouses; eliminating invasive species during
reforestation; and minor impacts of community activities. These potential impacts were assessed as part
of project preparation and were minimized or avoided through project design and environmental
mitigation measures.

Construction related impapts: The construction works will have typical impacts associated with these
activities (noise, dust, worker's health, management of waste from construction sites). The EA also
identified three construction areas that require special attention in designing mitigation measures. These
include the larger sized silt traps that will be built in Bohang and Hela Gullies which because of their
size will require extra measures; Construction in Jiaomu gully which is proximate (800m) to the
Taa TMer Temple to help ensure there will be no interference with activities at the temple; and drainage
works near the Huangzhong Medical school which will require measures to minimize interference with
their operations.

Impacts of resettlement sites: No significant environmental impacts are expected due to implementation
of the resettlement program as all the affected people will be resettled in their original villages.

River flow and ecology: The rivers are not ecologically rich with only a few species offish none of
which are important from an ecological or economic perspective. Changes· in river flow except during
flood events are not anticipated as the project does not involve construction of water storage dams or
flood detention facilities and the dike strengthening will not change river courses or river flow patterns.

Water pollution: The sewage and drainage collection systems constructed under the project will
transport wastewater that was previously disposed directly into open drainage canals flowing into rivers
to sewage treatment plants for treatment. For all urban areas, plans have been made to ensure the
necessary treatment capacity is in place at the time the construction is completed. Arrangements have
also been made to ensure the sludge produced from the treatment plants is properly disposed in landfills.

Forests and land use change: The project will finance reforestation and revegetation in watershed areas.
Within these areas the land use change will be significant. The area of farmland will remain unchanged,
but the area of woodland will increase I0%, the area of recovered grassland would increase 18.5% with
a corresponding decrease of the erosion prone wasteland and marginal areas. These impact s would be
largely positive, as the project will help reduce erosion and flooding by re-vegetating areas using
non-invasive species in degraded land that are not critical natural habitats or important ecologically.

Pest management: The reforestation and greenhouse construction and operation will result in an increase
in the use of pesticides in the project activities, although none will be procured as part of the project.
This raises issues common in the region including over-dependence upon chemical control; control and
quarantine techniques in pest management; and improper use of pesticides through lack of knowledge.
Under the project an integrated pest management plan has been developed to improve capacity of·
fanners to apply knowledge to minimize use and to safely and properly apply pesticides and also to
improve monitoring of government agencies of pests and undertake quarantines.

Regional impacts: A regional analysis was undertaken to understand the role and impacts of the project
in regional development. It concluded that while the project's environmental issues (water quality,
ecology, flood control and river flow) are also issues relevant to the region, the scale and scope of the
impacts are not significant at the regional level.

Linked activities: Linked activities including past dike strengthening, and past and ongoing wastewater
treatment plants and capacity expansions which are consistent with and support the project -objectives,
leading to no indirect or long term detrimental impacts outside of those that have been identified as part
of the project. Those works that are completed have approved environmental assessment s under
national laws. EA compliance, operational performance and timing of waste water treatment capacity
expansion in relation to the project works will be monitored as part of the project.   ·

Alternatives considered: The following alternatives were considered as part of project design in light of
their environmental impacts.

 a.     Dam construction: Dam construction was considered at the very beginning of project
preparation, but soon was abandoned because the project area does not have appropriate geological
conditions for building of large dams and significant adverse impacts could be caused by these activities.

 b.     River courses: Originally it was proposed that changing of river courses would be implemented,
but these were not adopted. The choice of the river bank protection structures was also based on
considerations of the advantage of a structure that would better support river bank ecology and natural
aesthetics.

 c.      Management of Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) sludge, removed municipal solid waste and
construction spoil in dike strengthening -activities: Disposal options w ere considered for these wastes
including existing landfills and designated spoil disposal sites in light of the environmental impacts.
Considering the altemativ~s, it was decided that the solid waste that has been dumped on the river banks
would be disposed in two sanitary landfills in the region. The construction spoils which are
environmentally more benign would be disposed in seven designated spoil disposal sites. Both sets of
sites have adequate capacity to receive this additional waste. The STP sludge disposal for the linked
projects considered agricultural application or disposal in the landfills. The current practice of disposal
in landfills is considered safe from an environmental perspective as the landfill capacity and operation is
adequate and with only limited advantages from an environmental perspective for use agriculture.

 Environmental Management Plan: All project activity types have been identified as part of preparation.
The approach was therefore to undertake an environmental impact assessment for all activities and
develop design and mitigation measure to prevent or minimize the impacts. The EMP includes the
following instruments (i) mitigation measures for major environmental issues includ,ing general
guidelines for construction works; (ii) environmental management plan for participatory watershed
management including a pest management plan; and (iii) supervision oflinked projects. In addition for
the first year commenced works site specific EMPs were developed. The EMP also includes an
environmental monitoring program, institutional establishment, capacity building and training needs, as
well as cost estimates for EMP implementation ($1.14 million).

 Safety of Dams:

 The Dam Safety Safeguard Policy (OP 4.37) is triggered by the Project because the project sites are
located downstream from a number of existing dams, and the failure of the upstream dams could cause
extensive damage to or failure of the some or all the investment under the Project. Totally 10 dams
trigger the policy. Among these dams, 7 are classified as operationally safe, and 3 are classified as
needing remedial works.

 Other safeguards policies:

 Projects on International Waterways: The project area is located in the upper Yellow River Basin. The
drainage area upstream of the project area to the top of the catchment is all within China and drains
ultimately to the Yellow River and generally east to the Yellow Sea. There are no international rivers in
the project area.

 Physical Cultural Resources: A total of38 important cultural sites were identified proximate to the
project areas. The border of the closest site is 800 m from the construction activities and the
environmental assessment concluded they would not be impacted by project activities. For the sites
closer to construction areas, basic precautions are included in the EMPs to ensure there are no impacts. .
Chance finds procedures were also included in the environmental management plan that outline
procedures to be taken if important cultural property is discovered during construction.

Impacts of the restructuring activities

A supplementary RAP and a supplementary EMP have been prepared for the newly added activities in
compliance with applicable Chinese regulations and standards, as well as the safeguard policies of the
World Bank. These activities will cause similar environment and resettlement impacts as those listed in
the original safeguards documents during construction and operation phases. The new resettlement
impacts in the supplementary RAP covers 607 mu of collective land to be acquired with impacts on 1349
persons in 344 households, as well as 1304 mu of state-owned land without impacts on any individual or
entity. The new activities will not pose substantial changes in the overall project risks or warrants a
change in the original environmental categorization (Category A) or trigger new safeguards policies.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
tbe project area:
A regional environmental analysis was done for the Huangshui watershed that projected trends in the
watershed and indicated that atthe regional level the long term impacts of the project, even if scaled up,
would be positive and that in light of ongoing and planned development would not confound or cause
significant additional direct or indirect impacts. The use of pesticides would in the longer term increase
in the project area however the increase in use is not significant, relative to the current pesticide use in
the region.

Linked activities including ongoing and past dike strengthening, and wastewater treatment operations
are consistent with and support the project objectives and national laws, leading to no indirect or long
term detrimental impacts outside of those that have been identified as part of the project
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Dam construction: Dam construction was considered at the very beginning of project preparation, but
soon was abandoned because the project area does not have appropriate geological conditions for
building oflarge dams and significant adverse impacts could be caused by these activities.

River courses: Originally it was proposed that changing of river courses would be implemented, but
these were not adopted to avoid impacts on the ecology of the area. For similar reasons the choice of the
river bank protection structures considered the advantage of choosing a structure that would better
support river bank ecology and natural aesthetics.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has hired institutions to prepare the EIA and EMPs and the RAP. In addition, experienced
consultants, familiar with Bank standards of preparation have been engaged by the borrower to carl)' out
the Social Assessment. The borrower is committed to setting up the required implementation
management arrangements, including a Resettlement Office and Environmental Office as part of the
Project Implementation management organizational structure. These dedicated management
organizations would be supplemented by Expert Panels.

 Environmental Management Plan: In order to mitigate the environmental impacts, an environmental
management plan has been developed that includes environmental protection measures that will be
required to be implemented under the project. The outline of the EMP is as follows:
 Design measures: The design of all the components has integrated environmental measures that will be
required to be implemented by the contractors. These most importantly include the design choices for
the dike strengthening (to maintain and enhance the riparian and river ecology), gully works (avoiding
large dams) and reforestation (avoiding invasive species), but also other measures including those
designed to minimize conversion of productive land, erosion and ensure adequate facilities for workers.

  Construction: For all works, rules for contractors will be included in contract specifications to help
 mitigate general impacts including waste management, noise, erosion control, safety and construction
 camp management. For the large works, a series of site specific measures are considered. In particular,
 special measures were taken to ensure construction will not disturb the population and activities around
 the Temple and residential and schools. Other site specific measures include those intended to protect
 ecological areas and erosion prone gullies during construction.       ·

  Pest Management Plan: A PMP has been prepared based on existing Provincial and National Integrated
 Pesticide Management Plans and included as part of the EIA and also as a stand-alone document. The
 document assesses pest management in the project area, to support integrated pest management (!PM),
 the safe use of agricultural pesticides, and to mitigate potential environmental impacts. It includes
 non-chemical approaches to pest control, monitoring and evaluation procedures, guidelines for the use
 of appropriate pesticides and a plan for capacity building at local institutional and community levels.

 Social aspects on the original project
  Ethnic Minorities Development Plan: As described above, ethnic minorities constitute a large
 proportion of residents potentially affected in the participatory watershed management component. A
 draft Ethnic Minorities Development Plan (EMDP) has been prepared, documenting consultation
 processes and results, and describing tentatively identified benefit programs for each affected gully area,
 to offmg set restrictions on resource use required for improved erosion and sedimentation control. The
 EMDP includes tentative cost estimates and financial arrangements. Final design of benefit programs
 will be determined, and implementation will be undertaken, at least in part, in a participatory manner, as
 described in a separate resettlement
                                 .     process framework that will. guide implementation.
  Resettlement Action Plan: The RAP sets forth a series of measures for livelihood compensation and
 rehabilitation in consultation with local affected communities and households. All these measures aim to
 minimiZe resettlement wherever possible, and, where resettlement cannot be avoided, to ensure proper
 relocation and rehabilitation of the affe~ted households so that they will be appropriately compensated
 for their losses, and their incomes and living standards will be improved or at least restored to the
 pre-project levels in a susiainable manner. In addition, in view of any potential restriction of access to
 living resources caused by afforestration and pasture alternation under the watershed rehabilitation
 component, a Process Framework was also developed in order to ensure timely assistance from the
 project to the affect people in their efforts for reestablishing resources and regenerating livelihoods.
 Based on three pilot sub-watersheds, principles and strategic measures for communities' participation in
 watershed rehabilitation design and implementation were set forth in the Framework for the remaining
 gullies to follow during project implementation. Moreover, the internal and external monitoring
 mechanism for the RAP implementation was designed and would be established as well to ensure that
 all the protection and rehabilitation mea sures for the affected people are properly implemented.

  Social aspects on the proposed new activities
  By the end of2013, 1556 mu of land was acquired including 1377 mu collective land, 192 farmer
  households were relocated, with total compensation fee disbursed at RMB 158 million. The
· resettlement implementation is proceeding well under regular and qualified external monitoring by
Hohai University. The RP implementation is generally satisfied. In the actual implementation, there is
no restriction of access happening, and so there is no need to implement the PF. The prepared EMDP
was well executed and monitored, and the specific assistance measures in the EMPD were properly
adjusted to meet the real demands of the affected ethnic minority villagers, who are satisfied with the
implementation results.

A supplementary RAP has prepared for the newly added activities in compliance with applicable
Chinese regulations and standards, as well as the safeguard policies of the World Bank. These activities
will cause similar envirorunent and resettlement impacts and were provided with similar mitigation
measures as those listed in the original safeguards documents during construction and operation phases.

 Dam Safety: The Borrower has made a remedial work plan for the Class C dams and a dam safety
review plan for those dams. The borrow has also issued guidelines and regulations for dam safety
management, including Reservoir Dam Safety Management Regulation, Regulations on Reservoir Dam
Safety Review, Guidelines for Dam safety Review, Guidelines for Emergency Preparedness Plan, and
Guidelines for Operation, Maintenance and Surveillance of Dams. During Project implementation, the
Bank will, together with the Dam Safety Expert Panel hired by the borrower, supervise the     ·
implementation of the remedial work plans and dam safety review and acceptance plans to ensure that
the Project complies with the OP4.37.

New impacts and measures under the restructuring activities

By the end of2013, 1556 mu of land was acquired including 1377 mu collective land, 192 farmer
households were relocated, with total compensation fee disbursed at RMB !58 million. The resettlement
implementation is proceeding well under regular and qualified external monitoring by Hohai University.
The RP implementation is generally satisfied. The prepared EMDP was well executed and monitored,
and the specific assistance measures in the EMPD were properly adjusted to meet the real demands of
the affected ethnic minority villagers, who are satisfied with the implementation results.

A supplementary RAP and a supplementary EMP have been prepared for the newly added activities in
compliance with applicable Chinese regulations and standards, as well as the safeguard policies of the
World Bank. These activities will cause similar environment and resettlement impacts as those listed in
the original safeguards documents during construction and operation phases.
Progress report for the ongoing project has been prepared by the PMO, confirming that
safeguards-related activities are being satisfactorily implemented and that there are no significant
outstanding safeguard implementation issues.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In order to learn the local situation and the project impact on it, a social assessment (SA) was carried out
by a consultant team composed of9 anthropologists and sociologists from the Central University of
Nationalities and Qinghai Ethnic Minority Research Institute, in cooperation with the PMO staff and
local authorities . After primary survey of ethnic minority information in the project areas, the SA team
conducted intensive sample surveys and PRA fieldwork in 17 villages and communities scattering in 8
townships and S counties/districts where ethnic minorities lived with Han people together, with a focus
on the Hui and Tibetan populations concentrated communities. In these sample villages; informed
consultation and two-way flow of communication were conducted through village meetings and focus
groups; 130 farm households were visited to carry out household interviews and more than 70 persons
underwent in-depth interviews. In addition, after training by the SA team, county PMO staff also
conducted a project information campaign and consultations over all the villages .in the 17
sub-watersheds under the project. As a result, the project social assessment report and EMDP were
developed with assurance of broad support to the project from local ethnic minority groups.
 At the same time, in order to avoid or/and mitigate project adverse impacts caused by resettlement, the
project resettlement team comprising professional consultants imd project staff conducted several
rounds of public consultation and surveys among the affected communities and households. Each of the
village communities and the relocated families were visited, consulted and measured. The RAP was
developed and finalized through the process of convocation of public opinions, solicitation of feedback
from in-house interviews, as ';Yell as detailed site measuring and discussing to reach agreements on final
calculations of property losses and compensations. In addition, a detailed sample socio-economic survey
of200 households, about 21% of the affected rural people, was conducted, based on which local
livelihood rehabilitation was assessed and planned. Overall, the RAP described in detail the rationale
and the time-bound steps for adequate compensations and assistance provisions to the affected
households and units in resettlement implementation.

 For the environmental assessment, two rounds of consultation.were undertaken during the EA
preparation, one round at the beginning of the EA preparation and the second before finalization. The
consultations included project affected people and residents in each of the project areas as well as
relevant city and local government representatives. The consultations show that many of the residents of
the project area knew of the project and 95% expressed support for the project. The consultations also
indicated that the construction should be scheduled to avoid interference with farming, that they should
avoid fannland and woodland as much as possible. Consultation with the Huangzhong County religious
administration associated with the Temple indicated they were supportive of the project, did not believe
there would be significant impact on their activities and requested there not be construction at night.

 The environmental and social safeguards documents were placed in county libraries and County
Project Management Offices (CPMOs} for public disclosure before the project appraisal, and lodged in
the Bank's lnfoShop.

The supplementmy RAP and EMP were publicly consulted and distributed locally on April 18, 20 14.
They were disclosed atthe Bank's lnfoShop on April20 and April!, 2014 respectively.·

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    01-Apr-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 01-Apr-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the      13-Dec-2008
EA to the Executive Directors ·
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                           18-Aug-20 13
Comments: Only the supplementary EMP for the restructuring project needs to be re-disclosed
          locally and at the lnfoShop.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     I 0-Apr-20 14
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  20-Apr-20 14
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                       18-Apr-2014
Comments: Only the supplementary RAP for the restructuring project needs to be re-disclosed
          locally and at the lnfoShop.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 01-Nov-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              07-Apr-2009         .
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                       06-Nov-2008
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                              Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 13-Dec-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                                              I5-Dec-2008
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                                       22-Dec-2008
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OPIBP/GP 4.01- Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X]         No I l   NA I l
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager    Yes [X]       No I l   NA I I
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes (X]     No[ I    NA I l
credit/loan?
OP 4.09- Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?          Yes [XJ       No I I   NA I I
Is a separate PMP required?                                         Yes lXI       No I I   NA I l
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards      Yes (X]       No I I   NA I I
specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included in project
design?lfyes, does the project team include a Pest Management
Specialist?
 OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework {as       Yes [XI     No! I    NA [ I
 appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
 Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [X I    No l I   NA [ I
 Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Yes [X I    No[ I    NA l I
 reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
 Sector Manager?
 OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement ·
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [X I      No l I   NA [ I
 framework {as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or     Yes [X I   No[ I    NA l I
 Sector Manager review the plan?
 OP/BP 4.37- Safety ofD.ains
· Have dam safetY plans been prepared?                                Yes tXI    No l I   NA [ I
 Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Yes [X I      No l I   NA [ I
 Experts {POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
 Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan {EPP) been prepared and           Yes !X I   No[ I    NA [ I
 arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
 Have.relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X]       No I I   NA [ I
 Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X I    No l I   NA l I
 in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
 project-affected groups and local NGOs?
 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [X)    No [ I   NA [ I
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [X)    No l I   NA [ I
 project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [X I   No[ I    NA l I
 the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
 safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [X]    No[ I    NA [ I
 the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
 legal documents?


 III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:              Name: Ximing Zhang
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor:
Sector Manager:                                     ' ,•
