                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR6589
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                                        Project ID:           P091950
                            Project Name:      CN-Guizhou Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development
                                               (P091950)
                            Task Team          Meskerem Brhane
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       08-Sep-2008                                     Estimated   05-May-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GURDR                                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Other industry (43%), Other social services (24%), General water, sanitation and
                                               flood protection sector (13%), General transportati on sector (13%), General
                                               industry and trade sector (7%)
                            Theme:             Rural non-farm income generation (37%), Cultural Heritage (37%), Other
                                               environment and natural resources management (26%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        90.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       60.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             30.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                60.00
                              Total                                                                                                90.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives



                                                                                 Page 1 of 8
                         Project development objectives are to achieve: (a) a higher level of livelihood productivity among
                         residents of participating historical and cultural villages/d                               istricts in
                         Guizhou Province; and (b) a high level of satisfaction among cultura
Public Disclosure Copy




                         l and eco-tourists visiting participating sites while protecting the cultural an
                         d natural assets effectively. These objectives would be achieved by undertaking
                         prioritized and sustainable investments in infrastructure, initiatives to enhanc
                         e incomes of the ethnic minority population, and a set of tourism industry inter
                         ventions paying special attention to the natural and cultural heritage of Guizho
                         u, as well as by capacity building in the tourism and protection sectors.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         Project development objectives are to achieve: (a) a higher level of livelihood productivity among
                         residents of participating historical and cultural villages/d                               istricts in
                         Guizhou Province; and (b) a high level of satisfaction among cultura
                         l and eco-tourists visiting participating sites while protecting the cultural an
                         d natural assets effectively. These objectives would be achieved by undertaking
                         prioritized and sustainable investments in infrastructure, initiatives to enhanc
                         e incomes of the ethnic minority population, and a set of tourism industry inter
                         ventions paying special attention to the natural and cultural heritage of Guizho
                         u, as well as by capacity building in the tourism and protection sectors.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project had been in problem status since February 2012 when it was rated Unsatisfactory due to
                         slow implementation progress arising from complexity of project design, ambitious scope and wide
                         geographic coverage. The pace of project implementation improved remarkably following the
                         midterm review of January 2013. A Level 1 restructuring is proposed as the PDO is being revised.
                         Additional changes include: i) modification of some subcomponents/activities; ii) simplification of
                         implementation procedures; iii) updating the Results Framework to monitor project impacts in line
                         with the revised PDO; iv) extending the Loan Closing Date; and (v) amending the legal agreements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to incorporate the above changes and introduce implementation flexibility and clarity by moving
                         procedural matters to the Operations Manual.

                         Two activities have been added under the restructuring: i) technical assistance to local communities
                         to conserve their intangible cultural heritage assets and ii) construction of an Intangible Cultural
                         Heritage Center in Danzhai. Several other cultural centers, similar to what is being proposed under
                         the restructuring have already been constructed under the project.

                         Two subcomponents are being dropped: (a) the museum for the Dingxiao National Geo-Park
                         subcomponent since the local government has not been able to propose a realistic design that can be
                         completed within the life of the project and also secure counterpart financing; and (b) the Provincial
                         Tourist Information and Service Center because of the inability of the local government to locate
                         suitable land.

                         The restructured project comprises four components, as summarized below.

                         Component 1: Ethnic Minority Cultural Heritage Protection (US$ 50.55 million), including (a) small
                         scale infrastructure facilities in villages and towns; (b) protection of unique historic buildings and
                         establishment of cultural and visitor centers; (c) pilot rehabilitation of traditional private houses; and
                         (d) intangible cultural heritage protection (arts, crafts and music, etc).

                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         Component 2: Natural Heritage and Scenic Site Protection and Development (US$ 20.10 million),
                         including improvements to infrastructure and tourism facilities in: (a) Guanling Geo-Park in Anshun
                         Municipality; (b) Wanfenglin National Scenic Area in Qian Xinan Prefecture; and (c) Shibing Sanmu
Public Disclosure Copy




                         River Scenic Area in Qian Dongnan Prefecture.
                         Component 3: Tourism Gateway Town Facilities (US$ 18.79 million), including the construction of:
                         (a) three county-level tourist information centers in Qian Dongnan Prefecture; and (b) a Guizhou
                         Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development Center in Guiyang.
                         Component 4: Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support (US$ 1.81 million), including:
                         (a) technical assistance for project implementation and capacity building; (b) PMO strengthening and
                         training for tourism sector staff; (c) revision of the Guizhou Tourism Master Plan and development
                         of guidelines for the conservation of traditional buildings and environments in minority villages; and
                         (d) tourism promotion in Qian Dongnan Prefecture.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Guizhou is located in southwest China and borders Sichuan, Chongqing, Hunan, Guangxi, and
                         Yunnan Provinces. It has a total area of 176,100 km2, and an average altitude of 1,100 m. About
                         92.5% of Guizhou is mountainous and has hilly areas, and 61.9% is featured with Karst topography -
                         the most outstanding characteristic of Guizhou’s physical environment. Guizhou is located in the
                         subtropical monsoon zone, characterized by a warm and humid climate.

                         Guizhou has an abundance of surface water which principally comprises two river systems, the
                         Yangtze and Pearl River basins. Surface water quality is generally good according to national
                         standard; however, the water quality at the urban sections of the rivers is a serious environmental
                         issue.

                         Guizhou has one of China’s most pristine environments. Botanical resources of the province are well
                         known for a large amount of rare flora, ancient trees of historic and cultural value, and a wide spread
                         of planted forests. Guizhou also provides habitat for a range of wildlife. Protected fauna include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Golden Monkeys and birdlife. Investigation shows that there are no protected ancient trees or rare
                         flora in project towns/villages. Some of the project locations have ancient trees which are far from
                         construction sites or are well protected. No significant impacts are anticipated.

                         In 2004 Guizhou’s population of 39 million comprised 26% of urban residents. Guizhou is the home
                         to 49 ethnic minority groups with a population of 13.39 million, which accounts for 36.77% of
                         Guizhou’s total population. Ethnic groups whose population exceeds 100,000 include the Miao,
                         Buyi, Dong, Tujia, Yi, Gelao, Shui, Hui and Bai.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mark C. Woodward (GURDR)
                         Jun Zeng (GURDR)
                         Xin Ren (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Project implementation has been challenging due to the complexity of project design, ambitious
                              scope and wide geographic coverage. The safeguards instruments (EMP, RAP and IPP) designed
                              under the project are adequate and effective. An independent and external environmental monitor
                              has been providing satisfactory and regular monitoring reports. Some challenges related to
                              safeguards include implementing some of the recommendations of the environmental monitor,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              especially as it relates to management of construction sites and the delay in recruiting an
                              independent and external social safeguards monitor. Both of these challenges are now being
                              addressed following the midterm review mission. First, a more proactive supervision by the
                              Provincial Project Management Office and Project Management Consultant is resulting in the
                              implementation of the recommendations of the external monitor. Second, the loan will finance the
                              social safeguards monitor whose recruitment is now being finalized.

                             The restructured project addresses the sustainable development of Guizhou’s cultural and natural
                             heritage, and has been delivering positive benefits in improved preservation and conservation of
                             the heritage. The project has been instilling a commitment to, and practical experience of,
                             sustainable approaches to tourism development amongst the government and the public in
                             Guizhou, resulting in enhanced cultural heritage appreciation, environmental sustainability and
                             economic development of isolated populations.

                             The project has also been delivering positive environmental and social benefits. The local
                             environmental conditions are improving; social and economic benefits are being realized by
                             accelerated development of service industry and increasing number of tourists. Economic
                             development
                             driven by tourism enhances incentives for the protection of natural and cultural heritage.



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                          The project components have caused a variety of short-term impacts, such as dust, noise, and soil
                          erosion, etc. However, those impacts are relatively minor and the developed instruments are
                          proved to be sufficient and measures have been taken to reduce the impacts to acceptable levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement impacts have been limited. In most cases, land needed for the village project was
                          obtained through land adjustment or donation. Facilities built under gateway and scenic area
                          subprojects used mostly empty state owned land. For the temporary resettlement of some
                          occupants in Huangping Jiuzhou, a due diligence report was prepared, which a Bank review found
                          to be satisfactory and demonstrates that the resettlement process was handled appropriately.

                          Majority of beneficiaries of the project are minorities including Miao, Dong and Buyi.

                           The new activities are similar to the investments already identified in the original project; as a
                           result, the disclosed safeguard instruments remain valid.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The project has been causing a variety of short-term impacts during construction phase, as
                           described above.

                           On the other hand, during the operation phase, some longer-term environmental impacts and issues
                           might be appeared, such as inappropriate solid waste collection and disposal, and noise
                           management. However, many of the concerns have been addressed in the design of the facilities.
                           The local capacity of environmental management is being strengthened through the TA
                           component supported by Bank loan.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Impacts of “with and without the project” have been analyzed during the preparation of EA
                           documents. Analysis reveals that the proposed project would promote sustainable development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           tourism industry in favor of the protection of Guizhou’s cultural and natural heritages and poverty
                           alleviation. Adverse impacts will be avoided or mitigated by implementing the EMP prepared.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             To address the safeguards issues, a comprehensive EA/Environmental Management Plan (EMP),
                           individual EMPs for each subcomponent, a consolidated RAP including a resettlement policy
                           framework have been developed. Social assessment has been carried out and free, prior and
                           informed consultation with affected minority groups was conducted during project preparation and
                           a community participation and operational manual has been prepared.

                           The borrower’s capacity in implementing the developed measures developed in the safeguard
                           related instruments has been improving. The overall compliance of safeguards has been
                           satisfactory, yet the monitoring and evaluation of RAP are delayed. Under the restructuring, the
                           RAP monitoring will be supported by Bank loan. An external resettlement monitor is being
                           recruited and expected to start working soon.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environmental Safeguards



                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           In the preparation of EA safeguard documents, two rounds of public consultation were carried out
                           through questionnaire surveys, expert consultations, household interviews and public hearings
                           during the preparation of the project. The first round was conducted when preparing EA terms of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           reference (TOR) in April and May, 2007, while the second round was when completing a draft EA
                           report in November and December, 2007. Participants in public consultation were mainly from
                           individuals who would be potentially affected by the project, organizations/institutes, NGOs and
                           experts.

                           Information on the project and potential environmental impacts has been publicly disclosed
                           through various means, such as the Internet (www.ghidri.com.cn) and local newspaper (Guizhou
                           Daily, Jan 30, 2008).

                           Social Safeguards

                           Public consultation and participation was a key element in resettlement planning. Free, prior and
                           informed consultation with minorities in the project areas was conducted through the process of
                           social assessment. As a result, a community participation and operational manual has been
                           developed. The resettlement action plan and resettlement policy framework have been publicly
                           disclosed through local media (Guizhou Daily, April 24, 2008, and Qiandongnan Daily, April 3,
                           2008). These documents can be accessible through internet (www.gz-travel.net and www.mdlyw.
                           com) as well as in the PMO offices. The government at different levels have committed for
                           implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        22-Apr-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Dec-2008
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        17-Oct-2008
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              30-Jan-2008
                           Comments: Information on the project and potential environmental impacts has been publicly
                                         disclosed through various means, such as the Internet (www.ghidri.com.cn) and local
                                         newspaper.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-May-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Dec-2008
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              03-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The resettlement action plan and resettlement policy framework have been publicly
                                         disclosed through local media (Guizhou Daily, April 24, 2008, and Qiandongnan
                                         Daily, April 3, 2008).
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-May-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Dec-2008


                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         IPP elements have been incorporated into overall project design. Therefore individual IPP disclosure
                         is not required.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Meskerem Brhane
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                          Date: 07-Jul-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager:   Name:                                              Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 8 of 8
