                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                             Report No.: 94041
.




Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           29 January, 2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Colombia             Project ID:               P148552
    Project Name:                Collective Reparation for Victims Through Social Reconstruction
    Task Team Leader:            Pia Peeters
    Estimated Board Date:        NA
    Managing Unit:               GSURR
    Sector(s):                   Other social services, sub-national government administration
    Theme(s):                    Conflict Prevention and Post-Conflict Reconstruction (50%),
                                 Participation Engagement (25%), Social Inclusion (25%)
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00             No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                 Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       4.7 Million              Total Bank Financing:     4.7 Million
    Financing Gap:            0 Million
      Financing Source                                                                           Amount
      Borrower
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                               US$ 4.7 Million
      Total                                                                               US$ 4.7 Million
    Environmental Category: B
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred        No
    project?
.


.




    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The objective of this project is to strengthen and deploy a model for the Collective Victim Reparation
    Program for Victims at the national and local level based upon documentation and systematization of
    the implementation of selected Collective Reparation Plans.
    3. Project Description
    The project will comprise the following components: (i) strengthening national and sub-national
    capacities to implement the collective reparation program; (ii) supporting the implementation of
    measures of Collective Reparation Plans (CRPs) for ethnic and non-ethnic subjects and (iii) generating
    knowledge and learning on collective reparations.

    Component 1. Strengthening national and sub-national capacities to implement the collective
    reparation program (US$1.2 million). The project will assist the Victims Unit (VU) in validating and
    improving a collective reparations framework and develop a flexible methodology that stakeholders at
    the national and local level can use to scale-up the implementation of comprehensive reparation
    programs. Specifically, this component will support: (a) strengthening the VU implementation
    capacity at the national and territorial level; (b) strengthening local authorities to design and
    implement CRPs with ethnic and non-ethnic subjects; (c) strengthening Collective Reparation Subjects
    CRSs (e.g. Comités de Impulso and Grupos de Apoyo)1 for the design and implementation of their
    CRPs and (d) program management.

    Component 2. Supporting the implementation of measures of Collective Reparation Plans for ethnic
    and non-ethnic subjects (US$2.8 million). This component will support the implementation of selected
    CRPs that are the direct responsibility of the VU, using the framework for collective reparations
    developed by the VU. Specifically, this component will support: (a) the selection of CRPs to be
    supported by the project; (b) the development of an implementation strategy for each selected CRP at
    the national and local level and (c) the implementation of selected reparation measures of selected
    CRPs.

        (a) Selection of CRPs to be supported by the project using the framework for collective
            reparations. The first stage of the framework includes criteria for the selection of CRSs, and
            the second describes the selection of eligible actions under the CRPs.

            Selection of Collective Reparation Subjects. The selection criteria of CRSs include: (i)
            institutional readiness, (ii) emblematic features of collective reparation, (iii) potential for early
            wins and (iv) implementation capacity. Institutional readiness is assessed by: (i) level of
            preparation of CRPs, (ii) level of community mobilization and participation (e.g., Comites de
            Impulso and Grupos de Apoyo), (iii) buy-in by all critical stakeholders and (iv) involvement of
            the local government and state agencies. Emblematic features of collective reparations are
            indicated by: (i) the visibility of the case in the national and historical context and (ii) its
            potential to be scaled-up in similar situations. The potential for early wins includes the
            likelihood of quick results and the contribution of the collective reparation process to building
            trust in the state. Finally, implementation capacity involves the grade of difficulty for logistics,
            security conditions, and the presence of capable implementing agencies at the local level.

            Selection of Collective Reparation Plans. The second stage of the framework is the selection
            of eligible measures for subprojects under the CRPs. The menu of eligible actions identified in
            the CRPs gives priority to activities considered relevant for building trust among victims,
            communities, and the state as well as those with the potential for early wins, including:

             Restitution of the economic and productive capacity of collective reparation subjects,


1
  Comités de Impulso are counterpart community groups that have been selected by the non-ethnic collective reparation subject to
represent its views and interests with the VU and other state and private entities involved in the process of preparing the CRP.
The counterpart mechanism of the ethnic groups is called Grupos de Apoyo.
        which includes, inter alia, the following type of actions: i) restoration of small-scale
        income-generation activities and livelihoods related to farm and non-farm productive
        services; ii) restitution of small business activities; iii) restitution of productive assets lost
        as a result of violence and iv) technical assistance to rural families to promote the re-
        establishment of associative arrangements disrupted by the armed conflict.

     Development of human and social capital for meaningful participation, organization and
      violence prevention as measures for non-repetition, which includes, inter alia: i)
      promotion of children, women, and youth empowerment; ii) gender-based violence
      prevention; iii) enhancing the role of the media in building peaceful relations; iv) conflict
      resolution and v) prevention of child and youth recruitment by illegal armed groups.

     Community infrastructure for human development and social cohesion, which includes,
      inter alia: i) rehabilitation of education infrastructure; ii) rehabilitation of health centers;
      iii) renovation and upgrading of sports facilities and iv) renovation of centers for
      community reconstruction and social cohesion.

    Non-eligible activities for financing under the project include: (i) large infrastructure projects
    such as roads, aqueducts, hospitals; (ii) actions located in national parks and protected areas;
    (iii) actions resulting in changes to the management, utilization, or protection of any forested
    area; (iv) actions that affect the physical and cultural resources of communities; (v)
    interventions that cause involuntary resettlement; (vi) recurrent costs such as payment of
    teachers, doctors, or public employees; and (vii) land purchase.

    In the selection of CRPs, the VU will pay special attention to ensure selected CRPs are
    focusing on addressing direct effects of the conflict rather than overall development challenges
    of vulnerable groups. Each year, the VU will present for approval to the Bank the selected
    CRPs identified for support under the project. At least one CRP will benefit women
    associations, and over the life-time of the project 50 percent will support ethnic CRSs. Criteria
    for selecting geographical locations will include their potential to demonstrate mid-term
    results, their sustainability, and ability to be scaled-up.

(b) Development of implementation strategy for each selected CRPs at the national and local
    level. For each of the selected CRPs to be supported by the project, a detailed implementation
    strategy will be developed including (i) identification of respective roles of the CRSs, local
    authorities and the VU at the national and territorial level, as well as identification of potential
    implementation partners as needed (for example local authorities, NGOs), (ii) capacity
    building plan for the respective partners in the implementation of the CRPs, and (iii)
    development of detailed action plan for implementation including time-lines and budget.

    For CRPs of social infrastructures, the VU will ensure that the rehabilitations or renovations
    do not fall under the responsibilities of the respective line ministries and will only (co)–finance
    the rehabilitation or renovations as a last resource of financing. In addition, before undertaking
    the rehabilitation or renovations of social infrastructures, the VU will develop agreements with
    the respective line ministries for the maintenance and functioning of the social infrastructures,
    including provisions of public employees.

(c) Implementation of selected CRPs. The project will finance fully or partially the selected
    CRPs in close collaboration with CRSs, communities and local authorities. During
    implementation, the VU will organize on a quarterly basis workshop with all partners involved
            in the implementation of the CRPs to (i) promote collective learning, (ii) identify key
            challenges and develop mitigation measures, (iii) adjust detailed action plans as needed and
            (iv) collect lessons learnt for the development of a model for implementation of CRPs.

    Component 3. Generating knowledge and learning on collective reparations (US$ 0.7 million). Given
    the innovative nature of the collective reparations approach, the project will support specific activities
    to ensure lessons learnt are captured and feed into the development of a model for scaling-up the
    collective reparation program, as well as establish a network for a continuous and informed dialogue
    and knowledge sharing among internal and external key stakeholders. Specifically, this component
    will support: (a) the implementation of a monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management
    strategy to measure the results of the CRPs and (b) the promotion of learning exchanges including
    south-south learning.


    4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
    The specific nature and location of the selected Collective Reparation Plans to be supported by the
    project have yet to be identified, as well as which indigenous communities will be targeted. Criteria for
    the selection of municipalities, communities or groups to benefit from support through the project have
    been defined and included in the Project Implementation Manual.
.




    5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    German Freire, Social Development Specialist, ( GSURR )
    Carlos Vargas, Environmental Specialist (GENDR)

.




    6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             The project is classified as
                                                                   environmental category B per OP/BP
                                                                   4.01, as the CRPs involve potentially
                                                                   small-scale infrastructure with no likely
                                                                   significant or long-term environmental
                                                                   or social impacts. The adverse impacts
                                                                   associated with potential works can be
                                                                   prevented or mitigated with standard
                                                                   measures, Environmental Management
                                                                   Plans, or environmental guidance for
                                                                   construction.

                                                                   Since the specific nature and location of
                                                                   the selected CRPs have yet to be
                                                                   identified, an Environment Management
                                                                   Framework (EMF) has been prepared by
                                                                   the client. The EMF is based on the
                                                                   existing national legislation and includes
                                                                   a guide on good environmental practices
                                                                for construction regulations that will be
                                                                mandatory for contractors hired by the
                                                                VU. It also details responsibilities
                                                                related to the supervision of
                                                                environmental aspects in contracts
                                                                during construction, environmental
                                                                audits of projects, and participation of
                                                                and consultation with project
                                                                beneficiaries.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No              The project will not result in changes to
                                                                natural habitats. Non-eligible activities
                                                                under the project include actions located
                                                                in national parks and protected areas.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No              Non-eligible activities under the project
                                                                include actions resulting in changes ot
                                                                the management, utilization, or
                                                                protection of any forested area.
    Pest Management OP 4.09                     No              The project will not support the
                                                                procurement or use of pesticides or other
                                                                agricultural chemicals, or lead to the
                                                                increased use of such chemicals.
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11      No              Non-eligible activities for financing
                                                                under the project include actions that
                                                                affect the physical and cultural resources
                                                                of communities.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10               Yes             Project beneficiaries will include
                                                                indigenous communities affected by the
                                                                conflict, which have been identified as
                                                                group/collective victims and as such
                                                                operational policy OP/BP 4.10 has been
                                                                triggered. Since the specific location of
                                                                the selected CRPs have yet to be
                                                                identified, as well as which indigenous
                                                                communities will be targeted, an
                                                                Indigenous People Planning Framework
                                                                (IPPF) has been prepared by the client.
                                                                OP 4.10 is being applied in accordance
                                                                with Colombia’s broader legal definition
                                                                of ethnic minorities, which includes
                                                                people of African descendent and Roma
                                                                communities. Consultations on the IPPF
                                                                were held with representatives of
                                                                relevant organization and communities
                                                                from the three main ethnic monitories.2



2
 Ethnic organizations and communities included: Consejo Comunitario Renacer Negro -Timbiqui-Cauca; Consejo
Comunitario Mayor Bajo Atrato- Cocomaunguia; Pueblo Embera de Pueblo Rico y Mistrató- Risaralda; Comunidad
                                                                 Key recommendations from the
                                                                 consultations include: i) to strengthen
                                                                 capacities of the VU, particularly at the
                                                                 local level, to work with ethnic CRSs; ii)
                                                                 to ensure meaningful participation of
                                                                 ethnic groups in the design,
                                                                 implementation and oversight of CRPs
                                                                 for ethnic CRSs; and iii) to include
                                                                 indicators to monitor implementation of
                                                                 CPRs targeting ethnic communities in
                                                                 the results matrix. All recommendations
                                                                 were fully incorporated across all the
                                                                 three project’s components, particularly
                                                                 component 1 and 2.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12          No              Non-eligible activities for financing
                                                                 under the project include any
                                                                 interventions that cause involuntary
                                                                 resettlement and land purchase.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No              The project will not finance the
                                                                 construction of new, or rehabilitation of
                                                                 existing, dams. Also, no project
                                                                 investments will rely on the operation of
                                                                 existing dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                 The project will not support activities
    7.50                                                         which affect international waterways as
                                                                 defined under the policy.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        No              The project will not be implemented in
                                                                 areas known to involve disputed areas as
                                                                 defined in the policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
    describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project is not expected to have large scale, significant or irreversible environmental or social
    impacts. Project activities are focused on capacity strengthening, developing of a model of
    implementing CRPs on a large scale at the national and local level, and learning.

    The project will have a broad beneficial social impact. Collective reparations target vulnerable groups
    and communities that have been recognized as collective subjects of reparation because of their
    culture, inhabited territory, or common purpose. Supporting these groups through small-scale
    community-driven projects would help to move beneficiaries out of vulnerability as a building block
    to overcome poverty, create spillover benefits for other community members and neighboring
    communities, and increase social cohesion. The project will support victims’ participation in the


Negra de Guacoche; Pueblo Embera de Florencia –Caquetá; Pueblo Kankuamo, Cesar. The consultations were held
in April 2014 through workshops.
design, oversight, and implementation of CRPs. Additionally, specific activities have been planned to
develop a community feedback and grievance redress mechanism with the project’s beneficiaries.
Special attention will be paid to support CRPs for ethnic groups and women associations.

Activities under Component 2, Supporting the implementation of measures of Collective Reparation
Plans for ethnic and non-ethnic subjects, have a potential to cause minor adverse impacts that will
need to be minimized, mitigated and managed. However, these anticipated impacts will be temporary,
site specific and limited in scope. To this end, operational policy OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered. In
addition, the project will target indigenous communities affected by conflict, and as such operational
policy OP/BP 4.10 has been triggered. OP 4.10 is being applied in accordance to Colombia’s broader
definition of ethnic minorities in its regulatory framework, which includes people of African descent
and Roma communities. Since the specific nature and location of the selected CRPs have yet to be
identified, as well as which indigenous communities will be targeted, an Environment Management
Framework (EMF) and an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) have been prepared and
disclosed on the VU web page and the Bank’s Infoshop.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Given the small physical footprint of the subprojects and activities to be financed, and the project’s
demand-driven approach, no significant indirect or long term impacts are anticipated. Furthermore, the
project’s long-term and indirect impacts are expected to be positive and beneficial. These impacts
include improved public health infrastructure, and well-being and livelihoods of the targeted
communities. Through the provision of technical assistance and training to community organizations,
the project will also promote the victims’ participation in the design, oversight, and evaluation of
reparation subprojects.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Victims Unit prepared and disclosed an EMF and IPPF and has the capacity to implement them.
The VU has a fully operational Ethnic Affairs Unit (EAU) with sufficient experience and personnel to
implement and oversee the IPPF. Throughout the design and consultation process related to the IPPF,
the Ethnic Affairs Unit exhibited strong technical skills and commitment to work with the affected
communities in the implementation of the IPPF. The project will also provide technical assistance to
improve the EAU’s oversight capacity during the implementation of collective reparations targeting
ethnic communities, and facilitate learning exchange among collective reparation subjects.

The VU has a team responsible for monitoring and oversight of works and infrastructure in the Sub-
direction of Collective Reparation, which will be responsible for monitoring implementation of the
EMF. In addition, a technical supervisor who will oversee the activities on-site and report directly to
the central office will be hired for each infrastructure supported by the project. Furthermore, each
contract for infrastructure related works will include a clause that states the obligation of the contractor
to comply with the EMF. Finally, in their reports, technical supervisors will provide an assessment of
the contractors’ environmental performance.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The VU has conducted public consultations on the EMF and the IPPF with victims groups,
    representatives of ethnic groups, civil society organizations, academia, and other stakeholders.
    Minutes of the stakeholder meetings, including proposed recommendations, were included in the
    revised versions of both documents.
.




    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   7/21/14
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                7/25/14
    For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the    NA
    EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure                                                       7/21/14
    Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   7/16/14
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                                7/25/14
    "In country" Disclosure                                                       7/21/14
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
    Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
    NA
.




    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ X ]        No [ ]   NA [ ]
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager      Yes [ X ]    No []    NA [ ]
    (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in     Yes [ X ]    No [ ]   NA [ ]
    the credit/loan?
    OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
    Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [ X ]      No [ ]   NA [ ]
    appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
    Peoples?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or      Yes [ X ]    No [ ]   NA [ ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been   Yes [ X ]    No [ ]   NA [ ]
    reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit
    or Sector Manager?
    The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]      No [ ]   NA [ ]
    Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [ X ]    No [ ]   NA [ ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
    to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
    All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
    the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
    the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
    safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [ ]   NA [ ]
    the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
    legal documents?
.
.




    III. APPROVALS
.




    Task Team Leader:              Name: Pia Peeters
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Glen S. Morgan/Maria Elena             Date: 1/30/15
                                 García Mora (Acting)
    Practice Manager:              Name: Markus Kostner                       Date: 1/31/15
