                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                       CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                         Report No.: 83462
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
April 10, 2014


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 A. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     DRC                  Project ID:              P150651
 Project Name:                DRC: Prevention and Mitigation of SGBV in North and South Kivu
 Task Team Leader:            Natacha Lemasle
 Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A                     Estimated Board Date: N/A
 Managing Unit:               AFTCS                Lending Instrument:      IPF
 Sector(s):                   Social Development
 Theme(s):                    Health and other social services
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00          No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
 Financing (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:      4,000,000                 Total Bank Financing:   4,000,000
 Total Cofinancing:       0                         Financing Gap:0
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
 State and Peace Building Fund                                                          4,000,000
     Total                                                                              4,000,000
 Environmental Category       C
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 B. Project Objectives

     1. The Project Development Objective is to achieve improved provision of services that
        promote treatment and prevention of SGBV in North and South Kivu. The project
        aims at contributing to increased social cohesion at the family and community level by
        specifically addressing issues of stigmatization and rejection of survivors of SGBV,
        who represent a particularly vulnerable group.




                                                                                                1
C. Project Description
   2. The proposed project will build upon lessons learnt from the previous project and pilot
      innovative approaches that will inform the Great Lakes Women’s Health and
      Empowerment Project. The proposed project will focus on: (i) piloting innovative
      support to address the needs of children and adolescent survivors, (ii) piloting
      activities designed to target both men and women, empower men as agents of change,
      and take the needs of men survivors into account, (iii) contributing to increasing the
      capacity of local NGOs intervening in the field of SGBV in South Kivu, and (iv)
      empowering Provincial authorities to monitor the quality of services, with a view of
      setting the grounds for a future accreditation mechanism. In particular, the proposed
      project will strengthen local government and local institutions through collaboration
      with the Provincial Health and Gender authorities, and the strengthening of CBOs.

   3. Project activities include:

      (i)     Component 1. Prevention and Service Provision

      Sub-component 1. A. Prevention
      This component will include prevention and sensitization activities through economic
      empowerment of women in the community (savings and loans associations, business
      skills training, group discussions including female members and their spouses on
      household decisions through the Economic And Social Empowerment, EASE,
      program in South Kivu), community education (including sessions conducted by male
      leaders in the community to encourage behavioral change among their peers, and
      piloting of the Engaging Men through Accountable Practice (EMAP), and support to
      CBOs (economic empowerment, training for SGBV referral).

      Sub-component 1. B. Access to basic services
      This component will focus on access to basic services for survivors, including
      medical, psychological, and legal services, with a specific emphasis on piloting new
      initiatives to respond to the specific needs of children and men. Legal support will be
      provided through local NGOs that will receive capacity building support through
      training both on management, legal aspects, and modalities of sensitive interactions
      with SGBV survivors. To ensure the provision of services in emergency situations, the
      project would also fund a mobile emergency team, designed to quickly deploy and
      provide a rapid assessment and response after an attack.

      Component 2. Local ownership on addressing SGBV

      There is currently a high demand, from the Provincial Ministries of Health, Gender,
      Family and Humanitarian Affairs Health Ministry, the National Program of Mental
      Health, and UN agencies for monitoring and improving the quality of services
      provided to survivors of SGBV. Providers of psychosocial and legal services to SGBV
      survivors are numerous in South Kivu with varying quality and limited control from
      national or provincial authorities. Component 2 aims at elaborating, testing, and
      implementing tools, in close collaboration with the Provincial Ministries of Health,

                                                                                            2
           Gender, Family and Humanitarian Affairs Health Ministry, and the National Program
           of Mental Health, to evaluate and monitor the quality of local organizations and
           institutions that provide psychosocial and legal services to survivors of SGBV.
           Component 2 will be piloted in South Kivu.


    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)
       12. Activities for sub-components 1.A. and 1.B. will be implemented in both North and
           South Kivu (except for the EA$E program that will only be funded in South Kivu), in
           a total of 26 communities. Component 2 will be piloted in South Kivu. Potential
           localized adverse environmental and social impact of the project is expected to be
           extremely limited. The project is not expected to have any long term or indirect
           negative social or environmental impact.

       13. While the project’s environmental and social risks and potential adverse impacts are
           expected to be very minor at most, a spectrum of management and mitigation
           measures exists, which builds on previously established, well tested, functional
           mechanisms The project’s concrete environmental risks would be (i) increase of
           medical waste generation in existing clinics and health centers; and (ii) environmental
           footprint / impacts of small scale economic empowerment activities. The main social
           risk would be unequal access of SGBV victims from the Batwa minority to the
           project’s services and benefits. The identified, minor risks will be addressed in the
           following manner:

       14. Potential Environmental Impacts: The project will provide referrals for survivors of
           SGBV to better access health services in North and South Kivu, but the project will
           not fund medical services or drugs, or directly support hospitals or health centers.
           Also, the implementing partner already is, under other sources of funding, providing
           such referrals. For this reason, the proposed project is not foreseen to induce a
           significant increase in the number of patients referred to existing facilities, and thus no
           increase of medical waste quantities that could not be handled under the current
           system. Moreover, medical waste management has been addressed by previous
           projects (through medical waste management procedures put in place through DfID
           and USAID-funded health projects in South Kivu that follow the WHO1 and DRC
           Government2 guidelines) and is currently managed without major challenges.

       15. The project’s small-scale economic empowerment activities using the VSLA
           methodology will mainly support advisory and business development services,
           training in basic management and business skills, as well as facilitating access to

1
  Safe management of wastes from health-care activities, WHO, 2013
http://www.healthcarewaste.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/Safe-Management-of-Wastes-from-Health-Care-A
ctivities-2.pdf
2
  “Cartes sur l’ hygiene hospitalière?, A l’intention des prestataires de soins, des gestionnaires et des usagers des
centres de santé 1ère edition?, created by the Ministry of Health as part of Integrated Health Program funded by
USAID

                                                                                                                   3
           finance and markets. VSLA start-up kits include office supplies, notebooks, ledgers, a
           calculator, and cash box. From these activities no adverse environmental impacts are
           expected.

       16. The project will provide yearly small sub-grants to CBOs, to ensure a small income to
           sustain their referral and psychosocial support to survivors of SGBV, through small
           scale economic activities. Support to 26 CBOs (13 in North Kivu and 13 in South
           Kivu) will include seeds and tools as well as small equipment and material for sawing,
           embroidery, knitting, and literacy classes. The support to small-scale activities will not
           include land acquisition, and will define a list of ineligible materials and activities,
           such as e.g. pesticides, toxic chemicals, chainsaws, or any other tools and materials
           that could be used for deforestation or cause harm to the environment. The
           implementing partner, the International Rescue Committee (IRC), has a long
           experience, including under a previous project funded by the World Bank, of working
           with CBOs and of monitoring the environmental impact of CBO activities. During the
           project it was verified during several field missions that no product or material that
           could be harmful to the environment were provided to CBOs under these previous
           activities.

       17. Access to Project’s Benefits by Indigenous Peoples: The proposed project will
           continue to implement measures successfully applied by the original project to ensure
           full participation of Indigenous Peoples in the project. Experience from the previous
           Bank-funded project implemented by IRC in the Addressing GBV in South Kivu
           Project (2010-2012) shows that Indigenous Peoples are well represented among direct
           project beneficiaries. For example between August 2010 and September 2012, 11
           percent of direct project beneficiaries were Batwa, while the estimated proportion of
           Batwa in the South Kivu population is around 10 percent.3

       18. A brief Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared to ensure there is free, prior
           and informed consultation leading to broad community support and that full inclusion
           of Indigenous Peoples in the project will continue to be actively promoted. This will
           be achieved by working through CBOs encompassing different ethnic groups within
           the communities, including Batwa. CBOs will continue to be trained and sensitized to
           ensure that Batwa in their communities are specifically targeted to receive support
           through the project. In addition, areas with higher density of Indigenous Peoples will
           be specifically targeted for prevention and sensitization campaigns by organizing
           specific awareness raising events for the Batwa after consulting with Batwa women
           and girls on topics that would be most appropriate and needed for their peers. Batwa
           women and girls will be encouraged to take part in the CBO social and economic
           activities in their localities to enhance solidarity amongst community women. The IPP
           will also address mitigation of any adverse impacts, culturally appropriate
           benefit-sharing, grievance redress, and monitoring and evaluation of impacts on
           Indigenous Peoples.


3
  G. Hall and H. A. Patrinos, eds., Indigenous Peoples, Poverty, and Development, Cambridge University Press,
2012: 123.

                                                                                                                4
 E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
    19. The project, as the previous project on Addressing GBV in South Kivu (2010-2012),
        will be implemented by IRC. Safeguards management and mitigation measures are
        building on well tested, functional existing mechanisms designed as part of the
        Addressing GBV in South Kivu Project.

    20. The IRC has worked in DRC since 1996, initially with programs in eastern DRC to
        respond to the humanitarian crisis in the region. The IRC’s WPE program in eastern
        DRC began in 2002 in South Kivu and expanded in 2007 to North Kivu. Ten years of
        program implementation and monitoring and evaluation data have contributed a
        wealth of experience and learning that is used to continually update and adapt
        approaches. In particular, IRC has a long experience, including under the previous
        project funded by the World Bank, of working with CBOs and of monitoring the
        environmental impact of CBO activities. During the previous project no product or
        material that could be harmful to the environment were provided to CBOs, and
        monitoring of CBOs was done regularly to ensure no CBO subproject had adverse
        social or environmental impacts.

    21. Medical waste management has been addressed by previous projects (through medical
        waste management procedures put in place through DfID and USAID-funded health
        projects in South Kivu that follow the WHO and DRC Government guidelines) and
        is currently managed without major challenges.

    22. Experience from the previous Bank-funded project shows that IRC successfully
        ensured the inclusion of Indigenous Peoples among direct project beneficiaries.
        Between August 2010 and September 2012, 11 percent of direct project beneficiaries
        were Batwa (the estimated proportion of Batwa in the South Kivu population is 10
        percent). ,

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

 Mr Antoine Lema (AFTCS), Wolfhart Pohl (OPSFC)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
 Safeguard Policies                Triggered ?   Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/BP    No            The only potential environmental risks
 4.01                                            concerns medical waste that may be generated
                                                 from the incremental increase of visits to
                                                 medical clinics. The project will not fund
                                                 medical services or drugs, or directly support
                                                 hospitals or health centers. Also, the
                                                 implementing partner already is, under other
                                                 sources of funding, providing such referrals.
                                                 For this reason, the proposed project is not


                                                                                              5
                                                                 foreseen to induce a significant increase in the
                                                                 number of patients referred to existing
                                                                 facilities, and thus no increase of medical
                                                                 waste quantities that could not be handled
                                                                 under the current system. Moreover, medical
                                                                 waste management is being addressed by
                                                                 previous projects (through medical waste
                                                                 management procedures put in place through
                                                                 DfID and USAID-funded health projects in
                                                                 South Kivu that follow the WHO4 and DRC
                                                                 Government 5 guidelines) and is currently
                                                                 managed without major challenges.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No
    Pest Management OP 4.09                    No
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP          No
    4.11
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              Yes               An Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared
                                                                 to ensure there is free, prior and informed
                                                                 consultation leading to broad community
                                                                 support, mitigation of any adverse impacts,
                                                                 culturally     appropriate    benefit-sharing,
                                                                 grievance redress, and monitoring and
                                                                 evaluation of impacts on Indigenous Peoples.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        No
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No

    Projects on International Waterways        No
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP           No
    7.60

III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
       A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: May 1, 2014


       B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
       needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: June
       1, 2014

4
  Safe management of wastes from health-care activities, WHO, 2013
http://www.healthcarewaste.org/fileadmin/user_upload/resources/Safe-Management-of-Wastes-from-Health-Care-A
ctivities-2.pdf
5
  “Cartes sur l’ hygiene hospitalière?, A l’intention des prestataires de soins, des gestionnaires et des usagers des
centres de santé 1ère edition?, created by the Ministry of Health as part of Integrated Health Program funded by
USAID

                                                                                                                   6
       23. Preparation of the IPP has already commenced, and the draft document will be submitted
           by April 28 for review, and clearance for disclosure by the RSA. In addition, at this time
           the appraisal stage ISDS will be prepared as draft version and submitted alongside the draft
           IPP. The targeted consultation period for the IPP is during the second and third week of
           May 2014. The target date for the finalization and disclosure of both documents, ISD and
           IPP, is June 1st, 2014.

IV. APPROVALS
 Task Team Leader:             Name: Natacha Lemasle
 Approved By:
 Regional Safeguards           Name: Alexandra Bezeredi                      Date: 04/24/2014
 Coordinator:
 Sector Manager:               Name: Ian Bannon                              Date: 04/10/2014




                                                                                                      7
