                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                           APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 01/24/2014                                  Report No.: AC7080
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Congo, Democratic Republic of       Project ID: P145196
Project Name: DRC Eastern Recovery Project
Task Team Leader: Maurizia Tovo
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 9, 2014 Estimated Board Date: February 27, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTSW                         Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                             Financing
Sector: Other social services (40%);General education sector (20%);Sub-national
government administration (20%);Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%)
Theme: Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0
IDA Amount (US$m.):             79.1
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
                                                                       0.00
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                  Yes [X]     No [ ]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to socio economic infrastructure
and improve livelihoods in vulnerable communities in the eastern provinces.

3. Project Description
The project will finance activities aiming at improving access to basic services through
collective action and at creating employment opportunities. It will have three
components: (i) community support, (ii) livelihoods and employment generation, and (iii)
capacity building and project management. The project will be implemented by the
Social Fund of DRC (FSRDC), a government agency with a successful record in
implementing similar activities with IDA financing and considerable familiarity with
Bank policies.

 Component 1: Community Support (approx. US$31 million). This component will focus
on strengthening community resilience through: (a) improving access to basic social
services; (b) facilitating and improving inclusive community participation processes; and
(c) strengthening local conflict prevention and resolution mechanisms. As every
community is different, interventions will be tailored to the specific ethnic, social,
physical and economic dynamics of each community, paying special attention to the
needs and preferences of vulnerable groups such as women and the displaced. With a
ceiling of $100,000 per community sub-project, a total of about 300 communities would
be covered by the component. The desirability of selection criteria in terms of geographic
area and risk-level will be determined as the evaluation design is firmed up, but also in
relation to the activities of other actors (e.g., both DFID and USAID finance large CDD-
type programs in the East).

 Component 2: Livelihoods and Employment Generation (approx. US$31 million). This
component will support employment creation through two sub-components that will
create short-term employment as well as sustainable livelihood options. It is expected
that employment creation will contribute both to poverty reduction and stability.
 •      Labor-intensive public works (LIPW): Road rehabilitation will be the main
activity supported, as both local authorities and development partners have been
unanimous in indicating accessibility as a crucial and urgent ingredient for both
stabilization and development. Other types of possible LIPWs could include: (i)
reforestation and other soil and water conservation works (also as natural disaster
prevention measures), and (ii) urban garbage collection and street cleaning in the main
urban centers. In rural areas, LIPWs would be implemented during the agricultural off-
season, to avoid interfering with agricultural employment/livelihoods. Specific
arrangements would be made to ensure the participation of women in rural and urban
LIPWs. Considering the temporary nature of the employment provided, participants to
the LIPW would also be offered services that could enable more sustainable livelihoods,
such as a savings program and training opportunities.

 •       Strengthening Agricultural Value Chains: The agricultural value chain sub-
component will increase the food security and incomes of agricultural households along
the same strategic corridors targeted for the rural roads to be rehabilitated under the
LIPW sub-component. Project support will address constraints all along the selected
value chains (on-farm productivity, post-harvest handling, storage and processing), in an
effort to strengthen the hand of small-scale farmers in the value chain and get more
profits returning to farmer households and villages. A Livelihood Innovation Fund (LIF)
that will provide subsidies/matching grants to the activities summarized above as well as
to other eligible activities that may emerge during the project implementation, which
would contribute to sustainable employment and improved household incomes for low-
income people living in the target areas (vocational training, agricultural research
activities, private investments with significant positive externalities for the communities
such as seed multiplication activities).

 Component 3: Capacity Building (approx. US$ 17.1 million). Capacity building will be
provided on a need-basis to national and provincial actors who will play a direct role in
project implementation. Provincial and district (territoires) authorities, as well as civil
society, will be offered training and other capacity building opportunities to strengthen
their ability to play a constructive role in project implementation. This component will
also finance the provision of goods, consultant services, training and operating costs to
support project coordination, implementation, management, and monitoring and
evaluation.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The physical environment of the target provinces is characterized by forests (Province
Oriental, 350.000 km2), savanna, and highlands/mountains and hills (North and South
Kivu, landslides are frequent). Rainfalls of 1000 to 2000 mm a year make the hilly
landscapes sensitive to erosion. This situation induces potential risks for afforestation and
soil erosion in conjunction with agriculture and road rehabilitation works. The three
provinces cover an area of about 625.000 km2. Province Oriental alone, is the about the
size of Spain. Together, the area covered by the three provinces is larger than Spain,
Denmark, the Netherlands and Belgium together.

  In a number of areas, especially around and in the north of Lake Kivu, soils are
constituted by rich volcanic soil, and enable a large variety of crops. Those areas are
characterized by lush vegetation and an extended growing season due in part to its high
altitude (1500 m) at the lakeshore) and the volcanic nature of its soil. Agriculture,
extensive livestock production husbandry and mining are the predominant source of
livelihood. Major crops produced include: cassava (manioc); corn; potatoes; beans and
bananas; coffee and tea are the cash crops. Artisanal mining is another source of cash.
Ownership of land is a recurrent source of conflict. Population density is twice national
average, about 71/km2.

 Project activities will be implemented in select low and high-risk areas in North Kivu,
South Kivu and Orientale provinces, allowing for a more tailored approach to future
scaling up under IDA. Low-risk areas are more stable and therefore positive outcomes are
more certain, but the impact in terms of improved stability would be smaller; high-risk
areas include zones only recently stabilized, prone to destabilization or adjacent to
conflict zones where it may prove very difficult to carry out project activities but the
stabilization impact would be considerable.

 This project is classified as environmental category B as both community sub-projects
and employment creation activities may have the potential of some localized
environmental and social impacts. An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) developed under the Emergency Social Action Project (last revised
and disclosed in May 2011) will serve as a basis to prepare and disclose the ESMF of the
Eastern Recovery Project. Other safeguards documents including a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) will also be
prepared and disclosed during implementation. In addition, an Integrated Pest
Management Plan (IPMP) has been prepared to mitigate agricultural activities which may
induce the use of pesticides, and will be disclosed before negotiations.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
   Mr Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes          No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                         X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                 X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                      X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                      X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                               X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                          X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                   X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as EA Category B with regard to the activities under Component
1 and 2 which will support investments such as sanitation works, labor-intensive public
works and the strengthening of the agriculture value chains. Project investments are not
expected to induce large scale or irreversible environmental and social impacts. Given the
topography of the targeted provinces, however, components 1 and 2 may induce
localized, adverse short-term environmental and social impacts due to potential soil
erosion triggered by road rehabilitation works and agriculture on slopes. Most adverse
impacts are, however, expected to be site specific, limited in scope and time, and easily
mitigated. Component 2 of the project, particularly the strengthening of agriculture value
chains, may increase the vulnerability of indigenous people unless adequate social
assessments are carried out prior to sub-project funding and mitigation measures such as
Indigenous Plans (IPPs) are prepared and implemented.
 The project triggers six safeguards policies: OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP
4.04 on Natural Habitats; OP 4.09 on Pest Management; OP/BP 4.11, on Physical
Cultural Resources; OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement; and OP 4.10 on Indigenous
Peoples. Since the project is processed under OP 10.00, paragraph 11, the preparation of
the environmental and social assessment documents has been deferred. However, an
Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been
prepared and will be disclosed after Board approval of the project, and an Integrated Pest
Management Plan (IPMP) was developed, approved and disclosed in country and at the
InfoShop prior to negotiations.

  Social: Risks or negative social impacts of the project revolve around: (i) fueling
resource-based conflicts; (ii) exclusion and inclusion errors in beneficiary selection; and
(iii) involuntary resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), particularly potential resettlement issues and
restriction of access to some sites linked with construction/rehabilitation works. In
particular:
  (i)   Components 1 and 2 will be implemented in areas affected by conflict
characterized by worsening social and economic conditions, deteriorating social capital,
population displacements, localized resource-based conflicts, inter-ethnic tensions (often
linked to resource-based disputes), destruction of infrastructure, and reduced access to
social services. The project aims to encourage social cohesion and conflict resolution
through economic activities and a participatory approach, but current patterns of
population displacement and the lack of government capacity to mediate and manage
land ownership disputes could constitute points of contention.
  (ii) Exclusion and inclusion errors could occur in assessing and selecting beneficiaries
for Component 2. In particular, given the high rate of underemployment/joblessness and
widespread vulnerability, it can be expected that demand for temporary employment in
public works will far outstrip supply, leaving many legitimate job-seekers out. The main
challenge, therefore, would be to find selection mechanisms that minimize real or
perceived errors of inclusion and that are considered fair, so as not to fuel discontent and
possibly exacerbate conflict. It should be noted that real risks of exclusion errors are
limited, considering the high prevalence of poverty in the project area.
  (iii) While project activities are not expected to necessitate the large scale physical
relocation of population groups, they could have implications for the livelihoods options
of formerly displaced populations returning home during implementation.

  Environmental: Project activities under both components will finance small-scale
community infrastructure works. This is expected to include the
construction/rehabilitation of key public social infrastructures (schools, health centers,
water points) for component 1, while under component 2 activities will include road
maintenance, micro-irrigation and rehabilitation of agricultural feeder roads through
labor-intensive methods, as well as construction of small agro-processing facilities.
Farmer field schools will also be established to promote efficient and sustainable
agricultural techniques; the use of chemical pesticides and fertilizers will be discouraged.

 Possible negative environmental impacts are expected to be short-term. For example,
the rehabilitation of open water sources may temporarily increase risks for water borne
diseases in the surrounding area, while pollution and loud noises can be expected during
part of the construction works for community micro-projects. The only long-term
negative environmental impact could be linked to water and sanitation sub-projects (e.g.,
construction of latrines for a school), if the water table is affected. All potential negative
impacts along with the corresponding mitigation measures will be addressed in the
ESMF. On the other hand, a number of positive and lasting environmental impacts can be
expected as a result of reforestation activities under component 2, sanitation works under
component 1 (e.g., the construction of latrines) and component 2 (cleaning of urban open
drainage system), and rehabilitation of open water sources.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
Negative environmental and social impacts are expected to be minimal to moderate. No
adverse, indirect or long term impacts are expected due to anticipated future activities in
the project area, to the contrary, project investments may foster the beginning of sound
environmental and social practices.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.
Road rehabilitation works will be informed by environmental assessments and
environmental social management plans. Likewise, the selection of agriculture
investments will be subject to environmental and social assessments.

 One alternative project arrangement considered to minimize risks of fueling conflict
consisted in recruiting international NGOs specializing in conflict management to
conduct lengthy assessments to guide the choice and design of micro-projects (e.g.: some
international NGOs active in the project area spend up to two years analyzing the context
before starting any concrete activity at the community level). This option was dismissed
because it would not be responsive to a context in which the needs for access to basic
social services should be urgently addressed. This is not to say that there will be no
conflict assessment or focused efforts on conflict management. Rather, the project will
make it possible to test different conflict-sensitive approaches, preferably relying on local
actors.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
At the national level, the DRC has a legislative and regulatory framework which is
conducive to good environmental management. In addition, the DRC has signed a
number of international treaties and conventions. However, implementation capacity is
weak. Environmental policies and their compliance are governed by the Ministry of
Environment, Conservation and Tourism (Ministère de l'Environnement, de la
Conservation de la Nature et du Tourisme or MECNT). The MECNT has three
departments in charge of environmental monitoring and management: i) Le Groupe
d'Etudes Environnementales du Congo (GEEC); ii) le Centre National d'Information sur
l'Environnement (CNIE); and iii) La Cellule Réglementation et Contentieux
Environnementaux (CRCE). The GEEC is responsible for safeguards compliance of all
projects in the country, but with emphasis on environmental category A projects. The unit
is understaffed and has limited capacity. Despite several donor-funded capacity building
initiatives, the unit still largely relies on donor funds to carry out its field supervision
duties.

 At project level, the preparation and satisfactory implementation of the Bank funded
Emergency Social Action Project known as PASU (2004 to 2013), helped the project
implementing agency, the FSRDC, to lay a sound institutional foundation for preparing,
managing and monitoring potential adverse environmental and social impacts of Bank
funded projects. The FSRDC prepared the required safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF,
and IPPF) in a timely manner, and implemented them satisfactorily until the project
closed in June 2013.
 For the current project, the implementing agency has already hired an environmental
and social safeguards specialist who will work in close collaboration with the regional
antennas to ensure full compliance with safeguards.

 Since the project is processed under OP 10.00, paragraph 11, the preparation of the
environmental and social assessment documents (except for the IPMP) has been deferred.
However, an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF)
has been prepared and will be disclosed after Board approval of the project, and an
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be developed, approved and disclosed in
country and at the InfoShop prior to negotiations. The ESSAF will serve as the tool for
the identification and mitigation of the environmental and social impacts and risks at the
early stage of the project implementation. The ESMF, RPF, and IPPF will be prepared
and disclosed no later than three months after board approval. Funds for this work have
been included in the budget of the Eastern Recovery Project and a consultant has already
been hired by the implementing agency (Fond Social de la République Démocratique du
Congo – FSRDC) thanks to a Project Preparation Advance. As soon as activity sites
selected and designs of civil work completed, Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs)
or Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to the commencement
of works. In the specific case where a RAP is needed, it will be prepared, consulted upon
and executed prior to the commencement of works. The implementing agency will be
responsible for the preparation and implementation of safeguards instruments under the
project.

 The ESMF will include screening procedures to identify, assess, evaluate, mitigate and
monitor the impact of project activities as well as templates of relevant tools. These
assessments will involve consultations with key stakeholders and will inform the design
of specific resettlement and environment protection action plans. Once the action plans
have been drafted, public consultations will be held and community systems to handle
grievances will be established. All key stakeholders involved in the Project will be
sensitized and trained on the mitigation measures. Depending on the findings of the social
screenings and assessments to be carried out, a resettlement action plan (RAP) and or an
Indigenous Peoples' Plan (IPP) may be prepared.

 A wide array of tools and trainings will be developed and adopted to address
corresponding risks arising during micro-projects implementation. Based on the nature of
the risks, some communities may require the provision of ear protection, protective
headgear, gloves, masks, and safety shoes to workers to mitigate safety and health
concerns; and adequate trainings on work site safety measures will be provided to the
workers on the first day of work for component 2. For activities such as tree planting,
implementing agencies will have to facilitate some sensitization campaigns to prevent
subsequent excessive tree cutting and wildfires. A community management plan would
have to be developed for activities that could entail resource management (for instance
water points, or rehabilitated lakes). Finally, communities would have to be trained to
minimize health risks that would be associated with the undue consumption of
rehabilitated open water sources.
  The RPF and IPPF will be the main instruments to address social safeguards risks. To
mitigate potential risks related to involuntary resettlement, the RPF will include steps to
take into account the specific needs of displaced and returning populations, and integrate
provisions for addressing possible land and other socioeconomic points of contention in
an equitable, consultative and peaceful manner. A conflict specialist will be recruited
and support the FSRDC on these issues, and will work closely with the Bank's social
safeguards staff. The IPPF will include steps for the identification of indigenous
populations in the targeted project communities and in the vicinity of sub-project sites,
and detail procedures that will ensure that indigenous populations are properly consulted
and feed-back mechanisms are established to allow for prompt action in case their rights
are not respected or they are denied their fair share of project benefits. The implementing
agency understands that both RPF and IPP have the potential to play an important role in
conflict prevention and management, considering that land disputes are a major conflict
trigger.

 On the risk related to exclusion/inclusion errors in targeting, they will be primarily
addressed in the LIPW sub-component through self-targeting by setting the wages
slightly below market rate to discourage less vulnerable people from participating. At the
same time, quotas and ring fencing will be set to ensure the participation of more
vulnerable groups (such as women and displaced people). Finally, an effective grievance
system accessible and easy to use by the communities will be established to provide a
vehicle for addressing complaints and grievances that arise during the implementation
process. Transparency will be promoted in beneficiary selection processes.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The stakeholders to be consulted in the preparation of the safeguard documents will
include the direct beneficiaries (local communities, local governments, etc.) and
potentially affected people during the determination of activities' sites. Where displaced
population are concerned, appropriate sensitization and communication mechanisms will
be implemented to involve them in decision making. Local stakeholders (authorities,
CSO, beneficiaries and affected groups, etc.) will participate in any consultation
throughout the project lifecycle. The Safeguards Specialist recruited by FSRDC will
ensure proper implementation, documentation, follow up and reporting of the mitigation
measures (screening, execution of specific ESMPs, RAPs, IPPs) recommended through
the instruments (ESSAF, PMP, RPF, IPPF). Sub-projects will be designed and
implemented in close consultation with local communities, vulnerable groups (including
displaced and returning populations, indigenous groups, and youth), local and provincial
authorities and other stakeholders. Sub-projects under component 1 will be developed by
the target beneficiary communities themselves, with support from partner NGOs and the
FSRDC that will include the consultative development of mitigation measures for
environmental and social impact. Local enterprises will be recruited to undertake the
work under component 1 and 2, under supervision from community committees.
B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/27/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              08/27/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08/27/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/27/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              08/27/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08/27/2014
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  08/27/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              08/27/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               08/27/2014
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                  01/23/2014
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                              01/24/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                               01/24/2014
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?               Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)           Yes
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the           Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of        No
critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other   N/A
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures
acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     N/A
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or   Yes
SM? Are PMP requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            N/A
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential          N/A
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as                  No
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed   N/A
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process              No
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        N/A
Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?
  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                              Name       Date
Task Team Leader:                   Ms Maurizia Tovo           01/20/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Abdoulaye Gadiere       01/17/2014
Social Development Specialist       Mr Antoine V. Lema         01/17/2014
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Ms Alexandra C. Bezeredi   01/23/2014
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Mr Stefano Paternostro     01/20/2014
  Comments:
