                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7852
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Djibouti                          Project ID:    P145848
                            Project Name:     Second Urban Poverty Reduction Project (PREPUD II) (P145848)
                            Task Team         Salim Rouhana
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         24-Mar-2014                       Estimated   14-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSSU                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Urban Transport
                                              (40%), Central government administration (10%), Other s ocial services (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Participation and civic engagement (20%), Urban services and housing for the
                                              poor (60%), Municipal governance and institution buildi ng (10%), Urban
                                              planning and housing policy (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.60           Total Bank Financing:                 5.60
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              5.60
                              Total                                                                                    5.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to basic urban services in
                           Quartier 7 (Q7) in Djibouti City.



                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will finance the three following components: (i) Infrastructure upgrading in Q7; (ii)
                         Building Institutional Capacity and Citizen Engagement; and (iii) Implementation support. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposed project builds on 30 years of Bank engagement in the urban sector in Djibouti, and is a
                         follow-up to the DUPREP which focused on Q7 and initiated the transformation process of the
                         neighborhood. Building on DUPREP’s lessons learned, the project DUPREP II will adopt an
                         integrated approach that allows the project’s infrastructure, institutional and social pillars
                         complement each others, while focusing on mainstreaming disaster risk management, gender
                         dimensions, and citizen engagement.

                         Component 1: Infrastructure Upgrading in Q7 (US$3.57 million IDA)

                         This component will finance key urban infrastructure in Q7 while at the same time respond to the
                         urgent need to address the chronic challenge of employment in the neighborhood, particularly among
                         women and young people.

                         a.       Urban roads and drains upgrading in Q7. The program includes urban roads, drains, street
                         lighting, and two transformers. The aim of the upgrading is to improve access to basic infrastructure,
                         reduce the road’s exposure to flood risks, and improve the Q7 residents’ mobility and safety. The
                         sub-component will finance the technical, environmental, and social studies, the works program, and
                         the cost of works supervision. The urban roads will serve local and Q7 communities (see the detailed
                         project description in Annex 2 and a map in Annex 8). The roads were also selected based on their
                         socioeconomic impact on the neighborhood. The works will complement the program already
                         financed under the DUPREP (see map in Annex 8).
                         This component will also generate employment. The roads will be upgraded using labor-intensive
                         methods, some of which were tested in the DUPREP. These techniques are 15 times more labor
                         intensive than asphalt roads. The residents of Q7, especially women, will be consulted throughout the
                         planning process to ensure that the interventions serve the neighborhood’s actual needs. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultations will build on the outcomes of gender-sensitive engagement, which were carried out
                         during project preparation. A GFDRR funded pilot flood risk emergency contingency plan for Q7
                         will be prepared, taking into account the existing urban road network and the work program selected
                         under the DUPREP II.

                         b.       Omar Gouled Square development. This sub-component will finance the revamping,
                         upgrading, and landscaping of the main and central square (Place Omar Gouled) and other small
                         public spaces in Q7. The goal of the upgrade is to reinforce social cohesion and create an area of
                         social exchange for the neighborhood. The new layout for this public space will be gender sensitive
                         and will be designed in consultation with the local population to ensure better ownership and
                         maintenance of the installations. It could include sport, cultural, and commercial activities, including
                         a cultural center located in the northwestern part of the square. The Government and other donors
                         have confirmed their willingness to support the development of new facilities on or around the Omar
                         Gouled Square. The upgrades will encourage the utilization of public open spaces as natural retention
                         ponds. The sub-component will finance the technical and architectural studies, gender-sensitive
                         consultations, the works program, and the cost of supervision. The International Organization of La
                         Francophonie has agreed to equip the future cultural center.

                         Component 2: Building Institutional Capacity and Citizen Engagement (US$800,000). This
                         component is of paramount interest for all of Djibouti City, but it will also directly benefit Q7 and


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         other neighborhoods under the DUPREP II.
                         •        Support to urban development (US$400,000). The activities are aimed at strengthening two
                         key levels of urban governance and supporting the implementation of the Djibouti City Urban Master
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Plan prepared by SSH in 2012 under the DUPREP. Through these pilot activities and other capacity
                         building efforts, the SSH and DHU are expected to develop adequate tools to better manage Djibouti
                         City’s urban development. To this end, a comprehensive urban restructuring plan of Djaga Bouldouq
                         will be prepared. This densely populated area embedded in Q7 lacks basic infrastructure and
                         services, leading to numerous social, environmental, and health-related issues. Local development
                         plans will also be developed in two specific areas on the south and west of the city selected for their
                         demonstration impacts.
                         •        Support to community development (US$400,000). This support is aimed at reinforcing the
                         impact of ongoing or planned programs to develop better urban services and infrastructure in Q7 and
                         other underequipped areas of Djibouti City. It will support activities targeting direct improvement at
                         the community level, including establishment of the Quartier 7 Community Development Fund.
                         Building on similar ongoing activities financed by AfDB in secondary cities and by AFD in Balbala,
                         a small fund targeting Quartier 7 will be created to support community led and benefiting activities
                         (small grants under US$3,000 equivalent). The goal of the funded activities is to improve the impact
                         and sustainability of the investment program financed under the project (Component 1). The fund
                         will be administered by ADDS and a selection committee will chose the activities to be supported by
                         the fund. Thirty percent of the subcommittee will be composed of women. Citizen engagement (CE)
                         mechanisms, and monitoring and evaluation support w ill also be provided to increase government
                         accountability, including on its service delivery aspects. The ADDS’ Social Directorate will develop
                         a CE action plan to ensure beneficiary feedback vis a vis project activities. In addition to leveraging
                         existing participatory processes in the neighborhoods, such as the CDQ and community associations
                         as interfaces for citizen engagement, mobile technology will be utilized to develop a platform that
                         allows residents to provide direct feedback on project activities, as well as to report potential
                         grievances in real time to help facilitate efficient responses.

                         Component 3: Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation Support (US$700,000).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance: (i) operating costs, short term technical assistance to ADDS, and
                         additional equipment, as well as training for the ADDS staff and other stakeholders in charge of
                         project implementation (US$645,000); and (ii) technical and financial audits (US$55,000).
                         In addition, US$220,000 will be set aside for physical contingencies, and US$310,000 will be used
                         for financial contingencies. A Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of US$500,000 was granted on
                         October 21, 2013. It will be refinanced under the credit.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be located in the Quartier 7 of Djibouti city, which is in the alluvial plain of the city
                         on the right bank of the Ambouli river. The area is characterized by lack of sanitation; lack of
                         effective solid waste management; and improper drainage that leads to flooding during the rainy
                         season particularly that many houses are below the level of the road.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Fatou Fall (MNSSU)
                         Helena Munir Freih Al-Naber (MNSEE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes         The Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                         BP 4.01                                    policy is triggered because of the site specific and
                                                                    less adverse impacts associated with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    construction and restoration of physical
                                                                    infrastructure assets and conversion and
                                                                    landscaping of the central “public” space
                                                                    (component 1). It is expected that all the
                                                                    investments at the sub-project level to be
                                                                    Category B.

                                                                    The project counterpart (ADDS) prepared an
                                                                    environmental and social management plan
                                                                    (ESMP) for the identified roads to undergo
                                                                    rehabilitation and upgrading, and an ESMP for
                                                                    the two transformers on Boulevard G. Battal. The
                                                                    ESMPs identify the main impacts, present
                                                                    mitigation measures that aim to reduce potentially
                                                                    significant adverse environmental impacts and
                                                                    enhance the positive impacts of the project;
                                                                    monitoring plan; and capacity development and
                                                                    training.

                                                                    The main impacts associated with the
                                                                    rehabilitation and upgrading of roads pertain to
                                                                    construction activities common to all roads (soil
                                                                    pollution, noise, dust, construction debris, risk of
                                                                    accidents, potential for social conflicts, disruption
                                                                    in utility services), as well as during operation ).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    In addition, the ESMP identifies road specific
                                                                    impacts and mitigation measures.

                                                                    The main impacts associated with the
                                                                    rehabilitation and upgrading of roads pertain to
                                                                    construction activities common to all roads (soil
                                                                    pollution, noise, dust, construction debris, risk of
                                                                    accidents, potential for social conflicts, disruption
                                                                    in utility services), as well as during operation ).
                                                                    In addition, the ESMP identified road specific
                                                                    impacts and mitigation measures.

                                                                      ADDS has also prepared an environmental and
                                                                      social management framework (ESMF), for the
                                                                      investments planned for other project activities
                                                                      the details and locations of which are not defined
                                                                      as yet (including the Oumer Gouled Square
                                                                      Development and the Community Development
                                                                      Fund). The ESMF details the procedures and
                                                                      methodologies to be followed to manage the
                                                                      environmental and social risks associated with the
                                                                      project implementation. The ESMF contains an
                                                              Page 4 of 8
                                                                      environmental and social screening checklist, and
                                                                      standard terms of reference for the environmental
                                                                      and social management plan to be prepared prior
                                                                      to the start of civil works to guide the
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project is located in an urban area – Q7 of
                                                                         Djibouti Ville. The project will not finance
                                                                         investments that have potential to cause
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         significant loss or degradation of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not finance investments that have
                                                                         potential to impact forests. The project does not
                                                                         aim to bring about changes in the management,
                                                                         protection, or utilization of natural forests or
                                                                         plantations; and does not support forest
                                                                         restoration.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not purchase, distribute, apply or
                                                                         dispose of pesticides and/or pesticide application
                                                                         equipment.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project is not located in or in the vicinity of
                         BP 4.11                                         recognized cultural heritage sites, and will not
                                                                         support the management or conservation of
                                                                         physical cultural resources. However, the ESMF
                                                                         will incorporate chance-finds procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The project does not trigger this policy.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Social Safeguards. The World Bank Operational
                         4.12                                            Policy on Involuntary Land Acquisition and
                                                                         Resettlement (OP 4.12) applies because of some
                                                                         adverse construction related impacts which are
                                                                         expected under Component 1 which includes road
                                                                         rehabilitation and upgrading, improvements in
                                                                         drainage systems and street lighting. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         impacts have been ascertained to be highly
                                                                         limited and minor in scope. No physical
                                                                         relocation of families/communities is expected.
                                                                         To address all potential adverse impacts under OP
                                                                         4.12 over the lifetime of the project, the client has
                                                                         prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (RPF). The RPF includes resettlement principles
                                                                         and processes, eligibility criteria, institutional and
                                                                         funding arrangements, grievance redress
                                                                         mechanisms, and a legal framework that reviews
                                                                         the fit between the borrower’s laws and Bank
                                                                         policy requirements.

                                                                         The Community Development Fund (Component
                                                                         2) will not finance any subproject which may
                                                                         cause OP 4.12 related impacts.

                                                                         To cover known adverse impacts under Op 4.12,
                                                                         the client has prepared an abbreviated



                                                                 Page 5 of 8
                                                                          resettlement action plan (ARAP) which includes
                                                                          provisions for 15 encroachers on state lands who
                                                                          are affected. Of these, seven have created very
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          minor assets on the ROW of five roads to be
                                                                          rehabilitated and are eligible for compensation.
                                                                          In addition, there are eight persons who appear to
                                                                          regularly use Omar Gouled Square for sleeping
                                                                          purposes. The ARAP that has been prepared
                                                                          defines the impacts and also the mitigation
                                                                          measures.
                                                                          Consultations and disclosure. The social
                                                                          safeguards instruments were prepared based on
                                                                          consultations with the directly affected parties
                                                                          and a broader stakeholder group including central
                                                                          and local authorities. Both safeguards
                                                                          instruments have been disclosed in a manner that
                                                                          is known to, as well as accessible for all
                                                                          concerned parties. InfoShop disclosure has
                                                                          occurred as well. In addition to consultations for
                                                                          safeguards, the project has carried out a series of
                                                                          consultations with Quartier 7 stakeholders to
                                                                          share information about the project, its benefits
                                                                          and also to elicit community feedback. Results
                                                                          from the consultations show that communities are
                                                                          highly in favor of the project and believe it will
                                                                          result in community development.
                                                                          Since August 2013, the Djiboutian government
                                                                          has been taking steps to clear all ROWs of illegal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          occupation. Even though this national directive
                                                                          precedes the ARAP prepared under the project,
                                                                          ADDs has indicated that the affected persons
                                                                          outlined in the ARAP will be given provisions in
                                                                          accordance with OP 4.12. There has been no
                                                                          Right Of Way (ROW) clearance in Quartier 7
                                                                          (project area) since the Bank's identification
                                                                          mission in April 2013, prior to the decree
                                                                          issuance in August 2013.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No            Not applicable.

                            Projects on International        No           The project does not trigger this policy.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No           The project does not trigger this policy.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                  Page 6 of 8
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:

                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     01-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  18-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     07-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  13-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?

                                                                   Page 7 of 8
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Salim Rouhana
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                         Date: 16-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)                              Date: 16-Apr-2014




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
