                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                          Report No.: 92607

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:
October 15, 2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                    Djibouti            Project ID:                 P148586
 Project Name:               Enhancing income opportunities in Djibouti
 Task Team Leader:           Stefanie Koettl-Brodmann
 Estimated Board Date:       November 2014
 Managing Unit:              GSPDR
 Sector(s):                  Health and other social services (70%)
                             Education Adult literacy/non-formal education
                             Finance/Microfinance

 Theme(s):                   Social protection and risk management (60%)
                             Financial and private sector development
                             Human development
                             Rural development Rural
                             Social dev/gender/inclusion

 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       2.73                   Total Bank Financing:      2.73
 Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     Borrower                                                                                   0
     Special Financing                                                                        2.73
     Total                                                                                    2.73
 Environmental Category: C
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred       No
 project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve access to life-skill, livelihood skills training,
and access to finance for at least 3000 low- and semi-skilled youth and women in poor
communities in Djibouti-ville and neighboring Arta, the northern region of Tadjoura, and the
southern region of Ali Sabieh.


3. Project Description

Component 1 : Basic training and Mini-Business-Plan Competition for Youth

This component addresses the human, social and financial capital constraints of youth to access
income-generating opportunities. Through this component, at least 2,200 youth would receive basic
life-skill training and coaching in business plan development through community facilitators in the pilot
regions in Djibouti (Djibouti-ville, Ali Sabieh, among others), and, where feasible, youth would be
linked up with technical training centers. In these same regions, at least 1,000 beneficiaries would be
able to access start-up funds through a mini-business plan competition. Examples of activities financed
could include beauty treatment and hair-dressing, sewing, food catering, kiosks, agricultural production
and processing, animal husbandry, and transportation related activities. Excluded activities include
those that require the involuntary acquisition of land, such as construction and infrastructure leading to
involuntary resettlement of people and loss of access to assets, revenues and/or means of livelihoods. It
is expected that all activities to be Category C. The following are key sub-components: (i) Identification
and training of peer facilitators; (ii) Youth mobilization and basic training; (iii) Mini-business-plan
competition; and (iv) follow-up coaching.

Component 2 : Cluster development and value chain integration

This component addresses the constraints related to the innovation, development and commercialization
of existing local products in the artisan sector which is a prominent sector of activity among poor women
in Djibouti. Based on an initial assessment by the project team through the JSDF Seed Fund, traditional
artisan activities in this sector that will be primarily targeted are grass and pearl weaving which are
prominent in the target regions. Through this component, 800 mainly female beneficiaries will receive
direct and indirect training and assistance to enhance the income-generating potential of their existing
economic activities. Prospective beneficiaries are poor and vulnerable women with existing skills in the
artisan sector, including adult Safety Net beneficiaries who seek to develop their artisan craft. The
following are key sub-components: (i) cluster development (i.e., identifying and aggregating existing
producer groups); (ii) product design and development (i.e., development of new product designs,
capacity building of artisan communities, quality control mechanisms); (iii) business development and
marketing (i.e., market analysis, participation in exhibitions, brand development, creating linkages to
bulk buyers); (iv) providing access to working capital; and (vii) functional literacy and basic business
training.

Component 3 : Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation

This component would provide support to the implementing agency (Agence Djiboutienne de
Development Social, ADDS) to: (i) hire consultants for project management and field coordination; (ii)
undertake audits; (iii) rent a vehicle for field visits and monitoring; (iv) purchase office supplies; and (v)
build capacity of ADDS in aspects of project management, participatory approaches, gender and
outreach to vulnerable communities. It would also support community-based and/or third-party
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements, including the design of appropriate monitoring
indicators and surveys. Specifically, participatory M&E will rely on involving beneficiaries and
community members in the following ways: a) beneficiaries will be given an opportunity to voice their
satisfaction with program activities on a regular basis; b) the community development committees
responsible for the selection of mini-business plans are expected to nominate and elect among their
members selected community members who will be responsible for the monitoring of funding
recipients; and c) a grievance redress mechanism will allow beneficiaries to nominate focal points
among each other to articulate problems related to project activities as well as empower facilitators to
help solve any potential issues at the local level. Finally, the project management team will ensure that
the information and lessons from the M&E system are shared with stakeholders and beneficiaries so that
potentially necessary adjustments can be made in a participatory and consultative process.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
NA


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Fatou Fall, MNSSU
Helena Naber, MNSEE

6. Safeguard Policies                         Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           No              It is expected that all financed activities
                                                              will be category C.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No              The project will not finance investments
                                                              that have potential to cause significant
                                                              loss or degradation of natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No              The project will not finance investments
                                                              that have potential to impact forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                       No              The project will not purchase, distribute,
                                                              apply or dispose of pesticides and / or
                                                              pesticide application equipment.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        No              The project does not trigger this policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                 No              The project does not trigger this policy.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12           No              No project funding will be allocated to
                                                              activities necessitating involuntary land
                                                              acquisition resulting in: (i) involuntary
                                                              resettlement, loss of assets or access to
                                                              assets, shelter, revenues or means of
                                                              livelihoods, loss of access to resources,
                                                              and (ii) the involuntary restriction of
                                                              access to legally designated parks and
                                                              protected areas.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No              The project does not trigger this policy.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  The project does not trigger this policy.
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           No              The project does not trigger this policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This project is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts and is classified as
environmental assessment category C. From the social safeguards perspective, the project does not
trigger OP 4.12 due to the fact that project activities will not result in any form of land take leading to
involuntary resettlement and/or restriction of access to assets and/or involuntary restriction to legally
designed parks or impact negatively on livelihoods.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
NA
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project will proactively put in place guidelines and procedures in order to avoid potential negative
environmental or social impacts. These include:
     A document comprising the “General conditions for environmental and social management? has
       been prepared by the project team and will be included in the Operations Manual.
     The Operations Manual will feature some safeguard related wording and a negative list of
       economic activities which shall be excluded from funding. Excluded activities include those
       that require the involuntary acquisition of land, such as construction leading to involuntary
       resettlement of people and loss of access to assets, revenues and/or means of livelihoods, and/or
       restriction of access to legally designated parks.
     The project will not finance any activities that will result in purchase or application of
       pesticides.
     The Operations Manual will further provide a checklist for the regional selection committees to
       capture potential social and environmental risks of sub-projects.
     For due diligence purposes, the agreements between the implementing agency and the selected
       livelihood groups will include general social and environmental clauses derived from the
       general conditions for environmental and social management.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
NA

B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not Applicable

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ ]        No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:              Name: Stefanie Koettl-Brodmann
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                       Date:
Sector Manager:                Name:                                     Date:
