                                                                                     82403

                            INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Date prepared/updated: July 22, 2014

I. Basic Information

 .
1 BaSIC    '
      ' Projcct D ata
                                                  Project ID: Pl50842
Country: MONGOLIA
                                   Additional Project lD (if any):
Project Name: TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN MONGOLIAN
EDUCATION (TAME) PROJECT

Task Team Leader: Kathrin Frauscher
Estimated Ap]ll"aisal Date: 05/12/2014       Estimated Board Date: n/a
Managing Unit: WBIGA                         Lending Instrument: Small RETF
Sector: Education{SO%) and Social Development (50%)
Theme: Social Development/Gender/Inclusion
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m:):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: GPSA Grant US$650,000

Environmental Category: C
Simplified Processing                           I Simple [X]               Repeater l
                                                                           Yes []     No [X]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
                                                                               in the education
The Project's development objective (PDO) is to strengthen civic engagement
                                                                      for the delivery of better
sector to improve transparency of budgeting and procurement processes
quality education services in western and central Mongolia.

3. Project Description:

Component I: Organization of Parent. Teacher Associations (PTAs)
                                                                                 , teachers/school
This component will focus on strengthening the capacities of students, parents
                                                                              officials to improve
officials to form and manage effective PTAs and engage with district level
                                                                               or strengthen in 20
the local education environment. In this context, 28 PTAs will be established
                                                                    seven   represe ntatives (three
targeted sourns (provinces). Each PTA will ideally consist of
                                                                                    nent include:
teachers, three parents and one independent observer). Activities under this compo
• Train selected PTA representatives on current education legislation, government refonn
  initiatives and social accountability tools (e.g. participatory school environment assessments,
  public hearings, participatory budgeting, focus group interviews, and community scorecards).
• Design and implement social accountability tools (e.g. community score cards, good
  governance school assessment) using focus group interviews, public hearings to participate in
  decision making to monitor availability of school supplies, budget and general school
  environment. In each soum, PTAs will conduct a governance school assessment to evaluate
  the local education environment, school perfonnance input and current level of
  teacher/parent/student participation.
• Prepare and disseminate news programs and articles on the results of the monitoring using
  community and mainstream radio and newspapers.
• Provide support to selected PTAs to disseminate results of project activities and establish a
  national PTA network.

Component 2: Monitoring of education budget and procurement

This component will focus on strengthening the capacity national and regional level CSOs,
media organizations and MES and MOF staff to analyze and monitor government budget
allocation and procurement in education within the eight aimags (regions) targeted by the
project. Activities under this component include:

• Train up to nine CSOs (to be selected) in the project's eight targeted aimags to analyze and
  monitor the allocation of government education budget and procurement at the regional level.
• Train up to 36 journalists from community and national radio stations, aimag and national
  mainstream media outlets on relevant education and social accountability issues.
• Generate quarterly project progress reports to be shared and discussed with the Project's
  Consultative Group comprised of: Globe International Center, AFE, regional level CSOs,
  selected PTAs, MES, MOF and the Independent Authority against Corruption.
• Conduct advocacy and public-private dialogue activities to influence national level policy
  making (including parliament) based on the infonnation on education budget and
  procurement generated by the project.

Component 3: Managing knowledge and learning and coordinating project management

This component serves as quality assurance mechanism to produce the appropriate knowledge
and learning (K&L) tools on the practice of social accountability and results for use by project
direct and indirect beneficiaries. Among others, this will include: (a) establishing a Project
M&E system; (b) developing case studies, lessons ·learned and good practices; (c)
producing/disseminating various manuals, guidebooks, training modules, others; (d) preparing
Project Operating Guidelines; (e) a strong capacity building and K&L sharing/ dissemination
program to aid replication to other provinces; and (f) installing of online link to GPSA
Knowledge Portal and a web-based dedicated portal as repository of the project's K&L products
and platfonn for disseminating project's K&L with the community of practice, CSOs, MES,


                                               2
local governments and other stakeholders in education reform in Mongolia and elsewhere.
Activities under this component include:

• Prepare project operations manual that will include guidelines for monitoring of the
  education procurement budget and educational services, framework for constructively
  engaging between CSOs and the national, provincial and soum authorities; and between
  citizens and service providers at the soum level and for quality documentation oflessons
• Develop and upload at least eight knowledge and learning products to the GPSA Knowledge
  portal.
• Develop and disseminate of at least eight case stories/studies, reports, blogs, videos, with
  other practitioners in the region and on the global level.     ·
• Design and launch a web-based dedicated portal as repository of the project's K&L products.
• Develop and implement a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms, including yearly
  external financial audits.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The Project will target communities, mainly indigenous people, in 20 soums (i.e. provinces) in
eight aimags (i.e. regions) in western and central Mongolia. These aimags include: Uvs, Bayan-
Ulgii, Hovd, Khuvsgul, Arkhangai, Bulgan, Uvurhangai and Sukhbaartar where 90 percent of the
country's IPs live.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Songling Yao (GURDR)

6. Saff2uard Policies        Triggered?                         Exnlanation
Environmental Assessment         No     The project will not finance civil works, but support
(OPIBP 4.01)                            capacity building activities for students, parents,
                                        teachers/school officials to form and manage effective
                                        PTAs. Project activities will strengthen civic engagement
                                        in Mongolia's education sector to improve transparency of
                                        budgeting and procurement processes. The project
                                        therefore will have no environmental impacts. This
                                        project is a Category_C.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP          No     The project does not have the potential to cause significant
4.04)                                   conversion (loss) or degradation ofnatuml habitats,
                                        whether directly (through construction) or indirectly
                                        (through human activities induced by the Proiect).




                                                3
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)          No    The project will not have impacts on the health and quality
                                    of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare of people and
                                    their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests,
                                    nor aim to bring about changes in the management,
                                    protection or utilization of natural forest or plantations.
Pest Management (OP 4.09)     No    The project will not include any procurement of pesticides
                                    or pesticide application equipment; nor introduce any new
                                    pest management practices, or
                                    expand/alter existing pest management practices; nor lead
                                    to substantially increased pesticide use and subsequent
                                    environmental and health risks.
Physical Cultural Resources   No    The project will not have impacts on physical cultural
(OP/BP 4.11)                        resources, or be designed to support the management or
                                    conservation of physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP     Yes   This project aims to strengthen civic engagement in
4.10)                               Mongolia's education sector to improve transparency of
                                    budgeting and procurement processes. In doing so the
                                    Project will target communities, mainly indigenous
                                    people, in 20 soums (i.e. provinces) in eight aimags (i.e.
                                    regions) in western and central Mongolia. These aimags
                                    include: Uvs, Bayan-Ulgii, Hovd, Khuvsgul, Arkhangai,
                                    Bulgan, Uvurhangai and Sukhbaartar where 90 percent of
                                    the country's IPs live. Since the overwhelming majority
                                    of the project beneficiaries are IPs, the project is not
                                    required to prepare an instrument. However, project
                                    design will ensure that elements ofOP4.10 are integmted
                                    and among others this includes, a social assessment, "free,
                                    prior, and infonned consultations" with ethnic minority
                                    communities and provision project benefits to the ethnic
                                    minorities that are culturally appropriate.

Involuntary Resettlement      No    The project will not finance civil works but support
(OP/BP 4.12)                        capacity building activities for students, parents,
                                    teachers/school officials to fonn and manage effective
                                    PTAs. Project attivities will strengthen civic engagement
                                    in Mongolia's education sector to improve transparency of
                                    budgeting and procurement processes. Therefore, no
                                    involuntarv resettlement or land acquisition is expected.
Safety of Dams (OPIBP         No    The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37)                               of any dams as defined under this policy.
Projects on International     No    The project is not associated with any international
Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)              waterway.
Projects in Disputed Areas    No    There are no known disputed areas in the project area of
(OP/BP 7.60)                        intluence.




                                         4
 II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
 A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. IdentifY
  and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
  The Project will not support any physical investments or civil works and we do not anticipate
  any environmental impacts. However, due to the nature of the project activities the project team
  has identified a need to assess and take into account, in an integrated manner, the social aspects
  of the project, particularly any impacts on IP communities who are present in the project area. It
  is in this context that OP 4.10 is triggered. Since the overwhelming majority of beneficiaries are
· IPs, the project is not required to prepare an instrument under OP4.1 0. The project is classified as
  Category C.

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
 activities in the project area:
 NA

 3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
 adverse impacts:
 N/A

 4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
 assessment of borrower capacity to plan and Implement the measures described:
 It was agreed that GIC Globe International Center (the recipient) will include elements of the
 Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) in overall project design. More specifically, the project will
 provide for Free, Prior and Informed Consultation, with the resulting recommendations
 integrated in the project design to ensure broad community support and provision of culturally
 acceptable benefits to the IPs. Globe International Center has positive track record working with
 IPs in the areas targeted by the Project.
 5. IdentifY the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
 disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
 The Project's direct beneficiaries are the same 28 PTAs in the 20 targeted soums (provinces) in
 western and central Mongolia. GIC will ensure that IP representatives are consulted throughout
 project preparation and implementation.


 B. Disclosure Requirements Date
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Manae:ement Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                       NIA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                          NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                      NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                       N/A
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework!Policv Process:



                                                   s
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               NIA
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  NIA
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                              N/A
Indh!enous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                               N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              NIA
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed orior to aooraisa/?
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                              N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                               N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of anv of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at tile Corporate Level (to heft/led in wlren tire ISDS is
finalized by tire project decision meeting)

OPIBP 4.01 ·Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]    No [ )      N/A[X)
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the creditlloan?
OPIBP 4.04 -Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No [ ]      N/A [X]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]    No [ ]      N/A[X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  YesrT      No f 1      N/AfXl




                                                 6
  If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
  safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
  requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
  project team includ~ a Pest Management Specialist?
  OPIBP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
  Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A[X]
  cultural property?
  Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
  the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
  resources?
 OP/BP 4.10- Indhtenous Peoples
  Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes[]     No[X]     NIA [ ]
  Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
 consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
 safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the      Yes
 design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
 Social Development Unit?
 OPIBP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [ ]   No [ ]    NIA [X]
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
 safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
•plan/policy framework/process framework?
 OPIBP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]   No [ ]    NIA [X]
 issues and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
 so, does it include provisions for certification system?
 OPIBP 4.37 - Saf~ty_of Dams
 Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ ]   Nci [ ]   NIA [X    1
 Have the TORs as well as composition for the
 independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
 approved by the Bank?
 Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
 prepared and arrangements been made for public
 awareness and training?
 OPIBP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     I Yes [ l   No [ ]    NIA [X]




                                                 7
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the Yes [ 1     No [   1   N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to Yes [ 1     No [ ]     N/A [X]
the World Bank's lnfoshop? ·
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safe211ard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes []   No []      N/A [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?




                                                8
D. Approvals

 SiJ[IIed fill(/ submitted by:                        Name                        Dale
 Task Tenm Leader:                   Kathrin Frauschcr                          07/22/20 14
 Environmental Spccinlist:
 Social Development Spccinlist       Songling Yno                               07/22/2014
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

ApproJ!ed by:
 Rc~ionnl
        Safeguards Coordinator:
 Comments:
                                     l'ctcr Leonard   4         n1
                                                          f.. "'-
                                                               ..   ,.    'I\
                                                                                07/22/2014


 Sector Manager:                     Roby Sendcrowitsch   t 0 ''"' ( V/\        07/22/20 I4
   Comments:                                                        '-'   ( )




                                                9
