                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5356
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Egypt, Arab Republic of             Project ID:    P146244
                            Project Name:     Promoting Innovation for Inclusive Financial Access (P146244)
                            Task Team         Sahar Ahmed Nasr
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         11-Dec-2013                         Estimated   31-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSF1                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Microfinance (50%), SME Finance (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (60%), Other Financial Sector
                                              Development (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     300.00           Total Bank Financing:                 300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  300.00
                              Total                                                                                  300.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) would be to expand access to finance for MSEs in Egypt,
                           using innovative financing mechanisms, with a special focus on youth and women, as well as
                           underserved regions.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         The project is a Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL), line of credit to the Government of Egypt,
                         amounting to US$ 300 million that will be channeled through the Social Fund for Development
                         (SFD)—the apex institution, which is mandated to lead and coordinate the MSE development sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in Egypt. SFD would then on-lend to financial intermediaries that would ultimately reach the end
                         beneficiaries, namely MSEs. The foreign exchange risk will be carried by the Government.
                         Numerous innovative mechanisms will be tapped on to enhance access to finance through offering
                         financial products for MSEs (financial leasing, venture capital); designing products that would
                         mitigate the hurdles faced by some enterprises (special products for women); expanding outreach in
                         underserved villages (through post offices); and addressing unmet demands (Islamic finance). All
                         this will contribute to improving financial intermediation, enhancing access to finance for different
                         segments of the society, creating private sector job opportunities, which will ultimately lead to
                         poverty reduction, and foster sustainable economic prosperity.

                         Financing mechanisms covered under this project would be as follows:

                         (i)      Line of credit through banks. Funds from the line of credit will be channeled through SFD to
                         eligible participating banks that either have an active MSE portfolio, large branch network in the
                         different Governorates, or the willingness and capacity to develop one. The banks will then on-lend
                         to MSEs—the ultimate end beneficiaries. The participating banks could be incentivized through
                         various mechanisms, such as training and capacity to develop appropriate products and systems for
                         the different market segments, with focus on women and youth. Eligibility criteria and the appraisal
                         of funding proposals from banks will form the basis of selection.

                         (ii)    Line of credit for NGOs-MFIs. Funds will be channeled as loans through SFD to eligible
                         participating NGO-MFIs, wishing to innovate in new product development for micro enterprises.
                         Based on eligibility criteria identified, funding will be focused on high performing, high potential
                         NGO-MFIs that have a strategy for reaching marginalized groups, especially women in rural areas,
                         through new financial products .The NGOs-MFIs will be incentivized with technical assistance that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will focus on innovative design and delivery mechanisms.

                         (iii)    Line of credit through financial leasing companies. The SFD will channel the funds to the
                         financial leasing companies that will cater to MSEs. This would benefit younger and smaller firms,
                         as well as enterprises that do not have a lengthy credit history or a sufficient asset-base to use as
                         collateral. Leasing can play a critical role in bridging the finance gap and bringing smaller businesses
                         into the formal financial sector. As opposed to other financial instruments, leasing, being an asset-
                         based financing option, also has the added advantage of being an inherently Shari’a-compliant
                         product, which makes it an attractive financial option for enterprises in Egypt with an appetite for
                         Islamic finance.

                         (iv)    Equity investments—venture capital and angel investors. Venture capital and angel investors
                         are essential financing vehicles to small and young firms that have limited access to banking
                         services. A certain minimal percentage of the proposed operation amount would be channeled
                         through SFD to a financial intermediary (venture capital company or NGO) that would invest in
                         innovative value-adding young firms, taking the form of matching funds alongside angel
                         investments. This mechanism will cater to young entrepreneurs with innovative ideas, yet lack
                         funding to venture into businesses. It will also introduce a new and specialized financing mechanism
                         for young firms.




                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         Islamic Shari’a-compliant financing will also be integrated into the financing mechanisms provided
                         under the project. The overarching target will be to unveil economic capabilities, reduce vulnerability
                         of poor entrepreneurs to shocks as well as satisfying the unmet demand for Islamic financial services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         towards achieving a tangible impact for more inclusive prosperity. SFD will provide funding to
                         banks, and NGO’s -MFI’s to diversify the men u of financial instruments provided to MSE through
                         offering Islamic financial products to enhance financial intermediation and unlock new opportunities
                         for growth for those who specifically seek this mode of financing.

                         There is demand for Shari’a-compliant products—equity-based financial instruments such as
                         Mudarba and Musharaka—to promote entrepreneurship, share risks, and foster financial
                         intermediation. Both instruments differ in structure from conventional collateral based financing.
                         These instruments engage the financial institution and entrepreneurs in a partnering relation with
                         intense monitoring from both parties of the business activity and performance. This in turn
                         minimizes moral hazard and maximizes the realized profits leading to stable growth for MSE’s. The
                         project will promote the deepening of MSEs access to Islamic financial products through
                         mainstreaming other risk-sharing non-bank financial services such as Ijarah—leasing, as well as,
                         micro Takaful–insurance. The provision of Ijarah instruments will reduce investment costs for
                         MSE’s and strengthen their competitiveness especially during their infancy stage. Moreover, micro
                         Takaful will help MSEs hedge against unanticipated shocks.

                         Outreach Venues

                         The scope of geographic targeting will be widened through encouraging the engagement of
                         experienced financial intermediaries that are well established in the business of financing MSE’s and
                         enjoy a large network of branches. There will be particular focus on rural areas to ensure adequate
                         coverage and provision of services in Upper Egypt and Delta that has huge entrepreneurial potential
                         yet still lacking the ability and skill to access to financial resources.
                         Participating NGO MFIs will be encouraged to tap into the huge branch network of the Egypt Post,
                         to increase outreach to poor and more remote villages. The designated financial intermediary (NGO-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MFI), as well as MSEs, will open accounts in the post office for funds transfer under the project. At
                         the same time, the Post will work to develop products for NGO- MFIs that will facilitate their
                         transactions (disbursements and payments) at the Post office and reduce transaction costs and related
                         administrative burdens. NGO-MFIs will be encouraged to open savings accounts for micro and small
                         borrowers who do not already have accounts, enhancing access and exposure to broader financial
                         services and markets. This mechanism will encourage saving, in addition to reduction in cash
                         dealing.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The activities financed will be implemented in Egypt in all Governorates as agreed with Social Fund
                         for Development, with a focus on areas with highest level of poverty and unemployment.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (MNSEE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)




                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              Environmental Assessment OP 4.01 is triggered
                            BP 4.01                                            because of potential impacts related to the
                                                                               activities of some of the sub-projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No                The project will not support any new
                            4.12                                               development of enterprises. Any activity which
                                                                               involves involuntary land acquisition and
                                                                               resettlement impacts will not eligible for project
                                                                               financing.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The operations likely to be financed under the project through MSEs are likely to have limited
                              environmental and social impacts. However, even with modest financing some environmental
                              impacts can occur (for example in olive oil manufacturing, in sectors that recycle waste products,
                              in sectors that affect natural resources, in manufacturing, in agri-business).To mitigate the
                              potential environmental and social impacts, an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                              (ESMF) has been prepared in compliance with the Bank safeguards policies. The ESMF utilized
                              the SFD 2009 EMP as the main building block whereby it comprises: (i) an extensive institutional
                              capacity assessment of the SFD to carry out the implementation and supervision of the
                              environmental and social safeguards measures as per the Bank guidelines and the relevant
                              Egyptian laws and regulations; and, (ii) A management framework which will cover the potential
                              impacts of the types of sub-loans; and the associated mitigation measures. The major elements of
                              the ESMF have been included in the project’s Operational Manual (OM). The OM will be
                              approved by the Bank prior to project appraisal.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Given that the sub-projects have not yet been identified, indirect and/or long-term impacts cannot


                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                           be assessed at this stage. However the Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           includes measures for screening of sub-projects so that an adequate Environmental and Social
                           Assessment will be carried out at the sub-project level to identify any site-specific indirect and/or
Public Disclosure Copy




                           long term impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Different approaches from a financing point of view were considered, for example line of credit,
                           microfinance, equity investment, however these had little bearing on safeguards, the beneficiaries
                           and activities to be financed being independent of the source of financing. Criteria have been
                           developed for the selection of the enterprises to be financed to avoid any substantial environmental
                           and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMF, which has been prepared, includes an extensive assessment of the SFD institutional
                           capacity to plan and implement the safeguards measures to be adopted in the project. The ESMF
                           identifies any capacity gaps and the way to fill these gaps. In general, the SFD has gained
                           experience in the last several years in supervising the implementation of EMPs as per the Bank
                           safeguards guidelines. This is essentially done through the World Bank projects implemented by
                           the SFD: Enhancing Access to Finance for MSEs Project, and Emergency Labor Intensive
                           Investment Project (ELIIP). Quite recently, the SFD, recognizing the importance of
                           environmental management in general and environmental and social safeguards in their sub-loans,
                           has established an Environmental Department so as to strengthen its mandate and responsibility in
                           this regard.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the financial institutions (the banking sector, leasing institutions,
                           microfinance institutions), and MSEs in Egypt. A wide range of consultations with stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and potential beneficiaries have been carried during project preparation. The SFD has carried out
                           consultations with stakeholders on the draft ESMF. The feedback and comments received on the
                           ESMF were taken into account in the revised draft, which was formally cleared by the Bank prior
                           to disclosure in-country and in the Bank InfoShop. Final disclosure of the ESMF was done in-
                           country and on the InfoShop on December 17, 2013.The EMP of the Enhancing Access to Finance
                           for Micro and Small Enterprises Project, which was prepared in 2009, has been re-disclosed
                           alongside the ESMF in order to provide a complete overview of the environmental and social
                           measures identified for both projects. Furthermore, continuous consultation on project safeguards
                           matters will be carried out during project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          22-Oct-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       17-Dec-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Egypt, Arab Republic of                                           17-Dec-2013
                              Comments: The Environmental and Social Management Framework documents were received by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                            the Bank on Ocotber 22, 2013 and sent to infoshop on the same day. The documents
                                            have been redisclosed In country and by the infoshop on December 17, 2013, due to
                                            the change in the project name.
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Sahar Ahmed Nasr
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Takeaki Sato (RSA)                              Date: 26-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:

                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Hooman Dabidian (SM)   Date: 26-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          Page 7 of 7
