                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 86030
Date prepared/updated: March 12, 2014

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: THE ARAB REPUBLIC OF EGYPT               Project ID: P149677
                                                  Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: INCLUSIVE REGULATIONS FOR MICROFINANCE PROJECT
Task Team Leader: Sahar Nasr
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 10, 2014          Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: MNSF1                              Lending Instrument: Investment Project Financing
Sector: Microfinance (100%)
Theme: Micro Enterprise support (60%) Other Financial Sector Development (40%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
MENA Transition Fund - IBRD as Implementing Agency (US$m.): 4.5
Environmental Category: C
Is this a transferred project                     Yes [X ]                 No [ ]
Simplified Processing                             Simple [X ]              Repeater [ ]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises          Yes [ ]       No [ X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The project development objective (PDO) is to support the development and implementation of the
regulatory framework and supervisory capacity in the microfinance sector to promote its expansion .


3. Project Description:
The proposed project comprises of three main components: (i) developing the legal and
regulatory framework for financial inclusion; (ii) establishing and operationalizing the
microfinance unit at EFSA; and (iii) promoting accountability, governance and consumer
protection. The total cost of the project is US$ 4.5 million.
Component I: Developing the legal and regulatory Framework for financial inclusion
(US$ 500,000). This component will support the setting of a legal and regulatory framework that
is conducive to growth and stability of the microfinance sector. Critical to the success of the new
microfinance law is a set of executive regulations that are robust and comprehensive and provide
clear guidelines for NGO MFIs, microfinance companies, and other market players to easily
comply with the new supervisory framework. Specifically, this component will support EFSA
through three main sub-components: (i) developing and finalizing the executive regulations/
instructions needed to enforce and implement the microfinance law; and (ii) developing and
finalizing the directives of the NGO Microfinance Oversight Board and developing and
finalizing the needed rules and standards to be enforced on the NGO MFIs in accordance with
the microfinance law. The Oversight Board that will play the role of “sounding board” to support
the effective supervision and regulation of NGO MFIs through coordination and cooperation
between EFSA (responsible of supervising the microfinance companies) to make sure the same
rules and requirements are applied on both microfinance companies and NGO MFIs, thus
creating a level playing field for all service providers in the market. The new rules will adopt
some light prudential requirements with a focus on fit and proper requirements, strong
governance rules, transparency, disclosure, consumer protection, and internal and external
controls. This would also allow microfinance companies to engage in other non-banking
financial services in accordance with the EFSA Law of 2009 after getting EFSA’s approval. This
would not only be encouraging for the microfinance companies who will be able to engage in
other financial services besides microcredit, but can also be an incentive to NGO MFIs to
transform to microfinance companies.

Component II: Establishing and operationalizing the Microfinance Unit at EFSA (US$ 2.7
million). The objective of this component is to ensure that the microfinance unit adopts
international best practices and develops the capacity necessary to implement the law and
associated executive regulations effectively as to support the growth of the overall microfinance
sector in Egypt. It will support EFSA in establishing, staffing, and equipping a Microfinance
Unit, which would be responsible for operationalizing executive regulations and policy,
enforcing rules, ensuring compliance, and supervising microfinance companies.
This component comprises of three sub-components (i) establishing the Microfinance Unit
specialized and responsible for, licensing, monitoring, collection, and oversight, inspection and
audit; financial reporting; and consumer protection and complaints; (ii) capacity building and
training of key staff, to be equipped to undertake key operational procedures and strategic
functions within the unit. This include conducting study tours to countries that has well
developed systems for microfinance regulations and supervision; (iii) strengthen the institutional
infrastructure, with the required equipment and IT, both software and hardware—which would
ultimately enhance the information dissemination mechanisms internally and externally aiming
at improving the governance structure and transparency.
Component III: Promoting accountability, governance and consumer protection (US$ 1.3
million). This component will support EFSA in enhancing accountability and governance, and
developing a robust consumer protection capacity within the industry, which will center on fair
treatment (ethical staff behavior, sale of appropriate products and acceptable marketing,
reasonable collection), transparency (minimum standards for client communication, disclosure of
relevant product terms and conditions), and effective recourse (single point of contact for
complaints; right to withdraw brand of negligent partner financial institutions).
This component comprises of three sub-components: (i) enhancing consumer protection and
financial literacy, through training workshops, publishing materials, social media and public
awareness campaigns; (ii) conducting study tours to countries which have well developed
systems for financial consumer protection; and (iii) building the capacity of the “Microfinance
NGOs Oversight Board.” Within this component particular attention will be placed on
comprehensive transparency and disclosure requirements and further business conduct rules.
Incorporating gender mainstreaming features is essential to ensure inclusiveness and effective
targeting. The design of gender mainstreaming in the operation has tapped on the
recommendations put forward by the 2012 World Development Report, Gender Equality and
Development, which highlights the importance of providing women with appropriate and timely
information, their legal rights and obligations in dealing with the financial system. Accordingly,
the microfinance unit, to be established under this project, will ensure disclosure and
accountability, protecting women from discrimination, and ensuring their rights are preserved.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The proposed project will complement the proposed World Bank’s US$ 300 million Promoting
Innovation for Inclusive Financial Access Project for Egypt, which aims at expanding access to
finance for MSE in Egypt, using innovative financing mechanisms, with a special focus on youth
and women, as well as underserved regions. The proposed project will also complement the on-
going Enhancing Access to Finance for MSEs Project (US$ 300 million) in Egypt. These
investment loans provide lines of credit channeled through the Social Fund for Development
(SFD) to financial intermediaries- banks and NGOS-MFIs. The proposed project will ensure
effective implementation of the lines of credit through developing the legal, regulatory and
institutional financial infrastructure to promote the expansion of the microfinance sector. It
basically provides critical non-financial support to ensure the line of credit can be effectively
used by MFIs in the sector, as currently small enterprises through the banking system get the
bulk of the funds. The activities financed will be implemented in Egypt in certain Governorates that will
be agreed on with Social Fund for Development. None of the Bank Safeguards Policies will be applied to
this project.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Alaa Ahmed Sarhan, Senior Environmental Economist, MNSEE
Mohammad Kandeel, Environmental Specialist
Chaogang Wang, Senior Social Development Specialist, MNSSU
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                      Yes               No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                                        x
   The proposed project is classified as a Category C, as it is likely to have minimal or no adverse environmental
    impacts. No environmental safeguards instruments other than the ISDS need to be prepared for this project.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                                x
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                                         x
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                                    x
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                                     x
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                                              x
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                                        x
The Bank’s policy on Involuntary Resettlement and Land Acquisition does not apply. The project will not entail
any investments that will trigger the policy since the project components are focused on client capacity building,
enhancing consumer protection regulation, strengthening of the credit guarantee scheme, and improving the
regulatory framework for micro finance institutions. There are no civil works, relocation of populations, impacts on
livelihoods nor restriction of access to resources envisioned under the project.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                                  x
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                                             x
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                                      x

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: NA


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area: NA


3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts: NA


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: NA
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

The key stakeholders are the financial institutions (the banking sector, leasing institutions), and
micro and small enterprises in selected Governorates in Egypt. No people will be adversely
affected by the project implementation. However, a wide range of consultations have been
carried with stakeholders and potential beneficiaries during project preparation and continuous
consultation will be carried out during project implementation in order to enhance the project
benefits.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                NA
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                         Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [ X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                              Name     Date
 Task Team Leader:                  Sahar Ahmed Nasr          12/03/2014
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Maged Hamed               13/03/2014
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Simon C. Bell             13/03/2014
   Comments:
