                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC5392

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Aug-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Egypt, Arab Republic of        Project ID:     P146244
                            Project Name:     Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Development for Inclusive Growth
                                              (P146244)
                            Task Team         Sahar Ahmed Nasr
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       08-Dec-2013                      Estimated       31-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: MNSF1                             Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Microfinance (50%), SME Finance (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (60%), Other Financial Sector
                                              Development (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                  Total Bank Financing:       300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                    300.00
                              Total                                                                    300.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) would be to contribute to the improvement and expansion
                           of access to finance for MSEs in Egypt, as well as reaching out to start-ups, using innovative
                           approaches, with a special focus on youth and women.
                           C. Project Description
                         The project is a Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL), line of credit to the Government of Egypt,
                         amounting to US$ 300 million that will be channeled through the SFD—the apex institution, which
                         is mandated to lead and coordinate the MSE development sector in Egypt. SFD would then on-lend
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to financial intermediaries that would ultimately reach the end beneficiaries, namely MSEs, as well
                         as start-ups. The foreign exchange risk will be carried by the Government. Numerous innovative
                         mechanisms will be tapped on to enhance access to finance through offering financial products for
                         MSEs (financial leasing, venture capital); designing products that would mitigate the hurdles faced
                         by some enterprises (special products for women); expanding outreach in underserved villages
                         (through post offices); and addressing unmet demands (Islamic finance). All this will contribute to
                         improving financial intermediation, enhancing access to finance for different segments of the society,
                         which will ultimately contribute to the creation of sustainable private sector jobs.

                         Financing mechanisms covered under this project would be as follows:

                         (i)       Line of credit through banks. Funds from the line of credit will be channeled through SFD to
                         eligible participating banks that either have an active MSE portfolio, large branch network in the
                         different Governorates, or the willingness and capacity to develop one. The banks will then on-lend
                         to MSEs—the ultimate end beneficiaries. The participating banks could be incentivized through
                         various mechanisms, such as training and capacity building under the MENA MSME Facility.
                         Eligibility criteria and the appraisal of funding proposals from banks will form the basis of selection.
                         (ii)      Line of credit for NGOs-MFIs. Funds will be channeled through SFD to eligible
                         participating NGO-MFIs that will then on-lend to micro enterprises. Based on eligibility criteria
                         identified, funding will be focused on high performing, high potential NGO-MFIs. NGOs-MFIs play
                         a crucial role in the development of the marginalized regions through their branch networks in poor
                         villages. Women owned-micro enterprises benefit from such mechanisms, as they account for more
                         than 85 percent of this sector, contributing to women’s economic empowerment, especially in rural
                         areas.
                         (iii)     Wholesale microfinance development facility with banks. SFD will set-up financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilities with banks, to provide wholesale funding to NGOs-MFIs. Banks would be expected to
                         provide matching funds from their own resources. This would stimulate the growth of more market-
                         based funding for NGOs and MFIs and link microfinance to bank resources. The SFD involvement
                         provides banks with valuable market knowledge and also NGO-MFI assessment techniques. Two
                         banks have already pursued this arrangement with SFD for its knowledge of the microfinance
                         market, and clients’ network.
                         (iv)      Line of credit through financial leasing companies. The SFD will channel the funds to the
                         financial leasing companies that will cater to MSEs. This would benefit younger and smaller firms,
                         as well as enterprises that do not have a lengthy credit history or a sufficient asset-base to use as
                         collateral. Leasing can play a critical role in bridging the finance gap and bringing smaller businesses
                         into the formal financial sector. As opposed to other financial instruments, leasing, being an asset-
                         based financing option, also has the added advantage of being an inherently Shari’a-compliant
                         product, which makes it an attractive financial option for enterprises in Egypt with an appetite for
                         Islamic finance.
                         (v)       Equity investments—venture capital and angel investors. Venture capital and angel
                         investors are essential financing vehicles to small and young firms that have limited access to
                         banking services. A certain minimal percentage of the proposed operation amount would be
                         channeled through SFD to a financial intermediary (venture capital company or NGO) that would
                         invest in innovative value-adding start-ups, taking the form of matching funds alongside angel
                         investments. This mechanism will cater to young potential entrepreneurs with innovative ideas, yet
                           lack funding to venture into businesses. It will also introduce a new and specialized financing
                           mechanism for start-ups.
                           (vi)     Gender-based finance. Designing special financial products and windows for women will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           enhance their access to finance, contributing to their economic empowerment. This will benefit from
                           the impact evaluation that is being conducted with the support from the Gender and Development
                           Department. In order to achieve inclusive growth, it is important to target women-owned enterprises
                           through developing new gender-based products, developing special windows for women, especially
                           in marginalized governorates where there are more social and cultural barriers. Banks and NGOs-
                           MFIs networks will be capitalized on to provide financing for women entrepreneurs, especially micro
                           enterprises.
                           (vii)    Post office network through NGOs-MFIs. SFD will on-lend to NGOs-MFIs that will tap on
                           the huge branch network of the Egypt Post, which is widespread in the poor villages. The designated
                           financial intermediary (NGO-MFI), as well as, MSEs, will open accounts in the post office, and
                           funds will flow through the post office network from the former to the latter. This mechanism will
                           reduce transaction costs and administrative burdens. More importantly, micro and small borrowers
                           will have enhanced access to finance and better exposure to financial services and markets through
                           dealing with the post office. This mechanism will also encourage saving, in addition to reduction in
                           cash dealing.
                           (viii) Islamic finance. There is demand for Shari’a-compliant products—equity-based financial
                           instruments such as Mudarba and Musharaka—to promote entrepreneurship, share risks, and foster
                           financial intermediation. The project will promote the deepening of MSEs access to Islamic financial
                           products through mainstreaming other risk-sharing non-bank financial services as Ijarah—leasing, as
                           well as micro Takaful–insurance. The provision of Ijarah instruments will reduce business entry costs
                           for startups and strengthen their competitiveness especially during their infancy stage. Moreover,
                           micro Takaful will help with hedging against unanticipated shocks to MSE’s, especially during the
                           startup phase. SFD will on-lend to banks to provide Islamic products to small enterprises, and to
                           SFD-NGOs to reach out to micro enterprises.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                           Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
                                      would be prepared: 9/5/2013.

                                      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A

                                      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                      10/7/2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sahar Ahmed Nasr

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 24-Sep-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Djibrilla Adamou Issa (SM)                                                                                           Date: 11-Nov-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
