                                                                                          94837
                           INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 (FCPF READINESS FUND)
                                    CONCEPT STAGE


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: March 1, 2015

I. BASIC INFORMATION
FCPF Readiness activities relate to strategic planning and preparation for REDO+. Specifically, countries
prepare for REDO+ by:
        i.  Assessing the country's situation with respect to deforestation, forest degradation,
            conservation and sustainable management of forests and relevant governance issues;
       11.  Identifying REDO+ strategy options;
      iii.  Assessing key social and environmental risks and potential impacts associated with REDO+,
            and developing a management framework to mitigate these risks and potential impacts;
      iv.   Working out a reference level of historic forest cover change and greenhouse gas emissions
            and uptake from deforestation and/or forest degradation and REDO+ activities, and
            potentially forward-looking projections of emissions; and
       v.   Designing a monitoring system to measure, report and verify the effect of the REDO+
            strategy on greenhouse gas emissions and other multiple benefits, and to monitor the drivers
            of deforestation and forest degradation, as well as other variables relevant to the
            implementation of REDO+.
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant activity (referred to as "Project" in the ISDS) will finance some of
this preparatory work; it will not finance any implementation of REDO+ activities on the ground (e.g.,
investments or pilot projects).

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Fiji                                  TProject 10: P 151209
                                               I Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: Fiji: FCPF Implementation Support Pr<~ject
Task Team Leader: Stefanie Sieber
Estimated Appraisal Date: N/A                 I Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: GENDR                          I Lending Instrument: IPF
Practice Area: Environment and Natural Resources
Theme: Climate Change
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
FCPF Amount (US$m.): 3.8
Other financing amounts by source:
Environmental Category: B
Simplified Processing Simple [Xl Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project Yes [ ] No [X]


B. Project Objectives
The development objective of Grant is to assist Fiji to catTy out the Readiness Preparation Activities by
supporting the preparation o f its REDD+ strategy through a participatory and inclu sive process, the
establishment of a national MRY system, and by producing technical work and po licy advice to help
strengthen sustainable land and forest management practices.

C. P1·oject Description:

The Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) Roadmap 1 includes all activities necessary for F iji to
achieve a state of REDO+ Readiness. The proposed Read iness Preparation Grant wi ll provide US$ 3.8
million over a period of four years (20 15 to 20 19) to finance a subset of those activities, focusing on the
technical aspects of the R-PP Roadmap. Broader awareness rais ing and capacity building activities will be
financed by the Government and Deutsche Gese llschaft fUr lnternatio nale Zusamme narbeit (GlZ) (US$
0.6 million respectively).

The Readiness Preparation Grant will finance the main elements of the R-PP that will not only help
Fiji develop its REDO+ strategy, but strengthen sustainable land and forest management practices
through targeted technical work and policy advice. In particu lar, the Readiness Preparation Activities
w ill aim to (i) strengthen existing institution s for REDO+ through the establishment and
operationalizatio n of a Fiji National REDO+ Unit and assessment and strengthening of existing feedback,
and grievance redress mechanisms (FGRMs) for REDO+; (ii ) deve lop National REDO+ strategy and an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which wi ll be va lidated by a broad spectrum
of stakeholders through the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and be informed by
several analytical studies; and (iii) put in place a robust monitoring system for REDO+, includ ing a
pre lim inary national Reference Emission Level/ Reference (RELIRL), national Measurement, Reporting
and Verification (MRY) system and a safeguards information system. These activities w ill also strengthen
existing forest policy, practices and manageme nt systems, information and data, partic ipatory methods
and human and institutional capacity, which will support sustainab le land and forest management
practices.

Table 1 below provides detail activities to be fina nced with the Readiness Preparation Grant. In
addition, the table also shows other funding source from the Government of Fiji (Go F) and G lZ to
complement the proposed Readiness Preparation Activities in order for Fiji to s uccessfully im plement all
activi ties required for REDO+ Read iness.

                       Table 1: Project Components a nd Costs, 2015-2019 (in USD millions)
          ..      ·.
Acti~.ties for Assessment Note witli FCPF Funding
                                                                                   FCPF      R-PP        GoF GIZ
...;. ' \ > .;: •,                      .                   ·•·..                  grant component: ,
                                                                                     1.30 I
                                                                                                                  -
 1. Institutional strenethening for REDO+                                      '                      0.20 0.17
  1.1. Establishme nt and operationalizatiqn of Fiji National REDO+
                                                                                    1.1 0 ICamp. 1a      0.14 0.13
 Unit
  1.2. Assessment and stre ngthening of existing FGRMs for REDO+               I    0.20 1Camp. 1a, c    0.06 0.04
 2. Development of a REDD+ strateey for Fi.ii                                       1.19                 0.23 0.31
 2.1. Supporting ana lytical work to prepare a REDO+ strategy     __           I    0.44 1Camp. 2a-c     0.09 0.09
2.2-   SESA process and ESi\jF develS_>I?_ment
                                                           --        -              01_1 _Camp. 2d           0    0
 2.3. Consultation and pattici~ation activities                                     0.44 Cross-cutting   0. 14 0.22
 3. Establishment of a monitorine system for REDD+                                  1.65                 0.20 0.11

1
    Please see Component 5 of the R-PP for a summary of all the acti vities and budget.


                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                0.07
                                                                                                                0.03
                                                                                                                0.0 1
                                                                                                                0.59
                                                                                                               !.5.02

Component 1: Institutional Strengthening for REDD+ (US$ 1.30 million)
The acti vities under this component include: (i) supporting the establi shment and operationali zation of the
Fiji National REDO+ Unit, by providin g them with human, technica l and operational resources; and (ii)
assessing the relevant existing FGRMs and arrangements at the national and decentrali zed leve ls,
strengthening the existing FGRM s and, as necessary and appropriate, establishing a new FGRM, to
address any relevant feedbacks and grievances related to REDO+. The institutional and human capacity
building as well as technical support prov ided under this component will also help strengthen sustainab le
land and forest managemen t practices.
       a) Sub-component 1. 1: Establishment and operationalization the Fiji National REDD+ Unit (US$
            1. 10 million). The Fiji National REDO+ Unit will comprise of a technical adv iser (with some
            management functions), two technical experts, one communications officer, one finance and
            administration offi cer, one project assistant and one driver. The GoF will fund the latter three
            personnel, while the Readiness Preparation Grant will support the remaining positions as well
            as the set-up and operational costs. 2 The technical advisor and experts will provide tech nica l
            oversight and coordination of the REDO+ Readiness process, including the REDO+ strategy
            deve lopment, analytica l work, RELIRL deve lopment and estab lishment of a MRV and
            safeguards information system. Th ey will also provide technical sup port to on-going or
            upcoming REDO+ projects, especially in the design of project methodologies. The REDO+
            unit will be based in the Forestry Department. The Communication Officer will coordinate the
            extensive consultations required for REDO+ Readiness and the development of the REDO+
            strategy. Key tasks include: (i) ensure effective delivery of the consultation and participation
            plan; (ii) develop and implement the communication strategy/plan and outreach, which are
            culturally appropriate to fit the target audience; (iii) ensure the results of the consultations are
            properly documented and effective ly disseminated to the relevant stakeholders using the right
            channel/medium of communi cation; and (iv) ensure the procedures for how these consultations
            influence REDO+ strategy development are followed. This sub-com ponent wil l also cover
            expenses associated with the ann ua l budget audit, monitoring and rep01ting and the mid-term
            revtew.
       b) Sub-component 1.2: Assessment and strengthening of existing FGRMsfor REDD+ (US$ 0.20
            million). Fiji recognized early on that the national REDO+ program needs to be operated in an
            inclusive manner with particular regard to transparent and effective com munication and
            decisions across di fferent sectors of Government. A stakeholder analysis was thus conducted
            early on3 and the multi-stakeholder Nationa l REDO+ Steering Commi ttee (REDO+ SC) was
            set up. This sub-component aims to ensure broad stakeholder engagement and use of
            stakeholder feed back in shaping the RED O+ Readiness program by fund ing (i) an assessment
            of existing grievance mechanisms at the national and decentralized levels; (ii) assess the
            capacity of institutions a.nd customary mechanisms that would handle grievances; (iii) support
            their strengtheni ng specifica lly for REDO+; and (iv) establish effective FG RM.
2
  It is important to note that the FCPF grant will only fund the salaries of contractual staff for the Read iness
Preparation Activities. It will not fund consu ltants' services and salaries of offic ials for Fiji 's civil service.
3
  For a full li st of identi fied stakeholders see annex I b of the R-PP.              ·


                                                                                                                   3
Component 2: Development of a REDD+ strategy for Fiji (US$ 1.19 million)
This component will support the GoF in further developing its REDO+ strategy building on the on-going
processes in-country, which will help identify the best balance of land use options to promote sustainable
and inclusive economic growth in Fiji. This will require developing a deep understanding of the multi-
sectorial drivers of deforestation and forest degradation, integrating social and environmental concerns
into the REDO+ strategy and building broad-based support across all ethnic groups and relevant
stakeholders. In particular, the activities under this component include: (i) supporting analytical work to
prepare a REDO+ strategy; (ii) undertaking SESA and preparing an ESMF; and (iii) conducting
consultation on key issues related to REDO+, including multi-sectorial drivers and underlying causes of
deforestation and degradation, REDO+ strategy options, forest governance and land tenure, benefit
sharing arrangement, SESA, and MRV. The policy and technical analysis produced under this component
will also help strengthen sustainable land and forest management practices. It will also help inform
possible future programs to implement some of the proposed REDO+ strategy options aimed at reducing
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, improving SFM, strengthening agricultural practices
and enhancing climate change resilience. This component has three sub-components:
       a) Sub-component 2. 1: Supporting analytical work to prepare a REDD+ strategy (US$ 0.44
           million). The current state of knowledge indicates that Fiji has modest rates of deforestation
           compared to other countries in the region, but that its forests are heavily degraded. A broad
           range of drivers and underlying causes were identified during the R-PP preparation phase, most
           notably agricultural expansion and conversion of forest to pasture lands and grazing. However,
           there has been no nationwide assessment of Fiji's deforestation and forest degradation
           processes and only an initial set of REDO+ strategy options has been identified. The Readiness
           Preparation Grant will thus fund several studies to (i) comprehensively assess the multi-
           sectorial drivers and underlying causes of deforestation and forest degradation in Fiji,4 (ii)
           analyze forest governance and land tenure analysis, (iii) identify and prioritize REDO+ strategy
           options and (iv) analyze the economic, environmental and social costs and benefits associated
           with different REDO+ strategy options.
       b) Sub-component 2.2: SESA process and ESMF development (US$ 0.31 million). To ensure that
           negative impacts of future performance-based REDO+ programs are eliminated or minimized,
           social and environmental concerns will need to be taken into account during the development
           of the REDO+ strategy. A Safeguards Working Group (SWG) has already been established by
           the National REDO+ SC to develop national REDO+ criteria and indicators, which will be
           important for managing the SESA and ESMF development. This sub-component will fund the
           strengthening of the SWG as well as the SESA process, which will assess the extent to which
           the proposed REDO+ strategy options address the environmental and social issues associated
           with Fiji's customary and present patterns of land use and forest management. Any identified
           gaps will be addressed throughout this process. In addition, the SESA will develop an ESMF
           that outlines the procedures for managing potential environmental and social impacts resulting
           from REDO+ implementation including guidance for the preparation of future environmental
           and social safeguard instruments.
       c) Sub-component 2.3: Consultation on key issues addressed under the FCPF (US$ 0.44 million).
           Inclusive and participatory consultations are at the heart of the REDO+ readiness process. This
           sub-component will fund consultation on key issues addressed under FCPF, including on (i) the

4
  Since Fiji is a low deforestation/high forest cover country, a methodologically-strong approach is required to
account for future drivers of deforestation and forest degradation in the REDO+ Strategy. Such an approach would
combine an in-depth analysis of the potential impacts of the development of productive sectors on natural forests
(based on national plans or sector strategies) with a modelling approach. Such an assessment will also be able to
inform discussions on potential competitive land-uses and help identify trade-offs.


                                                                                                               4
            multi-sectorial drivers and underlying causes of deforestation and degradation; (ii) forest
            governance and land tenure; (iii) the identification of strategy options; (iv) potential benefit
            sharing arrangements and mechanisms, (v) the SESA, and (vi) MRV including safeguards and
            multiple co-benefits. Outreach efforts are anticipated to be substantial given a widely dispersed
            population and a rich and strong tradition on consultation and participation across all layers of
            society in Fiji. 5 GoF and Fiji will fund broader awareness raising and outreach programs.

Component 3: Establishment of a monitoring system for REDD+ (US$ 1.65 million)
The activities under this component will put in place a robust monitoring system for REDO and will
include designing and developing: (i) a RELIRL, (i) a MRV system, and (iii) a safeguard information
system. The monitoring system established under this component will also provide important information
and data that can be directly used in the management and development of the forest sector more broadly.
The activities developed under component 3 will enable Fiji to access results-based finance should it
choose to. More importantly, it will strengthen its capacity to monitor and manage natural resources more
generally through the extension of the national forest inventory beyond forest management purposes,
enhancement of national databases and geospatial information regarding Fiji's natural resource base to
inform land development and planning and developing technical skills. It will thus be critical to carefully
sequence the technical work so that it will be able inform the development of the REDO+ strategy. The
activities planned under this component will build capacity and develop data and information
infrastructure that can serve other important purposes beyond REDO+, such as FAO FRA reporting,
national land use planning and biodiversity reporting. This technical work will build on ongoing capacity
building and awareness activities of GoF and GIZ. 6 Specifically the grant will aim to draw on existing
remote sensing data, ground based measurements, capacity and infrastructure, in a coordinated way, to
design, build and operationalize a National MRV system. Such a system will allow Fiji to routinely asses
its natural resource base, which is central to meet broader climate change objectives.
           c) Component 3.1. Design and development of a REVRL (US$ 0.58 million). The development
               of a REL/RL for Fiji wi11 measure the level of net emissions and removals resulting from
               land cover changes during a historical reference period. Projections of different
               development scenarios will be generated taking national circumstances into account. The
               outputs from this component will inform the development of the REDO+ Strategy for Fiji
               (Component 2). Funding for this component will include: (i) technical and hardware.
               support, particularly for the DoF; (ii) GIS-based data analysis and management support; (iii)
               collection, analysis and aggregation of activity data (land use and land cover change); (iv)
               collection and analysis of emission factors for all land use categories; (v) assessment of
               carbon pools; and (vi) development of national RL and alternative scenario.
           d) Sub-component 3.2: Design and development of a MRV system (US$ 0.87 million). This
               sub-component will support the design and establishment of a national MRV system
               building on existing IT infrastructure. It will provide funding to: (i) design and establish
               institutional framework for National Forest Monitoring System; (ii) establish a database and
               integration tool to estimate GHG emissions and removals in the forestry sector; (iii)
               transparently document the MRV system; and (iv) conduct capacity building for MRV.
           e) Sub-component 3.3: Design and development of a safeguards information system (US$ 0.20
               million). This sub-component will support the development and establishment of a
               comprehensive monitoring system for non-carbon impacts of REDO+, including safeguards
               as well as co-benefits that integrates with the MRV system (component 3.2). It will be

5
  It will, however, be critical to ensure that the consultations relate to specific issues where analytical work can bring
additional knowledge and insights and to avoid consulting the same actors too many times on the same issues.
6
   Whilst a range of capacity is being built in relevant government departments, there is currently a lack of
coordination to generate GHG accounts for UNFCCC reporting and REDO+.


                                                                                                                        5
              critical to integrate this new monitoring system as much as possible with existing
              information and data management system. The activities under this component will thus
              review existing monitoring institutions regarding safeguards and then build a safeguards
              information system. Communities can play an important role in monitoring adherence to
              safeguards and will thus be supported through capacity building activities to fulfill this
              function.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known):
The REDD+ Readiness Activities does not entail activities on the ground.

Fiji is an archipelago comprised of over 330 islands spread over a large area of ocean. The Project will
not fund any on-the-ground activities but would include plans for such activities to operate in forested
areas of Fiji, which cover approximately 80% of Fiji's land mass. Over 80% of the total land area also
remains under customary ownership. Three trial pilot REDD+ sites are already in place.

It is expected that future REDD+ sites will be predominately in rural areas, and have a combination of
land tenure arrangements including customary ownership including reserve and non-reserve land, as well
as leased lands.

The likely safeguard issues are detailed in Part II of this ISDS. Specifically, the SESA to be prepared
during the REDO readiness phase will analyze land holding and tenure arrangements, and identify and
assess the potential for any involuntary land acquisition issues or restriction of access to natural resources
to occur, and management processes will be embedded into the ESMF. The ESMF will include, as
required, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process Framework (PF), all of which will be
part of the SESA, in order to ensure avoidance, minimization, and/or appropriate compensation for
adversely affected persons or populations in downstream implementation.

E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:
Fiji's National REDO+ Policy was developed through a comprehensive multi-stakeholder consultation
process and endorsed by cabinet in 2011. The National REDD+ Steering Committee is a multi-sectoral
institutional arrangement established to coordinate the REDD+ agenda. The GoF has already mobilized
a multi-sectoral Technical Safeguards Working Group to support the National REDO+ Steering
Committee and issued a series of policy statements relevant to safeguards associated with the program
including the protection and respect of rights of Indigenous People, biodiversity conservation and
preservation of the natural forest (e.g. the Forestry Policy in 2007, the Fiji REDD-Pius Policy in 2011
and the National Climate Change Policy in 20 12).

Government agencies currently involved in the Readiness activities (e.g. the Forestry Department, the
Ministry of iTaukei Affairs, the Secretariat of the Pacific Community, the iTaukei Land Trust Board
and the Ministry of Environment and Mineral Resources) have exhibited awareness of safeguard issues
and demonstrated strong commitment to undertake the SESA. The GoF has also conducted an
assessment of the country's present legal and institutional framework vis-a-vis the requirements of the
REDO+ program (i.e. Republic of Fiji: Legal Framework for REDD Plus, 2013) relevant to safeguards
issues, such as the land rights and security of tenure, community involvement in forest management and
environmental impact assessment (EIA) of REDD+ activities.

Despite these efforts, GoF's familiarity of World Bank (WB) Safeguard Policies and Procedures is
limited and not universal, and the statutory framework does not fully meet WB Safeguard Policies and
Procedures requirements. For instance, although grievance mechanisms exist for customary land
disputes, access to an adequate grievance redress mechanism or legal remedy regarding land

                                                                                                            6
management or change of use varies needs to be broadened to be inclusive of other ethnic groups, land
users and vulnerable persons. Other example areas of shortcomings include ambiguity in land-related
legislation and lack of community consultation for proposed developments or land use changes.

The WBG will conduct a comprehensive institutional capacity assessment to determine national
capacity for applying and complying with WB Safeguard Policies during readiness preparation, a
detailed analysis of social and environmental impacts to be conducted by a specialist team delivering
the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will occur in tandem with consultations on
the REDO+ Strategy Options. These assessments will identify additional measures needed to ensure
safeguard compliance beyond the existing institutional framework, domestic laws, regulations and.
policies. The ToR for this specialist team will be approved by the WBG prior to ~pproval of WBG
funds. Subsequently, guidelines for effective participation and consultation, carbon transactions, benefit
sharing schemes and regulations on the management of REDO+ funds will be developed.

The key output of the SESA is the formulation of an ESMF to address the safeguards issues and satisfy
the requirements of the WB Safeguard Policies. The ESMF will govern the screening, the preparation,
review, approval and compliance monitoring of projects to be undertaken in the REDO+ program.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Haddy Jatou Sey, Senior Social Development Specialist, co-TTL
Ross Butler, Social Safeguards Specialist I Regional Safeguards Coordinator
Kenneth Green, Senior Safeguards Specialist
Jonas Bautista, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
Claire Forbes, Social Safeguards Specialist

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
The FCPF Readiness Preparation grant must comply with WB safeguard policies regarding the
management of environmental and social impacts. This grant will, in part, support the country's activities
to identify the potential risks associated with REDO+ and mitigation options. In order to do this, the
FCPF is using a SESA to integrate key environmental and social considerations into REDO+ Readiness
by combining analytical and participatory approaches. The SESA allows: (i) social and environmental
considerations to be integrated into the REDO+ Readiness process, in particular the REDO+ strategy; (ii)
stakeholder participation in identifying and prioritizing key issues, assessment of policy, institutional and
capacity gaps to manage these priorities and recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDO
Country's progress reports on Readiness preparation; and (iii) an ESMF to be put in place to manage
environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts. The SESA guidelines have been
integrated into the R-PP template.

It is envisioned that the safeguards policies mentioned below may be triggered in the REDO+ Readiness
process.

Safeguard Policies Tri22ered                                     I Yes               No     I TBD
Environmental Assessment {OP/BP 4.01)                            I     X                    I
This policy is triggered ·as the Readiness Preparation Activities will result in drafting of REDO+·
Strategy Options, which may have potential long-term impacts on forest, land use, .and landowner and
leaseholder rights.
The assessments and plans generated by the Readiness Preparation Activities will be informed by policy
requirements of OP 4.01 and other relevant safeguard policies. The potential social and environmental
impacts of the REDO+ Strategy Options will be assessed through a SESA, with TOR cleared by the
WB.


                                                                                                             7
Safeeuard Policies Tri22ered                                         I    Yes      I     No      I   TBD
Component 3 will support the development and establishment of a comprehensive monitoring system
for non-carbon impacts of REDO+, including safeguards as well as co-benefits. Activities will review
existing monitoring institutions regarding safeguards and then build a robust safeguards information
system.
Natural Habitats (OPIBP 4.04)                                        I     X       I             r
This policy is triggered as the Readiness Preparation Activities will result in drafting of REDO+ Strategy
Options, which are expected to have significant positive environmental impacts to natural habitats due to
a reduction in forest loss. This policy is triggered to ensure the REDO+ Strategy Options take into
account biodiversity conservation as well as the conservation of critical natural habitats.
Forests (OPIBP 4.36)                                                 I      X      -~            I
This policy is triggered as the Readiness Preparation Activities will result in drafting of REDO+ Strategy
Options, which are expected to have significant positive impacts on the health and quality of forests as the
overall objective is to reduce deforestation and forest degradation. This policy is triggered due to the
potential changes in the management, protection, or utilization of natural forests or plantations that could
arise from REDO+ Strategy Options and activities which may affect the rights and welfare of people and
their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests. Triggering of this Policy will ensure that the
work carried out with WB funding is properly informed in relation to potential impacts on Forests.
Pest Manaeement (OP 4.09)                                            I     X       I             I
This policy is triggered as the Readiness Preparation Activities will result in drafting of REDO+ Strategy
Options, which might lead to agricultural intensification, and/or reforestation and forest management
programs that require pest management. The REDO+ Strategy Options and SESA will address critical
issues related to pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources (OPIBP 4.11)                               I      X      T            I
This policy is triggered as the Readiness Preparation Activities will result' in drafting of REDO+ Strategy
Options, which could affect areas containing sites with physical cultural resources (e.g. monuments,
historical buildings, archaeological or paleontological sites, holy sites, etc.). The SESA (and ESMF) will
assess if ground implementation of REDO+ Strategy Options is likely to include these sites and ensure
the appropriate measures are adopted in order to protect them.
Indieenous Peoples (OPIBP 4.10)                                        I      X      I            I
The Readiness Preparation Activities are likely to benefit Indigenous People and occur predominately on
the customary lands of Indigenous Peoples (referred to as iTaukei). The application of this policy will
ensure that consultation regarding REDO+ Strategy Options is culturally appropriate and inclusive, and
provides evidence of broad community support for REDO+ activities on their lands. The nature and
extent of impacts on Indigenous Peoples will be determined through a social assessment (SA) as part of
the SESA. Given that Indigenous Peoples will form the overwhelming majority of people in the project
area, elements of an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be incorporated into overall project design. Guidance
for this is provided in the SESA Terms of Reference.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                  I      X      I            I
Since REDO+ Strategy Options are under development, potential impacts, including the type and extent
of potential land acquisition, economic or physical displacement or access restrictions to resources,
remains unknown. This policy is triggered to ensure landowners, leaseholders and land users and forest
dependent communities and/or individuals are properly consulted and not coerced or forced to accept or
commit to REDO+ activities or other forest management/reforestation activities involuntarily, and that
best practice approaches as informed by OP 4.12 are adopted. The SESA will identify and assess the
potential for any involuntary land acquisition issues or restriction of access to natural resources to occur,
and management processes will be embedded into the ESMF. The ESMF may include, as required, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or Process Framework (PF), all of which will be part of the
SESA, in order to ensure avoidance, minimization, and/or appropriate compensation for adversely
affected persons or populations in downstream implementation. Sub-component 1.2 of the Readiness

                                                                                                            8
Safeeuard Policies Trieeered                                                I     Yes       I     No       I    TBD
Preparation Grant will fund assessment of existing grievance mechanisms at the national and
decentralized levels, assess the capacity of institutions and customary mechanisms that would handle
grievances, and support their strengthening specifically for REDO+.
Safety of Dams (OPIBP 4.37)                                                 I              T       X       I
The REDO+ strategies and activities will not involve the construction of, nor will be affected by, new or
existing dams ..
Pro_iects on International Waterways (OPIBP 7.50)                  I             I     X       I
The REDO+ strategies and activities will not affect any international waterways.
Pro_iects in Disputed Areas (OPIBP 7.60)                           I             I     X       I
The REDO+ strategies and activities will not be located in any disputed areas.


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for review meeting of REDD Country's mid-term progress report, at which time
   the ISDS may be updated as needed:

December 31, 20 16

B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing7 should be specified in the initial ISDS and/or updated
   ISDS:
The main safeguard instrument to be applied is the SESA. The SESA includes the preparation of an
ESMF. The ESMF may evolve and be updated over time when new REDO + strategy options and
projects or activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during implementation
of REDO+. The SESA addresses the key environmental and social issues associated with the analysis and
preparation of REDO+ strategy options as well as REDO+ projects, activities (including investments),
policies and regulations. In this manner SESA can ensure compliance with WB's environmental and
social safeguards.
The SESA process requires that the selection of REDO+ strategy options should take into account the
country's institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social risks, and the
potential environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy options. Any identified gaps to
manage these risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant WB's safeguard policies should be
identified along with the strategy options to feed into t~e preparation of the ESMF. The ESMF should
provide a framework to manage and mitigate the potential environmental and social impacts related to
specific projects and activities (including investments and carbon finance transactions), in the context of
the future implementation of REDO+.
The ESMF will be structured to contain subject-specific frameworks addressing the relevant requirements
of the applicable environmental and social safeguard policies including, but not necessarily limited to, a
RPF and/or PF.

IV. APPROVALS



7
  Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal
(i) at the Infoshop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible
to potentially affected persons.


                                                                                                                       9
SigJted and submitted by:

                                                     ~
Task Team Leader:                                                           February I 9,
                            Stefanie Sieber                                    2015
Approved by:

                                                         ul)1~j(/ln
Regional Safeguards         Peter Leonard                                   February 28,
Coordinator:                                                          I -      2015
  Comments:                                       . "7
                                                         I
                                                                  i
Practice Manager:           lain Shuker ~                                   February 2 I,
                                                                               20 15
                                        .......
  Comments:




                                                                                            10
