                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA1037

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Sep-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Sep-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           West Bank and Gaza                Project ID:    P152411
                                                        Parent         P116199
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      Gaza Emergency Response for Electricity Network Rehabilitation (AF)
                      (P152411)
   Parent Project     GZ-Gaza Electricity Network Rehabilitation Project (P116199)
   Name:
   Task Team       Simon J. Stolp
   Leader:
   Estimated       29-Sep-2014                          Estimated   30-Oct-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GEEDR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
   Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), City-wide
                     Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      15.00           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     Borrower                                                                                     0.00
     Special Financing                                                                           15.00
     Total                                                                                       15.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          Yes
   Repeater
   project?



                                              Page 1 of 7
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objective of the Project is to rehabilitate and expand the electricity networks in Gaza in order
   to improve their reliability and performance.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The Project objective is to restore and improve basic electricity services in Gaza.

3. Project Description
The hostilities between Israel and Gaza in July-August 2014 have inflicted significant damage upon
Gaza’s power system, which is owned and operated by the Gaza Electricity Distribution Company
(GEDCO):

a.       Medium voltage (MV) transmission lines importing electricity from Israel and Egypt have
been damaged, limiting basic levels of supply.
b.       The fuel treatment and storage systems, and generation plant for Gaza’s only power plant
(GPP) – which is privately owned and operated - have been damaged, and according to PENRA will
take more than a year to repair.
c.       Medium voltage (MV) and low voltage (LV) distribution networks, ubiquitous in urban
environments, have been severely damaged and in some cases completely destroyed, constraining
what little supply there is to areas that have remained undamaged.
d.       GEDCO’s warehouse, and the goods and equipment for network repair and maintenance that
it contained, have been completely destroyed, limiting short-term emergency repair to the electricity
network.

This AF will allow GEDCO to meet part of its urgent need to reconstruct and rehabilitate the
electricity distribution network in Gaza, thereby allowing it to achieve the following:

a.       increase reliability and level of electricity supply to a population of around 1.8 million
people that are currently receiving only 6 hours of electricity per day in areas where distribution
infrastructure is intact, and no electricity at all in areas where distribution infrastructure has been
damaged ;
b.       re-connect approximately 190,000 people, 97 water pumping stations, 9 hospitals/clinics and
950 commercial consumers that are currently not connected to electricity supply
c.       increase reliability and level of supply to other basic humanitarian services providers that are
reliant upon electricity supply including further hospitals, water supply and wastewater treatment
plants which would receive improved service;
d.       provide urgently needed goods and materials, lost in the destruction of GEDCO’s warehouse,
which would enable emergency repairs and system strengthening.

The AF will finance supply and installation of electricity distribution infrastructure, and associated
implementation costs, in order to (i) reconstruct damaged electricity infrastructure and restore basic
electricity services; (ii) strengthen the existing network and improve supply in areas where
population movement has increased load; (iii) re-establish and improve revenue collections for
electricity; and, (iv) restore and enhance the capacity of PENRA and GEDCO to deliver electricity


                                              Page 2 of 7
services.

The AF will finance projects that will re-construct 121 kms of Medium Voltage, and 301 kms of Low
Voltage distribution network across the 5 governorates of Gaza. The AF will also support operating
costs for GEDCO in the implementation of the above projects.

Activities under the original Project will also be modified to better address immediate reconstruction
needs. Procurement of a financial management information system and mobile billing PCs will be
canceled, and funds re-directed to purchase of 25,000 additional pre-paid meters and control
hardware, to help re-establish revenue flows.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The investment projects financed by this operation are expected to rehabilitate and reconstruct
existing electricity networks in 5 governorates in Gaza, which is the same geographic location of the
parent project.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Hana Salah (GSURR)
Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (GENDR)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is classified as environmental
 BP 4.01                                             category B. The project involves rehabilitation of
                                                     medium and low voltage electricity networks.
                                                     Minor environmental negative impacts are
                                                     expected during the construction phase which are
                                                     readily mitigated by proper implementation of the
                                                     environmental management plans (EMP). An
                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                     Framework (ESMF) was prepared by PEA and
                                                     GEDCO in 2011, by which all sub-projects are
                                                     screened for social and environmental risks and
                                                     specific EMPs are prepared. The ESMF was
                                                     consulted, and publically disclosed locally and on
                                                     the Bank infoshop in English and Arabic. World
                                                     Bank during project preparation confirmed that
                                                     this is the only policy that will be triggered as a
                                                     result of project activities.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11



                                             Page 3 of 7
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              he Bank's Policy on Involuntary Land Acquisition
   4.12                                                 and Resettlement (OP 4.12) does not apply as
                                                        project level works are being carried out on
                                                        public lands and not affecting private lands nor
                                                        livelihoods (either permanently or temporarily).
                                                        During the September 2014 mission, the PMU
                                                        confirmed that works involving rehabilitation as
                                                        part of GENRP AF will not be on sites where
                                                        internally displaced people (IDPs) are present.
                                                        Any rehabilitation or reconstruction that is
                                                        potentially on-sites with Internally displaced
                                                        peoples willbe excluded.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The project activities are expected to have significant positive environmental and social impacts
     on the entire population of Gaza Strip by re-constructing and rehabilitating part of the electricity
     network infrastructure that was damaged during the hostilities of July-August 2014 in the five
     governorates of Gaza Strip. This reconstruction will allow the restoration of electricity supply to
     households and social infrastructure such as water and sanitation facilities, hospitals, and schools.
     The scope of works and activities of sub-projects envisaged in this additional financing (AF) are
     similar in nature and scale to the original activities of the parent project (GENRP), and the
     additional financing of GENRP will have the same environmental category (B) of GENRP. The
     parent project (GENRP) and this proposed additional financing (AF) triggers only OP 4.01, no
     activities of the additional financing are expected to trigger other safeguards policies.

     The sub-projects and activities planned for the additional financing are expected to have minor
     negative environmental impacts such as dust, noise, and disruption of traffic and services. Those
     are easily mitigated and adequately addressed in the environmental management plan (EMP) of
     the parent project’s safeguards instrument (ESMF) that has been prepared, consulted, and
     publically disclosed in 2011. The project activities include purchase and installation of new
     transformers, and likely disposal of old and damaged transformers. If any transformer containing
     PCBs is to be discarded and disposed of, the Palestinian Energy and Natural Resources Authority
     (PENRA) and the Beneficiary (Gaza Electricity Distribution Company (GEDCO)) will handle and
     dispose of them safely and properly according to PENRA PCB management policy annexed to the
     ESMF of the parent project.


                                                Page 4 of 7
 Construction debris removal is now in process in many places in Gaza Strip, largely guided by UN
 agencies. Although construction debris is expected to be largely recycled for residential and road
 construction, new materials will be used for the civil works in this project. Similarly, UN Mine
 Action Service (UNMAS) as well as other humanitarian agencies are responsible for the safe
 removal of unexploded ordnances (UXO) and other explosive materials. Written documentation
 demonstrating completion of UXO clearance will be required as part of sub-project screening
 processes prior to commencement of civil works, as will be amended in relevant sections of the
 Operations Manual.

 During project preparation, it was assessed that OP 4.12 would not be triggered. The ESIA
 prepared by GEDCO indicates that the process of building new networks do not require land
 acquisition. Installation of the poles and underground cables will be through allocated land from
 the municipalities concerned with public services including the electricity networks. In addition,
 the team conducted site visits to around 10 percent of the total project sites. Based on this
 assessment and the verbal confirmation of GEDCO and PENRA, the team determined that OP
 4.12 will not be triggered. To further confirm this, written documentation was requested from
 PENRA to confirm that all works, even if there are design changes, will be undertaken on public
 land and will not result in relocation or loss of shelter, loss of assets or access to assets, or loss of
 income sources or means of livelihoods.

  During the September 2014 mission, the PMU confirmed works involving rehabilitation as part of
  GENRP AF will not be on sites where internally displaced people (IDPs) are present. Any
  rehabilitation/reconstruction that is potentially on-sites with internally displaced peoples will be
  excluded. Formal consultations were held across each of the five Gaza governorates. Information
  on the Additional Finance project will be communicated to the beneficiary population by the
  following process: Social and environment documentation will continue to be made available
  locally in easily accessible locations in the local language (Arabic).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Implementation of Gaza Electricity Network Rehabilitation Project (GENRP), implemented by
  PENRA and GEDCO, has been proceeding satisfactorily. Both PENRA and GEDCO have
  demonstrated good capacity in managing environmental risks and implementing the environmental
  management plan (EMP) successfully. Their performance on safeguards compliance for GENRP
  project was rated satisfactory for the entire duration of the project.

 As is the case of GENRP, the parent project, this AF will be implemented by PENRA through the
 existing Project Management Unit (PMU), which has a record of successful execution of other
 Bank and donor financed projects. The PMU operates under the umbrella of PENRA, while
 GEDCO will be responsible for the technical aspects of the project management. To handle the
 increased work load on the PMU in Gaza, PENRA will enhance its in-house capacity for


                                              Page 5 of 7
  management of environmental and social risks by assigning environmental and social specialists to
  the project to oversee the screening of sub-projects, the implementation of their ESMPs,
  monitoring compliance of GEDCO, and reporting to the Bank on safeguards regularly.

  Under GENRP, a complaints mechanism (Grievance Redress Mechanism or GRM) exists.
  GEDCO has assigned staff to document and respond to complaints and ensure general community
  awareness of where to make complaints during consultations and a public awareness campaign for
  the project. However, most complaints are responded to verbally and not documented. PENRA
  will work with GEDCO to ensure the GRM is accessible to the population and documentation of
  all complaints as part of the Additional Finance.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders of GENRP (parent project) and this additional Financing (AF) include
  PENRA, which is implementing through the existing Project Management Unit (PMU). The PMU
  has a record of successful execution of other Bank and donor financed projects. ThePMU operates
  under the umbrella of PENRA, who will be responsible for the administrative and fiduciary
  management of the project activities, while GEDCO will be responsible for the technical aspects
  of the project management and the physical implementation of the project activities. During
  GENRP project preparation, an ESMF was prepared, key stakeholders were consulted, and the
  ESMF was publicly disclosed both locally on PEA website and at the Bank Infoshop. GEDCO has
  demonstrated adequate ability to hold consultations with communities and been responsive to
  community needs and priorities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Nov-2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Nov-2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  West Bank and Gaza                                               28-Nov-2011
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?

                                           Page 6 of 7
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Simon J. Stolp
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/      Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (PMGR)               Date: 22-Sep-2014
   Manager:




                                             Page 7 of 7
