                                                                                 89555
                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: February 5, 2014

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: GHANA                                 Project ID: P147241
                                               Additional Project ID: P115247
Project Name: Support Rural Income Generation of the Poorest in the Upper East Region
Task Team Leader: Suleiman Namara
Estimated Appraisal Date: Dec 16, 2013         Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: AFTSE                           Lending      Instrument:Investment     Project
                                               Financing
Sector: Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (35%); General industry and trade (35%); Other
social services (30%)
Theme: Other social protection and risk management (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: JSDF Grant (US$2.7525m)
Environmental Category: B Partial
Is this a transferred project                  Yes [ ]               No [X]
Simplified Processing                          Simple [X]            Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises Yes [ ]        No [X]
and Emergencies)
Is this a Repeater project                                           Yes [ ]     No [X]

2. Project Objectives:

The development objective of this project is to improve incomes of the extreme poor households
by enabling them to manage their small farm and non-farm activities more productively and
sustainably.




                                              1
3. Project Description:

The project will pilot a participatory approach designed to provide technical and business skills
and small grants to extreme poor households located in rural communities in six districts of the
Upper East Region, where a majority of the population remains very poor yet lacks access to
poverty alleviation programs. Extreme poor households will be supported to improve their
income in a twofold manner: through the acquisition of skills relevant to their activities and via
small grants to enable them to manage their farm and non-farm activities more productively.

Community interest groups (CIGs) will play a central role. The JSDF pilot team will carry out a
micro-market assessment around each community to identify the needs and demands of potential
businesses and markets. Then the team will conduct awareness seminars to attract potential
beneficiaries. Once the beneficiaries are selected, those with common interests will be
approached to participate voluntarily on the CIG, which is comprised of 15 members. In
establishing the CIG, members should be counseled to seek business support from service
providers and the Department of Cooperatives (possibly to be registered as a cooperative).

The community interest groups (CIGs) will be provided business management skills for five
days, with the first three days focusing on business orientation, framework of business activities
relating to business planning–including, financial planning and management (e.g., basic book
keeping skills to enable CIGs to keep track of basic accounting, sales, expenses, simple
budgeting, discipline in spending, etc.), culture of saving for future investment, where and when
to borrow and debt management, marketing and operations planning and management,
culminating in the formulation of business plans for both groups and individuals. The last two
days will focus on, among others, group dynamics, including conflict resolution, leadership
skills, gender and power dynamics, and business ethics.

The appropriate training content will be developed for and tailored directly to the capacity,
training needs assessment, and aspirations of the CIG members. The training will be designed to
accommodate illiterate persons and will be conducted in local languages by local NGOs
procured through competitive bidding. The staff of the NGOs/ service providers will be provided
capacity (i.e., training of trainers) to enable them to provide business management training and
follow-up advisory services to the CIGs. The five days of training will not be conducted
continuously but will be spread over a period of time (perhaps two to three weeks) to allow
trainees to reflect on what they are learning and put it into practice, and at the same time allow
them enough time to continue attending to their businesses. After the CIGs have formulated their
business plans both as groups and as individual entrepreneurs, follow-up business advisory
services will be provided on a monthly basis to CIG members. The follow-up service will be
tiered to determine the optimal time/length of service. This will enable the beneficiaries to learn
as they implement their activities, while correcting for their mistakes.




                                                2
Project Component Details

Component 1: Business Management Support to Community Interest Groups for Their
Income Generation Activities (US$2,198,500)

This component will provide business support to the community interest groups (CIGs) for their
income generation opportunities and will have four sub-components: (i) promoting awareness of
income generation opportunities; (ii) providing necessary training in skills and business
management to CIGs; (iii) providing follow-up business advisory services to CIGs; and (iv)
providing small grants to CIGs and individuals.

Sub-component 1-1: Promoting Awareness of Income Generation Opportunities
(US$135,000): Participatory awareness seminars will be conducted to promote rural income
generation activities, select beneficiaries, and identify those with common interest who are
willing to form community interest groups (CIGs) in the respective communities. These
promotion activities will be coordinated with women’s associations in the district to promote
gender equality by encouraging women entrepreneurs. The GSOP developed the methodology to
identify committed beneficiaries through conducting awareness seminars for potential
beneficiaries. The methodology includes criteria to identify the extreme poor using the following
four items: typical sources of income, asset position, housing situation, and demography and
health.

Potential income generation activities that have been proposed are all family-based activities.
The possible farming options range from small livestock (guinea fowl rearing), dry season
farming (onions, peppers, okra, leafy vegetables, and tomatoes), and bee keeping to tree planting;
whereas, possible non-farming options range from handicrafts (basket and straw-hat weaving,
pottery), trades (auto mechanic, blacksmith, dress-maker, electrician, hair-dresser, quarrying,
tailor), local artisanal works (batik tie-dying, textile weaving), and small manufacturing
(baobab/groundnut/neem/soy bean oil extraction, dawa-dawa processing, shea butter and soap
processing) to petty trading.

Sub-component 1-2: Providing Necessary Training in Skills and Business Management to
Community Interest Groups (US$541,000): This would fund the support for capacity building
of staff (training of trainers) of the local NGOs to enable them to provide business management
training and business advisory services to the beneficiaries (US$16,000). Service providers will
offer or arrange the necessary training in skills and business management for income generation
activities. Business management training will be a workshop type for the CIGs to formulate their
feasible business plans and prepare for their implementation (US$315,000 and US$210,000 for
skills training relevant to the income generation activity). Local service providers (NGOs) will
be locally procured through a competitive bidding process.

Sub-component 1-3: Providing Follow-up Business Advisory Services to Community Interest
Groups (US$472,500): Upon completion of the approved business plans, the CIGs will receive
monthly follow-up business advisory services. In order to test the effectiveness of the follow-up
services on income generation by the beneficiaries, the number of follow-up advisory services
will be tiered: One third of the 210 CIGs will receive monthly advisory services for a period of

                                                3
six months (six follow-up visits); one third will receive monthly advisory services for a period of
one year (12 follow-up visits); and one third will receive no follow-up services but will be
provided at least six follow-up services after collecting and comparing the end data. With the
baseline and end survey data, it will be possible to estimate the impact of different times/lengths
of follow-up advisory services on the income generation by the beneficiaries.

Sub-component 1-4: Providing Small Grants to Community Interest Groups (US$1,050,000):
Based on their approved business plans, each CIG will be provided a small grant not exceeding
US$2,000 for their income generation activities (totaling US$420,000). The grant will be
received in two tranches: The first tranche of 50 percent of the grant will be provided to the CIGs
for implementation of their income generation activities after the formulation of a feasible
business plan. The second tranche of 50 percent of the grant will be provided to expand the
CIGs’ business operations upon successful implementation of their business plan after the first
six months of follow-up advisory services. Each individual CIG member will also be supported
with a small grant of US$100 maximum based on their approved business plans for a start-up
and another US$100 based on the revised business plan and the performance of the first six-
month income generation activities (totaling US$630,000).

Component 2: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and
Knowledge Dissemination (US$554,000)

In order to help ensure good project management as well as good governance and accountability,
including financial management within the project implementing agency and the associated
partners, this component will provide financing for basic grant administration and monitoring
and evaluation. It will also help ensure that lessons from the work are properly shared through a
knowledge dissemination sub-component.

The component is mandatory and will have two sub-components: (i) project management and
administration, and (ii) monitoring and evaluation and knowledge dissemination.

Sub-component 2-1: Project Management and Administration (US$260,400): This grant will
fund the costs of the Regional Coordinating Office (RCO) working for the GSOP to manage the
project, including: (i) financial management; (ii) procurement; (iii) auditing; (iv) participatory
strategic planning for sustainability and mainstreaming; (v) environmental assessment if
activities have an impact on their environment; and (vi) administrative costs, including
coordination with the implementing partners (service providers).

Sub-component 2-2: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Knowledge Dissemination
(US$270,000 and US$23,600 respectively): This sub-component will cover monitoring and
reporting as part of grant administration, including regular reports for project progress, financial
reporting, and monitoring of outcomes through a participatory monitoring process involving the
beneficiaries. It will also include conducting an impact evaluation. The participatory monitoring
and reporting system has been established, especially for collecting data on the results indicators,
as indicated in the Operations Manual.



                                                 4
In order to assess the impact of the project on the income generation of the beneficiaries, a
baseline survey will be conducted to cover the communities within the pilot districts and
communities in the neighboring districts not covered by the project. The end survey data will
also be used to assess the impact of different times/lengths of follow-up business advisory
services.

The sub-component will also cover knowledge dissemination to ensure that the weaknesses and
strengths of this pilot project become available to inform the formulation of income generation
projects of similar nature. Furthermore, lessons learnt on the project targeted at the extreme poor
and the creation of synergy with existing social protection projects will become useful to the
government and development partners. This knowledge dissemination will support: (i) electronic
platforms (video presentations, etc.); (ii) knowledge sharing workshops and conferences targeted
at the rural private sector development; and (iii) website development and maintenance.


4. Project Location and Salient Physical Characteristics Relevant to the Safeguards
Analysis:

The JSDF project will provide support to extreme poor households located in rural communities
in the six pilot districts of the Upper East Region where the GSOP is operating: (i) Bawku West;
(ii) Talensi-Nabdam; (iii) Kassena-Nankana West; (iv) Garu-Tempane; (v) Bongo; and (vi)
Builsa.

The Northern Savannah zone is characterized by vast areas of flat grassland, interspersed with
guinea savannah woodland, high temperatures and only one rainy season within a year. The rest
of the beneficiary regions lie within transitional, high forest zones and coastal grasslands. The
project has several hundred community level small scale sub-projects, predominantly in rural
areas, situated typically on communal lands.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

  Ms. Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFTCS) Social Safeguards Specialist
  Mr. Felix Nii Tettey Oku (AFTN3) Environmental Safeguards Specialist




                                                5
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered Explanation (Optional)
Environmental                   X     The project is to fund small farming and non-farming
Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)               income generation activities. The small farming options
                                      range from small livestock (guinea fowl rearing), dry
                                      season farming (onions, peppers, okra, leafy vegetables,
                                      and tomatoes), and bee keeping to tree planting; whereas
                                      non-farming options range from handicrafts (basket and
                                      straw-hat weaving, pottery), trades (auto mechanic,
                                      blacksmith, dress-maker, electrician, hair-dresser,
                                      quarrying, tailor), local artisanal works (batik tie-dying,
                                      textile    weaving),      and      small    manufacturing
                                      (baobab/groundnut/neem/soy bean oil extraction, dawa-
                                      dawa processing, shea butter and soap processing) to
                                      petty trading.

                                        It is anticipated that shea butter, dawa-dawa, and soap
                                        processing, and batik tie-dying will lead to the discharge
                                        of effluent into the environment which will contain
                                        BODs, CODs and dye. Quarrying will also lead to the
                                        issue of reinstatement of burrow pits. Pollution from
                                        hazardous waste from auto repair in terms of its disposal
                                        and management could also be anticipated.

                                        The project has adapted the ESMF for the GSOP to guide
                                        the management of potential environmental and social
                                        impacts.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP                 X
4.04)
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                    X
Pest Management (OP                     X
4.09)
Physical Cultural                       X
Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
Indigenous Peoples                      X
(OP/BP 4.10)
Involuntary Resettlement        X       There is a very slight possibility that this policy is likely
(OP/BP 4.12)                            to be triggered in that land and/or access may be required
                                        for the works under the project and in this context, the
                                        Resettlement Policy Framework prepared and disclosed
                                        for the GSOP will be used for the JSDF activities should
                                        the need arise.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP                   X
4.37)
Projects on International               X
Waterways (OP/BP7.50)


                                             6
Projects in Disputed                        X
Areas (OP/BP 7.60)


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

The project is to fund small farm and non-farm income generation activities. The small farming
options range from small livestock (guinea fowl rearing), dry season farming (onions, peppers,
okra, leafy vegetables, and tomatoes), and bee keeping to tree planting; non-farming options
range from handicrafts (basket and straw-hat weaving, pottery), trades (auto mechanic,
blacksmith, dress-maker, electrician, hair-dresser, quarrying, tailor), local artisanal works (batik
tie-dying, textile weaving), and small manufacturing (baobab/groundnut/neem/soy bean oil
extraction, dawa-dawa processing, shea butter and soap processing) to petty trading.

The project is largely small scale and is likely to have minimal environmental impact. It is
anticipated that shea butter, soap, and dawa-dawa processing as well as the batik tie-dying will
lead to the discharge of effluents into the environment that will contain BODs, CODs, and dye.
Quarrying will lead to the issue of reinstatement of burrow pits; the hazardous waste pollutants
from auto repair, in terms of its disposal and management, should be anticipated. However, the
negative environmental impacts expected from the project within the ESMF are minimal.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
None anticipated.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:
The team and clients will ensure that for dry-farming practices class 111 types of agrochemicals
are used to ensure the minimum negative environmental impact of the agrochemicals.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

The GSOP has already prepared an ESMF, which was disclosed and could be used for the JSDF
project. The GSOP is implementing a similar/same type of project and is quite familiar with
safeguard policy issues and mitigation plans. It has already prepared an ESMF that outlines the
principles and institutional arrangements as well as identifies the potential negative
environmental impacts. The ESMF also includes management plans for addressing the potential
negative impacts, which have been classified as minimal and reversible. Capacity building
arrangements for relevant staff of the project team and implementing entities have been included
to ensure full comprehension prior to and during project implementation. The GSOP prepared
the ESMF because the specific location of activities that would have such impacts were not

                                                 7
known at the time of appraisal. During implementation when these sites have been identified and
agreed on, follow-up management plans will be elaborated using the one outlined in the ESMF to
address specific issues.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:
The key stakeholders are the community interest groups (CIGs) and the NGOs operating in these
areas. The GSOP has identified these key stakeholders and established the mechanism for
consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected
people.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    Jan 29, 2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     May 13, 2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/orPhysical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                              8
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]    No [X]    N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]    No [x]    N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design?If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11– Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning              Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?



                                                9
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional Yes [ ]     No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [ ] No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparian been notified of the project?    Yes [ ] No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ] No [ ]        N/A [ X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]      No [ ]        N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [ ]      No [ ]        N/A [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?


                                               10
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:            Name                    Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Suleiman Namara         Sept. 25, 2013
 Environmental Specialist:           Felix Nii Tettey Oku    Sept. 25, 2013
 Social Development Specialist       Beatrix Allah Mensah    Aug. 20, 2013
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Alexandra C. Bezeredi   Oct. 10, 2013

 Signature for disclosure


 Sector Manager:                     Stefano Paternostro     Nov. 5, 2013

   Comments:
 Signature for disclosure




                                             11
