                                                                                        88635

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                      APPRAISAL STAGE



Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:        03-APR-14


I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                     Ghana                Project ID:                P145139
 Project Name:                OBA Urban Sanitation Facility for the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area
 Task Team Leader:            Ventura Bengoechea
 Estimated Appraisal Date: 14-Apr-2014             Estimated Board Date: N/A
 Managing Unit:               AFTU2                Lending Instrument:        Small RETF Grant

 Sector:                      Sanitation (100%)
 Theme:                       Urban services and housing for the poor (85%), Infrastructure services for
                              private sector development (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                              support (5%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00              No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                              Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       8.76                     Total Bank Financing:      0.00
 Total Cofinancing:                                 Financing Gap:             0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
     Local Communities                                                                             3.91
     Other (GPOBA Grant)                                                                           4.85
     Total                                                                                         8.76
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred        No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The Project Development Objective is to increase access to improved sanitation to people living in low
 income communities in the GAMA. This objective will be achieved by providing OBA subsidies to
service providers as an incentive to provide access to improved sanitation to low-income households.
OBA subsidies will be provided for the construction of sanitation facilities and the provision of
desludging services. OBA subsidies will bridge the gap low-income household’s face when trying to
install in-house sanitation facilities and stop open defecation or the use of public toilets. The project will
also leverage financial resources from micro-financing institutions and support the scale up of business
models that include soft loans for the provision of sanitation facilities in LICs of the GAMA. Thereby,
supporting the objective of increasing access to private sector finance in the sanitation sector, and
making environmental sanitation more affordable to the poor in GAMA.


3. Project Description
The project includes two components: (i) OBA subsidies for sanitation sub-projects; and (ii)
implementation support.

Component 1: OBA subsidies for sanitation sub-projects (US$3.91 million). The OBA Urban Sanitation
Facility will provide OBA subsidies to sub-project implementers for the provision of sanitation facilities
and desludging services to benefit people living in LICs in the GAMA, mostly crowded in compound
houses. The funds of the OBA Facility will be managed by the LGPCU within the MLGRD. The
provision of sanitation services will be delivered by sub-project implementers that can be MMAs,
NGOs, MFIs, equipment or desludging service providers, or community-based organizations.

Targeting to Low Income Communities (LICs) in the GAMA. The project will focus on priority LICs
proposed by MMAs to benefit from gaining access to sanitation and water. The proposed LICs will have
to pass the "low income" test, which will be validated by Ghana Statistical Services (GSS) using data
from the (2011) Census. Overcrowding will be used as a key proxy for "low income" status, together
with lack of access to improved sanitation. Therefore the proposed LICs will have to pass the test that 75
percent of the households live in one single room and 75% of the households do not have access to
improved sanitation facilities. Interventions will be prioritized if necessary taking into consideration
other factors such as density to maximize the impact. The implementation of the project is expected to
be very challenging due to the cramped nature of the LICs and at the same time very rewarding due to
the very positive impact of the provision of access to improved sanitation facilities in an
environmentally and sustainable manner.

There will be OBA subsidies for desludging operations to ensure the sustainability of the services.
Currently there exist various business models for the provision of sanitation facilities for LICs in the
GAMA. Some of them include subsides either covered by donors or NGOs or through the provision of
lower interest rates through micro-credits. These programs have been implemented in a low scale but
have the potential to be scaled up with the availability of additional funding. Most of these NGOs focus
mostly in providing the sanitation facilities to households and social promotion about the need of proper
sanitation, hygiene and behavioral change. In addition, they structure the financing model of the
sanitation facilities with contributions and commitments from landlords and tenants. However, most do
not support the operation phase when the facilities have to be emptied. There is a general impression that
desludging services are available in the GAMA and that they operate in general terms well. Current
desludging services are typically provided to higher income households and to public toilet facilities,
which can pay for the services because they are run as a business. In the case of LICs, affordability
constraints may result in manual emptying of septic tanks and sludge being dumped indiscriminately
nearby, which could have a significant negative health and environmental impact, especially as a result
of the increased access to sanitation. Also, the provision of sanitation facilities for compound houses
may imply new challenges in terms of having the right equipment (e.g. smaller trucks) that is able to
access cramped areas. The current desludging companies may not be willing to invest in the necessary
equipment unless they are given some assurance that the people in the LICs can afford their services.
Therefore, the OBA urban sanitation facility proposes to partially subsidize both, the provision of the
toilet facilities and the desludging operation to LICs to ensure the sustainability of the sanitation
facilities. The cost of providing targeted subsidies to LICs for desludging is considerable lower than the
health and environmental cost of continuing in the status quo that will continue to be the same if
subsidies are provided only for the provision of the sanitation facilities and households are not able to
afford the desludging services.

Component 2: Implementation support for project management and sub-project implementers
(US$940,000). This component will support three main activities (i) project management; (ii)
technical assistance to sub-project implementers and MMAs; and (iii) Independent verification of
outputs.

2.1 Project management (US$470,000). Project management will be carried out by the same PCU of the
IDA project, LGPCU. However, given the amount of work expected to promote the funds of the OBA
Facility, assess the sub-project proposals, and support sub-project implementation, is expected that
specific staff would need to be appointed to carry out these activities. Thus under this component the
project can hire consultants to manage and operate the OBA Facility, cover operating costs needed to
carry out activities in the field, and hire the external audit during the years of the Facility.

2.2 Technical assistance (US$100,000). This component will support the design and implementation of
solid sub-project proposals. Among the activities, the following are eligible for funding:

(i)     Preparation and dissemination of promotional material for sanitation facilities and campaigns to
publicize the OBA Facility (e.g. workshops) with service providers. This is expected to last throughout
the project, but mostly concentrated in the first two years of implementation.

(ii)    Support to sub-project proponents to identify, undertake due diligence, baseline data collection,
financial analysis, and business plans for the preparation of sub-project applications.

(iii)    Evaluation of sub-project applications to enable MMAs/WMDs to undertake necessary due
diligence on applicants’ proposals.
(iv)    Support sub-project implementers to implement proposal including social promotion, technical
support and establishment of sustainable arrangements for operating and managing sanitation facilities
with private sector participation.


2.3 Independent verification (US$370,000). This component will cover the cost of hiring an independent
verification agent (IVA) that will carry out base line studies of sub-project proposals that have been
approved by LGPCU before they start implementation to verify the conditions on the ground according
to the sub-project proposals. In addition, the IVA will verify the outputs, agreed in the implementation
agreement between the Facility and the sub-project implementers, upon which subsidy payments will be
approved.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project would be implemented in low income communities of the Greater Accra Metropolitan Area,
which encompasses 11 Metropolitan and Municipal Assemblies (MMAs) within the GAMA.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Felix Nii Tettey Oku (AFTN3 )
Afshan Khawaja (AFTCS )

6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes          The project includes the construction of
                                                   toilet facilities and the provision of
                                                   desludging services. These activities are of a
                                                   routine nature in general and do not have any
                                                   significant, long lasting environmental
                                                   impacts, or such impacts which would reach
                                                   beyond the immediate project area. Most
                                                   impacts would be restricted to the
                                                   construction phase and can be readily
                                                   mitigated with available and well-tested,
                                                   standard techniques and measures.
                                                   The key environmental risk associated with
                                                   the toilet facilities is their long term
                                                   operation. If the facilities are not properly
                                                   operated, they could negatively affect
                                                   ground and surface water quality, spreading
                                                   waterborne diseases, and causing nuisances
                                                   to the adjacent population by odors and
                                                   vectors. These are known issues and will be
                                                   duly considered in project design and in the
                                                   operational arrangements.

                                                   This project complements the IDA GAMA
                                                   Sanitation and Water Project that will be
                                                   financing collection and treatment facilities.
                                                   Since the specific sites were not known, the
                                                   IDA project prepared an Environmental and
                                                   Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                   and a framework EMP. The framework EMP
                                                   is specific on the nature of mitigation
                                                   measures, but generic on the location and
                                                   dimensions of project activities since these
                                                   were not known before appraisal. The ESMF
                                                   provides clear guidance for the preparation
                                                   of site-specific EIAs and EMPs during
                                                   project implementation when specific
                                                   environmental and social issues will be
                                                   analyzed in detail and a comprehensive
                                                   environmental and social impact assessment
                                                   (ESIA) developed, as well as ESMPs with a
                                                   long term operational planning perspective
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
Pest Management OP 4.09                    No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        Yes              The project triggers the OP 4.12 as there
                                                            could be land take due to the construction of
                                                            toilet facilities. The project has prepared a
                                                            Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                            which has been disclosed in country and at
                                                            the World Bank's InfoShop. An RPF was
                                                            used due to the fact that, at project
                                                            preparation was not possible to identify
                                                            specific sites for any project activity likely to
                                                            lead to involuntary resettlement. The RPF
                                                            developed by the Government of Ghana
                                                            (GoG) will be used to guide the preparation
                                                            of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or
                                                            Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans
                                                            (ARAPs), where required, after screening of
                                                            project activities and sites for particular
                                                            activities are done. RAPs/ARAPs would
                                                            then be properly reviewed, cleared and
                                                            disclosed as required prior to
                                                            implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No
Projects on International Waterways        No
OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental and social impacts for the actual civil works for which this OBA Facility will
provide subsidies to are expected to be, site-specific and can be managed to an accepted level. Potential
environmental impacts have been identified in regards to the provision of sanitation facilities and
desludging services. These activities may involve air and dust emissions, noise and vibration, open
pits/trenches, disposal of construction waste and public safety/health concerns. Other impacts include
interruption of natural drainage/hydrological patterns, water contamination, improper waste water
disposal (boreholes) and sludge/fecal matter disposal (latrines). All these environmental impacts are
manageable and could be contained.

An ESMF has been prepared to give guidance on mitigation and management of these impacts. From the
social side, the project may require pieces of land for the construction of the sanitation facilities, as
described above. This may temporarily affect peoples’ livelihoods, assets and access. For this reason the
borrower has prepared a resettlement policy framework that will serve as the guide to address any
involuntary resettlement issues related to the project. It is however expected that there will be no major
issues and possible cases would be easily addressed.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
Given the fact that in the targeted communities, one major challenge is available space, acquiring land
for the facilities could prove a major challenge. However, the extensive consultations undertaken and
the participatory design will serve to mitigate those challenges. In addition the RPF will provide
guidance and will be the reference point to address any such cases. On the other hand, the project is
likely to lead to expansion of economic activities and opening up of the respective local economies. The
positive social, health and economic impacts and influence of lifestyles can be considerable especially
for women, children and other vulnerable groups.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In response to all the policies triggered, the GOG has developed an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) which has an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the IDA
project that contemplated the activities to be funded by the OBA. The framework considers institutional
arrangements required to implement the environmental actions. The EMP also provides basis for the
identification and costing of mitigation measures against adverse impacts of sub-projects. All
subprojects will have to meet environmental standards as described in the POM, ESMF.

On social safeguards, a resettlement policy framework RPF sets the framework for addressing any
potential involuntary resettlement regarding land acquisition, livelihoods impact, and restriction of
access and what type of compensation or support a particular type of affectation can receive. The RPF
therefore assesses the existing legal and administrative framework, clarifies the principles underlying
the policy OP 4.12. it also considers the different types of possible impacts and their corresponding
mitigation measures, consultation processes and an outline for a resettlement action plan (RAP) should
that become necessary during project implementation. One important aspect of the RPF is a mechanism
for grievance redress and identification of training requirements for the implementing agency staff.

Mitigation measures will be enforced through contractor performance monitoring and evaluation as well
as the overall implementation of the ESMF with participatory supervision from the MMAs, the affected
persons and in collaboration with the EPA. Environmental Health Officers will help to ensure that
proper clearances and approvals are obtained for sanitation sub-projects. The GAMA will also sensitize
low income communities on the environmental aspects of their subprojects, and if needed train them to
understand their roles and responsibilities. Project staff will be responsible for the safeguards which will
be monitored and reported on as part of the projects periodic reporting. These measures will help to
identify environmental and social impacts way ahead and institute measures to address them effectively
and timely.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In the course of the preparation of the RPF and ESMF, there was considerable consultation with
metropolitan assemblies, communities, the EPA, Ministry of Local Government and Rural
Development and other stakeholders. The RPF and the ESMF details out the level of consultations and
issues raised during these consultation processes with a broad spectrum of stakeholders including
community leaders and institutional representatives. Some of the concerns raised and which have been
incorporated into the final documents included issues on land acquisition, community sensitization and
engagement with potential project affected people.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     17-Dec-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  09-June-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ghana                                                                           19-Dec-2012
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                     20-Feb-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                  09-June-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Ghana                                                                           7-March-2013
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]           No [ X ]   NA [   ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ X ]     No [   ]   NA [   ]
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation Yes [     ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ X ]         No [   ]   NA [   ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [ X ]      No [   ]    NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [ X ]    No [   ]    NA [   ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]   No [   ]    NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Ventura Bengoechea
Environmental Specialist        Name: Felix Nii Tettey Oku
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Coord:      Name: Alexandra Bezeredi                  Date: 05/04/2014
Sector Manager:                 Name: Alexander Bakalian                  Date: 06/05/2014
