                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                 CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                             Report No.: 95692

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12/02/2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Republic of Ghana                       Project ID: P152670
Project Name: Sankofa Gas Field Project (SGP)
Task Team Leader: Sunil Mathrani / Robert Schlotterer
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 15, 2015 Estimated Board Date: June 30, 2015
Managing Unit: GEEDR                             Lending Instrument: PRG
Sector: Oil, gas and mining
Theme: Natural gas exploration/ Infrastructure services for private sector dev.
IBRD Amount (US$m):
IDA Amount (US$m):
GEF Amount (US$m):
PCF Amount (US$m):
Other financing amounts by source: 3,400 (Private Investors)
IDA Guarantees                           700
Environmental Category: A
Simplified Processing                  Simple [ ]                    Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project           Yes [ ]                      No [X]

B. Project Objectives

 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the availability of natural gas for
 clean power generation.

C. Project Description

 The Project supports the development of the natural gas reserves of the Offshore Cape Three
 Points (OCTP) block by a package of IDA Payment and Debt Guarantees. Complementary
 World Bank Group support through MIGA insurance and IFC lending is also expected to be
 part of the final Project security and financing structure. The OCTP block will be developed by
 two private investors (Eni of Italy and Vitol of Switzerland/Netherlands) together with GNPC.
 The Sankofa Gas Field non-associated gas reserves can provide 170mmcfd on base load gas
 supply for nearly 15 years. This is sufficient to supply close to 1,000MW of power generation.
 The Sankofa gas field will come on line in 2020, when gas from other Ghanaian gas fields, are
 expected to start to decline. The proposed IDA Guarantees will thus help to mobilize much
 needed private investment in Ghana’s domestic gas production to provide affordable and
 relatively clean fuel to provide electricity.
 The Sankofa and Gye Nyame gas fields (“Sankofa Gas Field”) and the Sankofa East oil field,
 are located 60km offshore in the Western Region of Ghana. The Sankofa Gas Field is part of
 the OCTP block, together with the Sankofa East oil field. The OCTP will be developed in two
 phases. Phase 1 of the OCTP encompasses the development of the Sankofa oil field and Phase
 2 caters for the development of non-associated gas in the Sankofa Gas Field. IDA Guarantee
 support proposed hereunder would only relate to the OCTP's Phase 2 development. The oil
 development structure under the OCTP Phase 1 will not benefit from IDA Guarantee support.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):
  The Sankofa Gas Field is in the Gulf of Guinea, at a depth of about 1,000m, approximately
  60 km south of the Ghanaian coastal community of Atuabo. Gas will be transmitted from
  the FPSO via a 63-km undersea pipeline that makes its landfall slightly to the west of the
  community of Sanzule, in the Western Region of Ghana. From the landing point, a pipeline
  of approximately 800 m will convey the gas to the Onshore Receiving Facility (ORF) for
  compression. A short pipeline will carry the compressed gas to the GNGC pipeline, adjacent
  to the ORF site to the north. The locations of the additional compression stations mentioned
  in the project description are not yet known, but at the one required for interconnection with
  the GNGC pipeline, and possibly both, would be considered associated facilities that would
  need to be included in the safeguards arrangements for the project.

 With the exception of small patches of swamp forest and wet evergreen forest, the forest that
 may once have been on the ORF site has been disturbed by human activity -- mainly
 plantations of cassava, pineapple, coconut and oil palm. A small tributary to the Amansuri
 River crosses the site from west to east near the shore and may have scattered mangroves.
 There are dense mangroves along this tributary but further downstream, off the proposed
 site. The beach crossing itself will be challenging, because the shoreline is rock with a
 relatively thin layer of sand. Coastal erosion is a problem in the area, and depending on how
 the pipeline is installed, it could aggravate the erosion. Endangered sea turtles and various
 marine mammals including whales frequent the Gulf of Guinea, which is also an important
 resource for artisanal and commercial fisherfolk. Sea turtles use the Ghanaian beaches for
 nesting; whether the location of the pipeline landfall is a nesting area will have to be
 determined in the ESIA. There are no living coral reefs in the project-affected area.

 AAt least three villages – Sanzule, Bakanta, and Krisan – are close enough to the proposed
 location to be at some risk in the event of an accident resulting in explosion or fire at the
 ORF. Acquisition of land for the project will affect the livelihoods of 202 persons, 166 of
 whom are farmers. There are 21 structures on the land; 13 of them are residential, most of
 them simple houses on the beach used by migrant fishermen with permission of the village
 chief. There are 264 farm plots to be acquired, and 51 aquaculture ponds. The presence of
 shrines and other sacred places has been confirmed.
E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

 Eni has a well-established corporate Health, Safety and Environment (HSE) Policy endorsed by
 its Managing Director and applicable to all operations of the company and to its contractors and
 subcontractors. The HSE Policy and the Operation Controls that are associated with it have
 been developed and are implemented in accordance with ISO 14001 Environmental
 Management System specifications. Eni also has an in-house Environmental, Social and Health
 Impact Assessment Standard that is aligned with international best practice. The Eni project
 team will include an environmental advisor and an environmental lead, both reporting to the
 resident engineer.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

 Thomas Walton, Consultant – Environmental Specialist
 Demba Balde-- Social Safeguards Specialist

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                          Yes          No          TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental
                                                                     X
and Social Risks and Impacts
The project has been categorized as Category A, requiring a full ESIA, and meets the criteria in
OP 4.03 for application of the Performance Standards. Ghana EPA is also requiring a full ESIA.
Eni has already prepared a separate ESIA for OCTP Phase 1 that is about to be submitted to EPA
for review. The ESIA for Phase 2 (SPG) will include the FPSO, since it is a shared facility, and
will address the other impacts of Phase 1 as part of the cumulative assessment. One or both of
the additional compressor stations GNPC will need to utilize the gas will be covered in the ESIA
as associated facilities. Drilling operations, laying of the undersea pipeline, installing the beach
crossing, installing the pipeline from the beach to the ORF (which involves a river crossing and
disturbance of some wet evergreen forest mixed with coconut palms), and clearing the locations
for the ORF, base camp and helipad are the main sources of potential environmental impact
during construction. During operation, the most significant event that could affect the marine and
coastal environments is a crude oil spill from the FPSO, which handles oil and associated gas
from the OCTP Phase 1 as well as non-associated gas from SGP, or from the rupture of a flow
line from an oil well to the FPSO. Possible accidents involving gas leaks, fire or explosion at the
FPSO or the ORF or its pipelines are also concerns. Management of drilling wastes and cuttings,
solid waste and hazardous waste, air emissions and noise will be important. Aspects of the
natural and human environments that could be impacted are: air quality, marine water quality,
surface and groundwater quality at the ORF site, coastal erosion, noise levels at the FPSO, ORF,
and drilling rigs, occupational health and safety, aquatic/benthic life disturbance (fishes, marine
mammals and turtles), community health and safety, livelihoods from farming and fishing
activities, and disturbance of cultural heritage.
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                   X
Any facilities involving gas require meticulous attention to workplace safety and, in Africa there
must be provisions to protect facilities and personnel from criminal activities that have affected
offshore oil and gas operations, particularly in Nigeria, including piracy, attacks on and
occupation of facilities, hostage-taking, and theft of oil. The ESIA will include a review of
relevant Ghanaian workplace and labor legislation (e.g., the Factories Act) as well as a review of
Eni human resources management policies and procedures. The ESMP will include appropriate
recommendations for incorporation into the ESMS.
Performance Standards (please explain why)                          Yes         No          TBD
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                   X
Pollution prevention and response to accidents involving pollutant releases will be central
concerns in the ESIA. Spill prevention plans and emergency response plans will be prepared in
association with the ESIA. Since part of the project is located in the sea, all applicable
conventions addressing marine pollution will be taken into account. WBG EHS Guidelines and
good international industry practices will serve as references for development of the ESMP.
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                         X
Emergency Response Plans will need to be prepared and the potentially affected communities
will need to be made aware of them. Security arrangements to protect the FPSO and to keep
ships and fishing boats out of the restricted area need to be carefully planned, implemented and
supervised to minimize conflict with fisher folk and other users of Gulf of Guinea waters.
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                  X
Eni is acquiring the land through voluntary sale after direct negotiation with owners rather than
expropriation. However given the complexity of land ownership in Ghana, the large number of
farmers who are not the actual owners but use the land under various traditional arrangements
with the owners, and the presence of migrant fishermen who have only informal rights to occupy
homes on the beach, it is sensible to apply PS5. Eni has already begun drafting a Resettlement
Action Plan, following the guidelines in OP 4.12.
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable
                                                                     X
Management of Living Natural Resources
The amount of habitat on the proposed ORF site that could be considered natural rather than
already converted or, at best, modified, is small and should be avoidable in project design. The
marine and coastal waters and their ecosystems provide habitat for fish of importance to local
livelihoods and the economy as well as habitat for endangered sea turtle species and for marine
mammals, some of which are endangered. Key issues to be addressed in the ESIA will be:
prevention of pollution that could affect marine life or, via the tributary on site, the ecology of
the Amansuri Estuary, and avoidance of disturbance to sea turtle nesting. Careful monitoring to
assess the effectiveness of mitigation measures and detect unforeseen impacts will be important.
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                         X
No groups that meet the definition in PS7 have been identified in the project area.
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                              X
Preliminary investigations have determined that there is one deity that occupies two sacred
locations on the project site and may need to be resettled, with appropriate ceremonies. There are
shrines on some of the properties that will be acquired.
OP 7.50: Projects on International Waterways                         X
The Gulf of Guinea is an international waterway. Riparian countries will need to be notified of
the proposal to proceed with SGP. Notification can be most efficiently done via Ghana’s
representative on the Gulf of Guinea Commission.

III. SAFEGUARDS PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: February 3, 2015.
B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: NA

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: Eni’s
   consultant is beginning the scoping stage of the ESIA on December 1, 2014. All baseline
   surveys will have been completed by December 31, 2014. An ESIA report suitable for
   disclosure is anticipated in February 2015. The RAP will be finished and disclosed at the
   same time, if not before.

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                             Name: Sunil Mathrani                                                Date
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards                           Name: Alexandra Bezeredi                                            Date
    Coordinator:
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                               Name: Meike van Ginneken                                            Date
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
