                   INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                         ADDITIONAL FINANCING


I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 03/25/2014                                      Report No.: 87911
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Ghana                               Project ID: P149444
Project Name: Transport Sector Project Additional Financing
Task Team Leader: Kavita Sethi
Estimated Appraisal Date: April 17, 2014     Estimated Board Date: June 24, 2014
Managing Unit: AFTTR                         Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                             Loan
Sector: Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (51%); Urban Transport (36%);
Public administration- Transportation (13%)
Theme: Rural services and infrastructure (50%); City-wide Infrastructure and Service
Delivery (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):             0.00
IDA Amount (US$m.):             25.00
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0.00
Other financing amounts by source:
         BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             0.00
                                                                        0.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                        Simple []           Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]     No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives

1.      The Project Development Objective is being revised. The revised PDO is to
improve mobility of goods and passengers on selected roads through reductions in travel
time, vehicle operating costs and enhanced road safety awareness.

3. Project Description

2.      The Additional Financing of $25 million will cover cost overruns for the original
Project and its original costs at US$225.0 million equivalent of IDA financing. The
Ministry of Roads and Highways (MRH) and the Ministry of Transport (MOT) will
continue to lead the implementation of the project.

3.     The original project has seven components: (a) Support to Ministry of Roads and
Highways (MRH); (b) Support to Road Sector and Educational Entities; (c) Improvement
of Trunk Roads; (d) Improvement of Urban Roads and infrastructure; (e) Improvement of
Feeder Roads; (f) Support to Ministry of Transport (MOT) and Other Transport Sector
Entities; (g) Project Management.

4.      The additional financing is targeted for the completion of Components C and D of
the project:

   a. Component C - Rehabilitation of Ayanfuri-Asawinso Road. This component
      focuses mainly on the construction of the 52.2 km Ayanfuri-Asawinso Road
      which forms a South-North transport corridor western Ghana, linking the timber
      and mineral rich areas, and neighboring countries located West and North of
      Ghana to the deep water port of Takoradi. t is a continuation of the EU funded
      Tarkwa-Bogoso-Ayanfuri stretch currently under construction, and this corridor is
      a critical section of the national trunk road network which links the Ashanti and
      Western Regions of Ghana. The design of the Ayanfuri-Asawinso road did not
      adequately address the issues encountered during actual implementation. This has
      resulted in a review of drainage and pavement structure, as well as provision for
      slope stabilization leading to an overall additional cost of US$7.64 million
      including contingencies.

   b. Component D - Construction of Selected Roads in the Accra East Corridor.
      About 15 km of roads (dual carriageways) are being constructed under three
      separate contracts: Giffard Road (Lot 1) and the Burma Camp Roads Phase 1 and
      Phase 2, i.e. (Lot 2 and 3). The roads which are dual carriageways form part of a
      network of arterials that link the suburban areas in the eastern part of Accra into
      the Central Business district, as well as to critical facilities including the Accra
      Airport and 37 Military Hospital. All three contracts have been awarded (at a total
      contract price of US$41.5 million) and are at different stages of implementation
      since September 2012. However, project implementation has a revealed a number
      of weaknesses and inadequate considerations in the project design. These include
      the need for a review of the provision for relocation of electricity, water and
      telecommunications facilities, changes to the alignment in view of the actual
      positioning of utilities which has been revealed during construction, missing gap
      of 1.6 km of soft soil, reviews of the railway bridge leading to the Spintex Road.
      Furthermore, the last 1.2 km of Lot 3 of the design went through a built up area
      resulting in very high compensation costs and social impacts, as well as review of
      a 1.2 km section to incorporate the local road network on account of the sheer
      magnitude of the resettlement costs which was entirely prohibitive to GoG. The
      Department of Urban Roads has taken action to mitigate the increase in
      construction costs by rescoping the final section of the Burma Camp Road, Phase
      2, from a dual carriageway to a slightly modified route as a single carriageway
      which is integrated into the local road network of the Teshie area. Other planned
      improvements to the local road network have also been dropped to free up funds
      for the main link. An additional amount of US$17.86 million will be required to
      address the issues identified. While project implementation will need about nine
      additional months to be completed. The works are currently at about 65 percent
      of physical progress overall.
5.      As part of the processing of the additional financing, the project will also be
restructured to modify the following components:

     c. Component E: Improvement of Feeder Roads. The implementation of the
        feeder roads component is in two phases. Implementation of the first phase is
        completed, and implementation of the second phase, targeted at commercial
        agriculture is on-going. Funds allocated to the first phase of the works were not
        fully utilized, and will be allocated to the second phase of the feeder roads
        implementation. The modified scope will result in a saving of US$0.5 million,
        which contributes to the overall mitigation of rising costs under the project.

     d. Component F: Support to MOT and other Transport Sector Entities. This
        component focuses mainly on provision of critical equipment as well as feasibility
        studies and plans for the transport sector. All the equipment has been procured
        and 8 out of 10 studies are ongoing. The studies and equipment alone are now at
        about US$1.0 million in excess of originally planned costs. GoG has indicated its
        decision to implement the feasibility study for the dualization of the Tema
        Meridian Port Road under a different source of funding and therefore this activity
        (estimated at US$ 0.5million) has been dropped from the project releasing
        significant amount of funds to cover cost increases on existing project activities.
        Detailed design work for Takoradi airport (US$0.5 million) has also been dropped
        due to challenges with getting agreement with the military for the needed
        modifications to the existing infrastructure. The funds for the dropped activities
        have therefore been reallocated to absorb the additional costs on the studies and
        equipment procured under this component. These changes are cost neutral with
        and savings absorbed by the ongoing studies and equipment procured.


4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis

6.     The trunk road rehabilitation is located in the Western Region, on a 52 km portion
of the Ayanfuri-Asawinso road which forms a South-North transport corridor western
Ghana, linking the timber and mineral rich areas, and neighboring countries located West
and North of Ghana to the deep water port of Takoradi.

7.     The urban road rehabilitation is located in the capital city of Accra, particularly
along a 5.7 km stretch of the Burma Camp Road Phase 1, 3.66 km of Burma Camp Phase
2 and 5.7 km stretch of the Giffard Road.

8.      The feeder road rehabilitation is distributed in throughout the country.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Martin Fodor (AFTN3)
   Mr Franklin Gavu (AFTTR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                           X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                           X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

9.      Components C, D and E of the project include major civil works (road
rehabilitation and upgrading). These are associated with potential environmental and
social impacts typical for upgrading of road surface, widening or the road body and
adjusting curves on the trunk and urban roads, and spot repairs and grading of feeder
roads. Potential environmental and social impacts include dust, noise, traffic disruption
due to movement of machinery, clearing of vegetation, re-opening of borrow areas,
health and safety issues, social issues from establishment of workers camps in the vicinity
of local communities, land take and resettlement, etc. The works are ongoing with
moderately satisfactory safeguards performance with minor shortcomings associated
mainly with timeliness of resettlement compensation and lower intensity of safeguards
supervision. The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and
consequently, OP 4.11, Physical Cultural Resources have also been triggered, as the
policy applies whenever OP 4.01 applies, i.e. whenever there is likely to be significant
civil works. Also Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has been triggered. Due to
potential impacts of a 2 km section of the road on the Anhwiaso Forest Reserve, OP 4.36
on Forests will be applied as well. The original project has been assigned the
Environmental Category A which is retained for the Additional Financing as well.

10.     An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), and a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were prepared for the road sector in 2006,
disclosed and applied for this project. They will continue to be used for screening. Site-
specific Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs), Environmental Management Plans
(EMPs), and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the ongoing works (Ayanfuri –
Asawinso Trunk Road, Teshie – Link Road, Giffard Road, Burma Camp Road), were
prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal of the original project, and the mitigation
measures contained therein continue to be implemented. Many Environmental and Social
Management Plans (ESMP) have been prepared during project implementation (84 in the
first year, which were consulted upon, cleared and disclosed in November 2011, and 18
in the second year, which were consulted upon, cleared and disclosed in May 2014). In
addition, associated Abbreviated Resettlement Plans have also been prepared for the
feeder roads component after the appraisal of the original project. These have been
disclosed between November 2012 and March 2013. Updates to the ESIA/ESMP and
RAP due to design changes (road alignment) are underway for the Ayanfuri – Asawinso
trunk road.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

11.    Potential adverse indirect long term impacts due to the rehabilitation and
construction of the roads are hydrological changes and soil erosion from culvert
discharges. These are localized.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.

12.     Two alternatives were considered for the roads to be rehabilitated under the
project: the ‘no action’ option and the ‘rehabilitation of road’ option. The ‘no action’
alternative assumes that there will be no rehabilitation of the road implying that the road
would be left in its present state of disrepair. This would lead to high vehicular-vehicular
and vehicular–pedestrian conflicts and road accidents resulting in loss of life and property
and reduction in development opportunities such as easy movement of people and
agricultural produce.

13.     The ‘rehabilitation of road’ option assumes that the road will be improved to
correct the geometric defects so as to improve the standard of road and improve road
safety. Even though the initial cost of the construction would be high, the accrued
benefits to be derived (socially, culturally and economically) would by far supersede the
‘no-action’ alternative.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

14.    Project has put in place a full complement of environmental and social safeguards
personnel in the various road agencies, on the side of the contractors and on the
supervising engineers’ teams, building on the capacity foundations established by
predecessor operation RSDP. The intensity and level of supervision, and the agencies’
management attention, however, needs to increase to further upgrade the performance
from moderately satisfactory levels. As part of the RSDP initiatives, environmental desks
were established at DUR, GHA and DFR. Review of both environment and social
safeguards documents, and monitoring of compliance at supervision stage, have been the
core tasks of the desks. The environmental desks are constituted of two highway
engineers with masters in environmental management (Team leaders), and supported by
highway engineers in DUR and three sociologists in GHA. DUR and DFR would benefit
from further strengthening their social safeguards capacity, likewise, DFR. TSP will
continue to support the environmental desks of DUR, GHA and DFR with the aim to: a)
train more staff, b) strengthen the analytical capacity, and c) facilitate the implementation
and monitoring of the EMPs and the RAPs prepared for each of the proposed road
projects. In addition, TSP will continue work with other Bank funded infrastructure
projects in Ghana, in view of creating synergies and a pool of local experts.

15.     Mitigation of adverse environment and social impacts of development projects is
supported by national laws. The Land Valuation Board provides the executive instrument
for any expropriation of land or property for development projects (private or public),
after receiving detailed designs and carrying out its own field inspections. The Land
Valuation Board has both the human capacity and the logistic resources requested for the
work.

16.    Appropriate safeguards instruments have been prepared for each road project. An
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), was prepared for the road
sector in 2006, and re-disclosed for this project. Environmental impact assessments
including EMPs for each of the three project roads have also been prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed to guide avoidance, minimization and mitigation of potential adverse
environmental and social impacts. These safeguards instruments have been reviewed by
the environmental desks of DUR and GHA, and cleared by the Bank. The mitigation
measures of the EMPs have been costed and included in the civil works contracts.
ESMPs for the planned second batch of feeder roads were prepared and submitted to the
Bank.

17.     Individual Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been prepared, for each
project road. They have been reviewed by the environmental desks of DUR and GHA
and cleared by the Bank. Also, they were disclosed in prior to project appraisal; in Ghana
on December 22, 2008 and at Infoshop on December 23, 2008. The RAPs identified 333
households that would be adversely affected by the project, of which 87 by a permanent
loss their properties and 244 by partial loss. However, the RAPs have been updated in
the course of implementation of the civil works in response to design changes and
modifications and ground conditions. These will be disclosed before appraisal of the AF.

18.    The EIA and SIA teams included both social scientists and environmentalists. The
socioeconomic data collected through review of existing documentation, public
consultations, and field studies, covered issues related to land tenure, land acquisition,
involuntary resettlement, road safety, HIV/AIDS, vulnerable groups, indigenous peoples
and cultural property.

19.     The following specific safeguards instruments were prepared and disclosed for the
Project: (a) Environmental and Social Management Plans (84 for the Year 1 Projects) for
Wet Semi-Equatorial Zone, Department of Feeder Roads, August 2011; (b)
Environmental and Social Management Plans (Year 1 Projects) for South Western
Equatorial Zone, Department of Feeder Roads, August 2011; (c) Environmental and
Social Management Plans Year 1 Projects) for Tropical Continental Zone, Department of
Feeder Roads, August 2011; (d) ESMPs for Year 2 projects (18); (e) Abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plan (Year 1 Projects), Department of Feeder Roads, July 2012; and
(f) Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (Year 2 Projects), Department of Feeder
Roads, November 2012.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

20.     The design of the Project has been participatory at several levels: at national level,
at regional level, at district level and at donor community level. At the level of districts,
public consultations were held in local communities along the selected road projects
throughout the environmental impact assessments (EIAs) and social impact assessments
(SIAs) processes. Based on the Bank supervision mission to Ayanfuri – Asawinso
construction site, a grievance mechanism is in place utilizing to a high degree established
local structures, although log keeping needs to improve and separate from other records
of the safeguards specialist on the supervising consultant team.

21.     Key stakeholders in the disclosure of the safeguards instruments are the
Environment Protection Authority (EPA), the Ministry of Transportation, DUR and
GHA. Pursuant internal clearance of the EIAs (including EMPs) and the RAPs, the
safeguards instruments were sent to the EPA for national clearance. Subsequently, they
are sent from the Ministry of Roads and Highways to the Bank for clearance. Once
cleared by the Bank, they were disclosed in country and at the InfoShop, the process is
explicitly explained in the ESMF, the RPF, the EIAs, the EMPs and the RAPs prepared
by the client.

B. Disclosure Requirements Date
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT/AUDIT/MANAGEMENT PLAN/:
Environmental and Social Framework for the Transport Sector
Development Program by Center for Environment and Health
Research & Training (January 2007)
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12/23/2008
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    12/23/2008
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12/23/2008
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                    04/01/2009
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Environmental Impact Assessment for Ayanfuri – Asawinso
Road by Ghana Highway Authority (August 2008)
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12/23/2008
 Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    12/23/2008
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12/23/2008
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                    04/01/2009
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for Accra East
Corridor by Municipal Development Collaboration Ltd (June
2008)
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   12/23/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               12/23/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                12/23/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                04/01/2009
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Environmental and Social Management Plans for Feeder Roads
- Year 1 Projects (August 2011)
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   11/14/2011
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               11/15/2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                11/23/2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
RESETTLEMENT ACTION PLAN/FRAMEWORK/POLICY PROCESS:
Resettlement Policy Framework for Transport Sector
Development Program by the Ministry of Transportation
(January 2007)
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   12/23/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               12/23/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                12/23/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                04/01/2009
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan for Rehabilitation of Ayanfuri –
Asawinso Road by Ghana Highway Authority (December 2008)
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   12/23/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               12/23/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                12/23/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                04/01/2009
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan for Accra East Corridor by
Municipal Development Collaboration Ltd (December 2008)
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   12/23/2008
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               12/23/2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                12/23/2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                04/01/2009
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (Year 1 Projects) by
Department of Feeder Roads (July 2012)
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                   11/26/2012
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                               12/05/2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                12/06/2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                   N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Environmental and Social Management Plans for Feeder Roads
- Year 2 Projects (February 2013)
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                           No
Date of receipt by the Bank                                          02/28/2013
Date of "in-country" disclosure                                      11/29/2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                                       05/05/2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                        N/A
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (Year 2 Projects) by
Department of Feeder Roads (November 2012)
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                         No
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02/07/2013
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                    02/27/2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03/06/2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                                                                        N/A
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                 No
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)             No
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the             Yes
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?               No
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential             No
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process                 Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
  If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector        No
  Manager review the plan?
  The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       No
  Infoshop?
  Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       No
  form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
  groups and local NGOs?
  All Safeguard Policies
  Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities    Yes
  been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
  policies?
  Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project   Yes
  cost?
  Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the           Yes
  monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
  Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the             Yes
  borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                             Name                          Date
Task Team Leader:                   Kavita Sethi
Environmental Specialist:           Martin Fodor
Social Development Specialist       Franklin Gavu
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Alexandra Bezeredi
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Supee Teravaninthorn
  Comments:
