                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                             CONCEPT STAGE
.
                                                                                  Report No.: 93856
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:             10-Oct-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                      Ghana                 Project ID:                 P124060
    Project Name:                 Ghana: Additional REDD+ Readiness Preparation Support
    Task Team Leader:             Martin Fodor
    Estimated Board Date:         N/A
    Managing Unit:                GENDR
    Sector(s):                    Forestry
    Theme(s):                     Climate change
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                  No
    (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        5.20                       Total Bank Financing:       0.00
    Financing Gap:             0.00
        Financing Source                                                                             Amount
        Recipient                                                                                         0.00
        Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                                                5.20
        Total                                                                                             5.20
    Environmental Category        B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No
    Is this a Transferred         No
    project?
.
    B. Project Objectives
    The Project Development Objective is to design a socially and environmentally sound national strategy
    to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and to develop a reference scenario of
    emissions from deforestation and degradation that takes into account national circumstances.
.
    C. Project Description
    The Additional Funding activities will enhance Ghana’s capacities to achieve the Project Development
    Objective. The Additional Funding grant will finance activities identified in Ghana R-PP and MTR
    currently not financed by the original grant (i.e. the original $3.4 million FCPC grant that has helped the
    Recipient prepare a SESA, ESMF and RPF and that closed in November 2014).
    Completion of the additional activities will enable Ghana to generate a Readiness Package by November
    2015. The Additional Funding will also support Ghana’s efforts towards preparation of an ER- Program
    under consideration by the Carbon Fund of the World Bank, for piloting its REDD+ Strategy and
    leading to potential signing of Emissions Reductions Program Agreement (ERPA).
    The structure and implementation arrangements of the AF activities will remain as under the original
    grant. The AF activities are organized into three components as follows:

                                                                                             Budget
                                       Component
                                                                                           (US$ million)
     1. Support to National REDD+ Readiness Management Arrangements                            1.23
     2. Establishment of a Measurement, Reporting and Verification System                      1.72
     3. Project preparation support for Emission Reduction Program and testing of              1.73
     REDD+ readiness arrangements through ongoing pilots
     Contingency (10%)                                                                          0.52
     TOTAL                                                                                      5.20

    Component 1: Support to National REDD+ Readiness Management Arrangements
    Activities under this component will support the National REDD+ Readiness Management
    Arrangements with the aim of creating a robust system for managing and coordinating Ghana’s REDD+
    readiness process. The Component will finance (i) operational costs of the REDD+ Secretariat and
    Working Groups for coordinating readiness activities, (ii) establishment of arrangements for the flow of
    REDD+ funds in Ghana, and (iii) setting up of the Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism.

    Component 2: Establishment of a Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) System

    Activities under this component will provide support for addressing gaps in establishment and
    operationalization of Ghana’s MRV system. This will entail improvements to the reference
    level, including assessing the cost effectiveness of using remote sensing for estimating
    emissions from degradation, and support the strengthening of the FC’s Resource Management
    Support Centre (RMSC) and Climate Change Unit (CCU) to perform their designated roles. A
    REDD+ Registry, including an Information System for Multiple Benefits and a Safeguards
    Information System, will be established.

    Component 3: Project preparation support for Emission Reduction Program and testing of
    REDD+ readiness arrangements through ongoing pilots

    This component has an objective of leveraging finance from the Additional Funding Phase to enable
    Ghana to develop and complete its Emissions Reduction Program Document and also test arrangements
    for key thematic areas of REDD+ implementation.
.
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
    known)
    The AF activities are limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at the
    national and sub-national levels and do not include the implementation of site specific REDD+
    programs on the ground.
    E. Recipient Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
    National institutional capacity for the implementation of safeguards at the level required for REDD+
    readiness will continue to be strengthened. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in Ghana has
    experience of conducting sector and project specific assessments, and monitoring of social and
    environmental impacts. A SESA Sub-Working group made up of government and civil society
    representatives has been set up under the National REDD+ Technical WG to steer the SESA process in
    the readiness phase. A national consultancy firm assisted the Government in conducting the SESA and
    ensuring that the SESA feeds back into the national REDD+ strategy development process. A staff from
    the Environment Protection Agency in Ghana, which is experienced in application of national
    environmental safeguards, is represented on the SESA Sub-Working Group. The Forestry Commission
    assigned a dedicated staff to work on safeguards. The AF grant will support additional safeguards
    training for this staff. Broader safeguards capacity building activities for a wider range of personnel may
    also be supported as needed, in coordination with capacity building efforts under the Forest Investment
    Program (FIP) and the Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM), and other parallel Bank funded operations
    such as Natural Resources and Environmental Governance Technical Assistance Project (NREG TA).

.
    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
    Kenneth M. Green, Senior Safeguards Specialist
    Paula F. Lytle ( GURDR ), Senior Social Development Specialist
.
.
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP           Yes              In view of the nature of REDD + Readiness the
    4.01                                                      Recipient conducted a Strategic Environmental
                                                              and Social Assessment (SESA) under the
                                                              original Grant, used to inform the preparation
                                                              of the REDD+ strategy. The draft SESA
                                                              documents extensive consultation across
                                                              numerous stakeholders and integrates key
                                                              environmental and social considerations
                                                              relevant to REDD+ including all those covered
                                                              by the safeguard policies. An Environmental
                                                              and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                              was also drafted as part of the original
                                                              Readiness Grant that includes provisions for
                                                              managing and mitigating the environmental
                                                              and social risks related to investments and
                                                              future carbon finance transactions. The ESMF
                                                              includes procedures, along with appropriate
                                                              institutional arrangements for screening,
                                                              reviewing, implementing and monitoring
                                                              specific activities to minimize or avoid risks
                                                              and impacts.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes              Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
                                          have significant positive impacts on natural
                                          habitats. Potential impacts of the National
                                          REDD+ Strategy on natural habitats were
                                          assessed through the SESA and are included in
                                          the ESMF. There is no anticipation of
                                          modification of critical natural habitats nor
                                          reversal of biodiversity status in the program
                                          areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
                                          have significant positive impacts on forest, in
                                          that the main goal of the program is to reduce
                                          deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                          contributing      to    the    well-being      of
                                          forest-dependent communities.           Potential
                                          impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy on
                                          natural forests were assessed through the
                                          SESA and are included in the ESMF. The
                                          SESA and associated ESMF reflect the
                                          requirements of the Bank’s Operational Policy
                                          regarding forest management, in particular as
                                          these relate to the establishment of plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09             YES   At this stage in the REDD+ Readiness process,
                                          cocoa lands will be included in the
                                          interventions to address degradation and
                                          deforestation via enhancing cocoa production
                                          and/or expanding shade tree growth on these
                                          lands. Consequently, the details presently used
                                          in country for implementing Integrated Pest
                                          Management have been presented in the
                                          parallel Forest Investment Project (FIP) Pest
                                          Management Plan. The PMP under FIP will be
                                          applied across the REDD cocoa programs to
                                          ensure that handing, use and storage follows
                                          World Bank requirements.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   TBD   This policy could be triggered if REDD+
4.11                                      activities promote actions in areas containing
                                          sites deemed physical cultural resources by the
                                          local communities living there (e.g. holy/secret
                                          sites such as sacred groves, sacred forests,
                                          etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the
                                          project will have negative impacts on any such
                                          sites, the existence of any such sites and the
                                          corresponding need to trigger this policy will
                                          be determined once the National REDD+
                                          Strategy is completed and targeted zones for
                                          the ER-Program are determined.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                          area.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12    Yes             REDD+ activities might trigger Involuntary
                                                           Resettlement      in    situations     involving
                                                           involuntary restrictions of access to legally
                                                           designated parks, protected areas, or forest
                                                           management / reforestation areas. The policy
                                                           aims to avoid involuntary resettlement to the
                                                           extent feasible, or to minimize and mitigate its
                                                           adverse social and economic impacts in cases
                                                           where resettlement or other involuntary
                                                           restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the
                                                           SESA process, any issues related to
                                                           involuntary resettlement, including, but not
                                                           limited to, economic displacement, land
                                                           acquisition, access restriction, etc. have been
                                                           identified, and a Resettlement Policy
                                                           Framework prepared.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37              No              N/A
    Projects on International Waterways    No              N/A
    OP/BP 7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No               N/A
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.
A.     Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
       N/A
B.     Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.

       The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) report, an Environmental and Social
       Management Framework (ESMF), and a Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared as part of
       the original grant. These reports have been drafted and will be disclosed by the time of Readiness
       Package submission and assessment (expected in November 2015). The Preparation Activities will
       also include financing for the specific safeguards instruments required for the ER-Program (to be
       determined during ER-Program preparation).
.
IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:              Name: Martin Fodor
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards            Name: Alexandra Bezeredi                     Date: January 19, 2015
    Coordinator:
    Practice Manager/Manager:      Name: Magda Lovei                            Date: January 21, 2015
.
