                                                                                         87075

                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:
Date prepared/updated: Aprill5, 2014

I. Basic Information

      . Prowe
1 BaSIC    . tD at a
Country: Ghana                                   Project ID: P144828
                                                 Additional Project ID (if any):
 Project Name: Disaster Risk Management Country Plan
Task Team Leader:
Estimated Appraisal Date: January 31,2014        Estimated Board Date: No board date,
                                                 expected grant agreement signature February
                                                 28,2014
Managing Unit: AFTN3                             Lending Instrument:· Small RE Grant
Sector: Flood protection (1 00%)
Theme: Natural disasters (60%), Water Resources (30%), Climate Change (10%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: 1.3 million (GFDRR TF)
Environmental Category: C - no assessment
Is this a transferred project                    Yes [X]                  No []
Simplified Processing                            Simple [X]               Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises        Yes []       No [X]
and Emergencies)                                                                   I
2. Project Objectives:
1.     The PDO is to strengthen the institutional capacity of the agencies responsible for flood
and disaster risk management in support of Ghana's efforts to achieve the Hyogo Framework for
Action for disaster reduction.
2.       The proposed PDO Level Results Indicators would measure progress in the two key areas
of: i) strengthening flood forecasting in the White Volta Basin; and ii) strengthening institutional
capacities for disaster preparedness. The proposed PDO level results indicators are:
     •   Increased accuracy and timeliness of flood forecasts in the White Volta Basin;
     •   Number of beneficiaries, gender disaggregated, receiving tailored flood risk information;
3.       The proposed intermediate level results indicators include, among others:
     •   Number of hydrological and meteorological stations reporting in real time to flood
         forecasting;
     •   Number of districts. in the White Volta Basin with appropriate flood risk maps;
   .•   Number of short courses on disaster risk management delivered at various levels in
        Ghana;
    •   Number of advocacy events on disaster risk management successfully conducted.

3. Project Description:
4.      The Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Country Plan, which was jointly drafted by the
Government of Ghana (GOG) and Global Facility for Disaster Risk Reduction (GFDRR), is being
implemented in several phases. The White Volta Flood Hazard Assessment constituted the first
phase. The second phase constitutes a second grant of GFDRR in the amount of USD 1.3
million. This second phase (the project) has two main interrelated activity sets strengthening the
overall policy dialogue on disaster risk management and flood management in the North: (i)
Advocacy and capacity building for disaster risk reduction (USD 500,000); and (ii)
Strengthening flood management in the White Volta Basin (USD 800,000). Depending upon
government demand, successful implementation, availability of resources further phases of the
DRM country plan may follow.
5.       Both activity sets are closely related and cross support each other. The first set of
activities will facilitate the dialogue at the political level on strengthen DRR in the government's
policies, improve the capacity of government staff in relation to disaster risk management and
develop communication strategies targeted to stakeholders and affected population and thereby
benefitting the second activity set. Lessons learnt from the second activity set will in return
inform the dialogue at policy level. For example supporting national and regional platforms for
disaster risk management (activity set 1) will prepare the ground for the dialogue with the
regions and district assemblies on incorporating flood risk information in development planning
activities (activity set 2).
6. Activity Set 1. Advocacy and capacity building for disaster risk reduction (USD 500,000).
The specific development objective for this component is to foster advocacy and to strengthen
capacity at national, regional and local government level for disaster risk reduction and
preparedness. Activities under this component include:
    • Organizing high level public events· to raise awareness for specific topics and issues
        related to disaster risk reduction and management in Ghana. High level events should
         ideally be embedded in the national efforts around the international day for disaster risk
        reduction or international campaigns.
    • Supporting national and regional platforms of the country - to convene, discuss, plan and
        advocate for disaster risk reduction across sectors.
    • Taking stock of existing education and adult training programs related to disaster risk
        reduction and management.
    • Developing a training agenda and editing and designing training material for the different
        courses addressing disaster risk reduction and preparedness targeting different levels of
        education. This can include short and introductory courses, but special attention should
        be given to the delegates from national, regional and possibly district platforms for
        disaster risk management.
    •    Implementing training program in a series of training sessions, targeting initially
         delegates of the national, regional and where applicable district platforms for disaster risk
         reduction.
     • In conjunction with Ghana's role as a focus country of the United Nations Inter-Agency
         Standing Committee (UN-IASC), conducting a simulation exercise on national and
         regional level disaster contingency planning.
 7..     Activity Set 2. Strengthening flood forecasting in the White Volta Basin (USD800.000).
 This activity set of the DRM Country Plan will be implemented as a small recipient executed
trust fund (RETF) grant, and the specific development objective of this component is to
 strengthen flood management in the White Volta Basin. Water Resources Commission (WRC)
will be the implementing entity of the small recipient executed grant with the WRC, the National
Disaster Managament Organization, the Ghana Metereological Agency,  '          and the Hydrological
Services Department being the beneficiary agencies. The agencies' specific mandate,
comparative advantage, ongoing and existing support received from government and
development partners as well as the time-frame for implementation were considered for the
formulation of specific activities. The small recipient executed trust fund grant will be
implemented along three major sub-components: (i) improving flood forecasting, (ii)
communicating flood risk information, and (iii) project management.
8.      Component 1: Improving flood forecasting (USD 420,000). This sub-component will
strengthen the accuracy and timeliness of flood early warning information generated by the
Flood Early Warning System (FEWS) Volta by improving the model itself and by strengthening
the involved agencies capaCity to provide real time data for food forecasting.
    •   Improving the White Volta Flood Forecasting System for more accurate flood forecasting
        information through (i) the replacement and upgrading of selected hydrological stations
        and malfunctioning rainfall stations, and (ii) improving the forecasting system through
        the definition of additional alert levels, incorporation of satellite information, simulation
        of low flows for drought forecasting, and validation flood forecasting information in
        flood season 2014 and 20 15.
   •    Enhancing data sharing among relevant institutions for more accurate flood forecasting
        and real time information provision through the establishment of data servers at HSD and
        GMET linking relevant data instantly to FEWS Volta and making the information
        accessible for internet and cell phone applications.
   •    Sustaining and increasing the technical capacity of WRC, HSD, and GMET for flood
        forecasting through targeted training and consulting services.
9.      Component 2: Communicating flood risk information (USD 340,000)._This sub-
component will ensure that flood affected communities in the White Volta receive timely flood
risk information and that local district assemblies can use the flood risk information for local
plarming.
   •    Making flood risk information available to the district assemblies in the White Volta
        Basin (12 district assemblies) providing detailed information for district plarming. This
        may include open data and community mapping techniques to identity areas and
        infrastructure at risk, as well as training of district assemblies to better understand flood
        risk maps for planning and decision making.
    • Timely and effectively informing communities in the White Volta Basin about flood
        forecasting information, using tailored communication techniques. This may include the
        development open source IT based solutions for effectively communicating flood disaster
        risk related information to the potentially affected community.
10. Component 3: Project Management (USD 40. 000). This activity set bundles all activities,
which are related to the ·project coordination, including ·costs for project coordinator,
procurement and financial management specialist, consultants, vehicles and office space and
others to ensure a successful implementation of the project.         ·

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:
11. The location for the proposed project is the entire country for activities under component 1
(advocacy and capacity building) and the White Volta Basin for component 2. The project
includes no physical interventions besides tlie replacement of broken water level recorders and
mal-functioning rainfall stations or upgrading to tele-transmission located on existing selected
sites in the White Volta Basin and managed by the govermnent (Hydrological Services
Department, HSD or Ghana Meteorological Agency, GMET). The proposed project will not
finance any civil works or community driven development activities. The installation of hydro-
met equipment will be limited to the replas;ement of broken or upgrading of existing equipment
on existing sites and utilizing existing access routes, which will not require any intervention on
the ground or river bed nor fencing and further limiting access of people. The installations will
be carried out per the requirements of national and local laws and procedures. The proposed
project will not affect water quality or quantity and thus does not foresee a need for riparian
notification.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
-Martin Fodor (Senior Environmental Specialist, AFTN3)

- Franklyn Gavu (Safeguards Consultant, AFTN3)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)      I            Yes                  No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                                        X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                                X
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                                         X
Pest Mana2ement (OP 4.09)                                                                    X
PI:Jysical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                                   X
lndi2enous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                              X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                        X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                  X
Pro.iects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                            X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                      X
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues imd Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
12. 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


13. OP 4.01: The proposed project is likely to have no or minimal adverse environmental
impacts. It will not finance any works or community driven development activities. The
installation of hydro-met equipment will be limited to the replacement of broken or upgrading of
existing equipment on existing sites and utilizing existing access, and will not require any
modification of the river bed or ground or require fencing.


14. OP 4.12: In addition, the proposed project will not finance any works or community driven
development activities. Consequently, there will be no land acquisition for project activities. The
installation of hydro-met equipment will be limited to the replacement of broken or upgrading of
existing equipment, which will not require any land acquisition which may lead to impacts on
livelihood or relocation. The replacement and installation activities will not limit access of
people in the project area to land-based resources. Furthermore district assemblies (as planning
entities) and communities along the White Volta will benefit from the project by better
understanding early warning information and the existing flood risk in the area (e.g. houses and
infrastructure at risk).


15. OP 7.50: The proposed project does not foresee any reason to provide riparian notification, as
activities are limited and small scale equipment would not affect water quality or use (abstraction
or flow) affecting other riparian.


16. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area: Nl A

17. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts: NIA

18. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: NIA


19.Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with · an emphasis on potentially affected people: The key project
stakeholders are the communities and enterprises in flood-affected areas would be the principal
beneficiaries of the proposed project. The investments required to support improved flood
warnings would also benefit other stakeholders, inter alia: Hydrological Services Department,
Meteorological Agency, National Disaster Management Organization, Communities subject to
flooding, District assemblies, and Volta River Authority. No safeguard-related studies (and
hence, no consultations on such studies) are planned, as no safeguard policies are being triggered
and tbe proposed project will not finance any works or community driven development activities.


B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Manaeement Plan/Other:
   Was tbe document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                N/A
  Date of receipt by tbe Bank                                                    N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                N/A
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                                 N/A
  For category A projects, date of distributing the· Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank ·                                                  N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                N/A
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                                N/A
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 N/A
  Date of receipt by tbe Bank                                                    N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                N/A
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                                N/A
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                                 N/A
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    N/A
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                                                N/A
  Date of submission to Info Shop                                                N/A
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of tl).e Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
 N/A
 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

  OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
 issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                   Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11- Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to              Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning               Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regioni!l unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12- Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy               Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional Wlit responsible for
 safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36- Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public ·
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50- Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
If the project falls Wlder one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
 OP/BP 7.60- Pro.iects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the Yes [ ]      No [ ]   N/A[X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure oflnformation
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to Yes [ ]      No [ ]   N/A [X]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeeuard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional Yes [ ]   No [ ]   N/A [X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?

D. Approvals

 Si!!ned and submitted bv:                               Name                                  Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Shelley McMillan
 Environmental Specialist:           Martin Fodor
 Social Development Specialist       Franklin Gavu
 Additional Environmental and/or     Beatrix Allah-Mensah
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Avvroved bv:         ·
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Alexandra   Be;~eredi
   Comments:                                 ~
 Sector Manager:                     MagdaLovei                 I ! I,      'I
   Comments:




                                                                         (Template Version November 2007)
               I
              I

          I
          I

      I
     I

 I
I
