                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                         APPRAISAL STAGE

                                                                    Report No.: 91649

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:          October 1, 2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                      Guatemala            Project ID:                P145410
 Project Name:                 Pilot to Improve the Development and Nutrition of Young Children in
                               Poor Rural Areas in Guatemala (Nuestros Niños Listos y Sanos)
 Task Team Leader:             Lucy Bassett
 Estimated Board Date:         N/A
 Managing Unit:                GSPDR
 Sector(s):                    JB Other social services
 Theme(s):                     68 Nutrition and Food security
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00            No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                               Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:       2,750,924                   Total Bank Financing:
 Financing Gap:
     Financing Source JSDF Trust Fund                                                       Amount
     Borrower
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
     Total USD 2,750,924
 Environmental Category:             C
 Is this a Repeater project?         No
 Is this a Transferred project?      Yes


 2. Project Development Objective
 The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of parents and communities to
 improve and monitor child development outcomes (physical, cognitive, socio-emotional, and
 linguistic skills) for children under two in Project intervention areas.

 The grant is expected to reach 12,200 poor, primarily indigenous children under two years of
 age and at least 13,000 parents. The Project will be implemented in 100 communities in the
 northwestern departments of Huehuetenango, Quiche, San Marcos, and Totonicapán, where the
average chronic malnutrition rate is 70 percent, and the average poverty and extreme poverty
rates are 89 percent and 40 percent, respectively.

3. Project Description
The four-year Project has the following three components:

Component 1: Promotion of physical, cognitive, linguistic and socio-emotional development
through a parenting and early stimulation intervention (US$1,758,798): This component will
introduce parenting and early childhood stimulation activities into existing health and nutrition
community services under the Government’s Zero Hunger Program (especially the AINM -C
strategy and the Extension of Coverage Program which provides a basic package of health and
nutrition services in most of the intervention areas) in order to improve children’s physical,
cognitive, and emotional development. Specific Component activities include:

Component 2: Enhanced social and behavior change communication to achieve improved child
nutrition and development (US$443,267). This component will develop a strategy to address
social and behavioral change, tailored specifically to address concrete constraints caregivers
face in adopting positive practices to ensure optimal child nutrition (e.g. early initiation of
breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding, opportune introduction of complementary nutritious
foods, improved hygiene practices in the household, timely health seeking behavior especially
in the case of managing childhood illnesses, which affect nutritional status, etc.). The strategy
will be based on culturally-appropriate and motivational communication delivered at critical
moments in child development to have the greatest impact and using emotional/cognitive levers
to link actions with expectations for the future with an aim to change the behavior of parents, as
well as others, such as grandmothers and midwives, who influence mothers’ choices in
Guatemala. Specific activities include:

Component 3: Project management and administration, monitoring & and evaluation, and
knowledge dissemination (US$548,858): This component will support project management
and administration, technical assistance and training for monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and
knowledge dissemination.

4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The project will be implemented in a cluster of departments comprising Huehuetenango,
Quiche, San Marcos, and Totonicapán where chronic malnutrition affects, on average, 70
percent of all young children, and poverty affects nearly 90 percent of the population. These
departments are diverse in their ethnic and linguistic composition. In the state of
Huehuetenango. 57.4 % of the population belong to one of eleven Mayan linguistic
communities: Akateko, Awakateko, Chuj, Mam, Popti, Q'anjob'al, Tektiteko, Akateko,
Awakateko, K'iche' and Chalchiteko; in Quiché, 88.6% of the population belong to one of five:
K'iche', Ixil, Q'eqchi, Poqomchi' and Sakapulteko; in San Marcos, 27% of the population are
either K'iche', Mam or Sipakapense; and 97% of the Totonicapán population belong to the
K’iche’ linguistic community.
In these departments, the project will be implemented in communities in 17 municipalities.
These municipalities are characterized by: high rates of poverty, child mortality, and
malnutrition; demonstrated need for child development and nutrition interventions; and
community interest and demand for such interventions. In addition these municipalities have
access to Ministry of Health facilities and interventions, active community participation, and
the presence of the Recipient, which can increase the likelihood of delivering short-term results
while securing long-term impact. Finally, these municipalities have been also prioritized by the
Government of Guatemala’s Hambre Cero (Zero Hunger) Initiative, which aims to reduce the
prevalence of chronic malnutrition in children under-five and child mortality through the
coordination of multisectoral interventions. However, the selected areas currently do not
benefit from any parenting or early childhood stimulation activities, so this proposed Project
will fill an important gap. Implementing such activities in the prioritized areas will contribute to
improving child development outcomes and complement any other interventions (e.g. food
distribution, water and sanitation interventions, etc.) to ensure optimal child development. The
Project will also prioritize coordination with other stakeholders and institutions to facilitate
effective synergies.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Peter Lafere is the team’s social development specialist to provide guidance on the preparation and
implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan.

6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered?         Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment         No                 This policy is not triggered as impacts to the
OP/BP 4.01                                          environment are highly unlikely.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No                 This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                    impact natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36               No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                    will not finance activities that affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09          No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                    will not finance the purchase or use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources      No                 This policy is not triggered given that there will be
OP/BP 4.11                                          no expected impacts on physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes                   This policy is triggered given that the population in
                                                    the project intervention areas (Huehuetenango, San
                                                    Marcos, Totonicapán and Quiché) are diverse in
                                                    their ethnic and linguistic composition and are
                                                    considered indigenous for the purpose of this
                                                    policy. It is expected that Indigenous Peoples will
                                                    be the primary beneficiaries of this project.

                                                    In accordance with the requirements of the policy, a
                                                    social assessment commensurate to the size and
                                                    impacts of the project was undertaken during the
                                                    preparation of this project and its findings informed
                                                    project design.
                                                    Broad community support for the project was
                                                    ascertained during a process of free, prior, and
                                                    informed consultation with the affected
                                                    Indigenous Peoples’ communities and will be
                                                    further ascertained at municipal level in
                                                    accordance with Guatemalan legal requirements
                                                    during project implementation.

                                                    An indigenous Peoples Plan was prepared,
                                                    consulted and disclosed in country and through
                                                    Infoshop.     The Indigenous Peoples Plan
                                                    summarizes the findings of the social assessment,
                                                    the measures undertaken to avoid negative impacts
                                                    and ensure that the benefits of the project are
                                                    culturally appropriate, and the consultation
                                                    arrangements during project preparation and
                                                    implementation.
Involuntary Resettlement         No                 This policy is not triggered given that the project is
OP/BP 4.12                                          not expected to have any involuntary resettlement
                                                    impacts.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                    will not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                    dams nor will support other investments which rely
                                                    on the services of existing dams.
Projects on International        No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                will not affect international waterways as defined
                                                    under the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas       No                 This policy is not triggered given that the Project
OP/BP 7.60                                          will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
                                                    policy.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project will be carried out in the states of Huehuetenango, San Marcos, Totonicapan and Quiche in
the western region of Guatemala with diverse ethnic and linguistic indigenous populations and is
expected to have a positive impact on indigenous children development outcomes (physical, cognitive,
socio-emotional, and linguistic skills).

Due to the particular emphasis on behavioral change implicit in the project development objective, two
potential adverse effects related to indigenous socio-cultural beliefs, practices and interactions were
identified during the social assessment: (a) disregard and/or misrecognition of Mayan health care and
cultural illness belief systems and diet; (b) inadequate socio-cultural interaction and communication
with beneficiaries and communities.
To ensure existing belief systems and diet are fully taken into account, a sub-component to map the early
stimulation practices in participating communities was included in component 1 of the project, and an
investigation of current child feeding and caring behaviors in component 2. Coordination and
consultation with grassroots organizations, local partners and traditional healers, the establishment of an
ethics code for socio-cultural interaction and dissemination of project information and activities in a
culturally appropriate way will ensure appropriate communication with beneficiaries and communities.

No large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impacts are expected.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The expected impacts are improved child development outcomes and community ownership in tracking
these indicators. There are no indirect and/or long term adverse impacts as a result of future activities
expected for this project.
3. Describe any project alternatives considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
No alternatives were deemed necessary to avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
ChildFund International USA, the implementing NGO, carried out a Social Assessment during the
preparation of the project to (a) review the legal and institutional framework applicable to Indigenous
Peoples, (b) gather baseline information on the demographic, social, cultural, and political
characteristics of the affected Indigenous Peoples’ communities, (c) identify key project stakeholders
and a culturally appropriate process for consulting with the Indigenous Peoples at each stage of project
preparation and implementation, (d) assess the potential adverse and positive effects of the project, (e)
identify measures necessary to avoid adverse effects. ChildFund International USA carried out several
rounds of consultations on their findings, ensured that the design of the project was informed with the
findings and the feedback gathered at the consultations. The findings of the social assessment are
included in the Indigenous Peoples Plan.

The Indigenous People’s Plan has been prepared by the Recipient and establishes project guidelines
regarding culturally appropriate consultation activities and participation measures to ensure that they
respond to local practices and beliefs and to ensure high indigenous peoples participation in the project
throughout its implementation.

The Recipient has experience working with indigenous communities, and the Bank will work with the
agency to further solidify their capacity to plan and implement the measures needed.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Project stakeholders include the target beneficiaries (the poorest and vulnerable members of the
communities), as well as indirect beneficiaries, including the recipient communities at large, local
leaders, midwives, etc.

ChildFund International USA, the implementing NGO, carried out several rounds of consultations with
the target beneficiaries of the Project in the northwestern municipalities of Guatemala to clarify their
priority needs. Consultations included targeted small-group discussions as well as field visits to health
centers, community centers, and directly with families. The NGO has been instrumental in organizing
these small group discussions and the field visits. Consultations with target beneficiaries at municipal
level will continue during project implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    N/A
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the        N/A
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       N/A
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    N/A
"In country" Disclosure
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                       August 13, 2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                    October 14, 2014
"In country" Disclosure
Given the low risk of the operation, and that steps for the consultation process at the municipal level
have already taken place, hard copies of the IPP and project paper will be available at the ChildFund
office and published on the website. Subsequently, a Spanish version of the IPP will be disclosed in
country
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [ ]            No [ ]       NA [ X ]
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [ ]          No [     ]   NA [ X ]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the            Yes [ ]       No [     ]   NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as       Yes [X ]         No [     ]   NA [    ]
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or       Yes [X ]      No [     ]   NA [    ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been Yes [X ]        No [   ]   NA [      ]
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or
Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [ ]           No [   ]   NA [ X]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or     Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [X ]          No [   ]   NA [      ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X ]        No [   ]   NA [      ]
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [X ]       No [   ]   NA [      ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [ X]       No [   ]   NA [      ]
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [X ]       No [   ]   NA [      ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA [      ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Lucy Bassett
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Glenn Morgan                           Date: September 18, 2014
Sector Manager:                 Name: Margaret Grosh                      Date: September 26, 2014
