                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     INITIATION/CONCEPT STAGE
.
                                                                        Report No.: 95323
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:            03/02/2015


I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                     Guatemala            Project ID:                P152806
    Project Name:                GUATEMALA EITI: POST-COMPLIANCE I
    Task Team Leader:            Kristina Svensson
    Estimated Date of            April 1, 2015
    Approval:
    Managing Unit:               GEEDR                Lending Instrument:        Project Investment
                                                                                 Lending (grant)
    Sector(s):                   Energy and Extractives
    Theme(s):                    Transparency and accountability
    Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [ ]
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:      USD 0.462                 Total Bank Financing:     USD 0.3
    Total Co-financing:      USD 0.162                 Financing Gap:            USD 0.3
        EITI MDTF                                                                                 USD 0.3
        BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     USD 0.162
        Total                                                                                  USD 0.462
    Environmental Category       C
    Is this a Repeater project? Yes
    Is this a Transferred        No
    project?
.

    B. Project Objectives

    1.      The Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of the EITI Secretariat, the
    multi-stakeholder group and civil society to implement the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative
    (EITI).


    C. Project Description
    2.      The recipient executed grant would be funded through the EITI MDTF ($300,000). The
    duration would be an estimated 9 months from the start of effectiveness, but closing date can be no later
    than December 31st, 2015, since this has to comply with the closing of the EITI MDTF.

    Project Components

    3.      Component 1 - Production and dissemination of Guatemala EITI Reports (US$120K):
    According to the new EITI Standard, countries need to produce timely (annual) EITI reports
    (Requirement 2), including contextual information (Requirement 3), that the EITI report is
    “comprehensible, actively promoted, publicly accessible, and contribute to public debate? (Requirement
    6). Specifically, the grant will therefor support: (a) Hiring of the independent reconciler for the
    production of the EITI Guatemala report: (covering fiscal year 2014, to be published before December
    31, 2015). The main output will be the reconciliation report, consistent with the EITI Standard,
    containing clear recommendations of how to enhance transparency and accountability of the extractive
    industries in Guatemala: and (b) Communication and dissemination of the Guatemala EITI report
    covering FY 2012 and 2013: (produced in 2014). This would include the production of info-graphics,
    production and printing of a summary report, translation to local Mayan languages of summary report
    and other materials as needed, and outreach activities in district and municipalities in producing regions.

    4.       Component 2 - Supporting civil society to participate effectively in Guatemala EITI
    (US$60K): The new EITI Standard requires that the government works with companies and civil
    society to implement the EITI, and that these groups are “fully, actively, and effectively engaged? in the
    initiative (Requirement 1.3). Specifically, civil society has a role to play as an actor on the
    multi-stakeholder group, as well as in society at large to analyze EITI reports and advocate for enhanced
    transparency and accountability. The specific activities supported through the grant will include: (a)
    Training and engagement with CSOs on EITI, EITI report analysis, and policy advocacy: This
    component would support training and practical application regarding report analysis; and policy
    advocacy; and (b) Pilot studies and projects to support monitoring of the dissemination and use of
    revenues at the local level: With the objective to apply the knowledge acquired through the above
    trainings, this sub-component will support the production of action research conducted by Guatemalan
    CSOs regarding the distribution and use of revenues at the local level, or other social audit research and
    documentation.

    5.       Component 3 - Support to the Functioning of the National Secretariat (US$120K): While
    the government counter-funding will cover the operating costs of the National Secretariat, this
    sub-component will focus on improving the performance and the results of the initiative and training for
    MSG members. Specifically, this component would support: (a) Compliance study: The EITI
    International Secretariat recommends that countries conduct their own validation study (official
    validation is every five years) to document progress and compliance with the EITI Standard. The output
    will be a study that will be discussed with the MSG, and an action plan to improve performance: (b)
    Training and capacity building for MSG members: As the new Standard is being rolled out, and new
    countries in LAC are joining the initiative (Colombia, Honduras, etc.), there is a lot of room for
    peer-to-peer learning. This sub-component will support expenses related to attending such training
    events, as necessary; (c) Grant Audit: As required by the World Bank, an audit of Financial Statement of
    the grant has to take place. Such audit shall cover the entire period during which withdrawals from the
    Grant Account were made.


.
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
    known)
    6.       Project will provide only TA and there are no physical investments on the ground. Trainings
    will take place in Guatemala City and mining regions with a broad set of stakeholders, including
    communities and civil society and community based organizations and mining companies. The project
    will only support the multi-stakeholder group (civil society, government and companies) to make
    recommendations related to improving transparency and reporting on financial information and
    will not make recommendations related to investments for specific sites
.
    E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Management
    7.     The EITI is a global coalition of governments, companies and civil society organizations
    working together to improve openness and accountable management of revenues from natural resources.

    8.      Guatemala EITI was declared compliant in 2014, however was suspended temporarily in
    February 2015 due to failure to publish the EITI report for 2012-2013 by 31 December 2014. The
    expectation is that the suspension will be lifted after the publication of the next EITI report (expected
    May, 2015). This is the second EITI MDTF grant for Guatemala. The Guatemala EITI Secretariat and
    COPRET is aware of World Bank safeguards policies.
.
    F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team




.


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
    Safeguard Policies                       Triggered ?     Explanation (Optional)
    Environmental Assessment OP/BP           No              This is a technical assistance project focused
    4.01                                                     specifically on improving the institutional
                                                             management of extractive industries, including
                                                             some consultations and training. There are no
                                                             physical investments being supported under
                                                             the project. Since none of the project activities
                                                             have any impact on the ground and have zero
                                                             environmental footprint, the category is
                                                             proposed to be C.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No              This policy is not triggered as project
                                                             activities are not expected to have any
                                                             impacts on natural habitats.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No              This policy is not triggered as project
                                                             activities are not expected to have any
                                                             impacts on the management of forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09             No   This policy is not triggered as the project
                                         will not finance the procurement or use of
                                         pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP   No   This policy is not triggered as project
4.11                                     activities are not expected to have any
                                         impact on physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No   This policy is not triggered given that
                                         project activities are not expected to cause
                                         any impacts on Indigenous Peoples.


                                         The team notes that the EITI is inherently a
                                         multi-stakeholder        initiative     with
                                         responsibility to increase transparency and
                                         accountability of the extractive industries
                                         by publishing and disseminating yearly
                                         reports. Guatemala EITI is governed by a
                                         multi-stakeholder group, which includes
                                         representatives of civil society. Three
                                         representatives        of         indigenous
                                         organizations      are    sitting in     the
                                         multi-stakeholder group, and they in turn
                                         represent a “grupo ampliado? of
                                         indigenous organizations from all over
                                         Guatemala.

                                         Furthermore, the EITI Standard EITI
                                         requires that the report is “comprehensible,
                                         actively promoted, publicly accessible, and
                                         contribute to public debate? (Requirement 6).
                                         In this regard, the Guatemala EITI has
                                         developed a communication strategy with the
                                         support of the World Bank EITI MDTF first
                                         grant     (P125451).       This      includes
                                         consultations and dissemination of
                                         material in Mayan languages to indigenous
                                         communities in production regions and
                                         was implemented during the dissemination
                                         of the first EITI report in 2014. The
                                         communication strategy is currently being
                                         revised with the support of GIZ.

                                         Under this Project, the Bank will also
                                         support the wide dissemination of the
                                         Guatemala EITI report for 2013
                                         (Component 1). This will include the
                                           production of info-graphics, production and
                                           printing of a summary report, translation to
                                           local Mayan languages of summary report and
                                           other materials as needed, and outreach
                                           activities in district and municipalities in
                                           producing regions.

                                           The team also notes that a separate
                                           Bank-executed project Improving Civil
                                           Society Engagement in EITI in Guatemala
                                           (P128883) was implemented 2012-14.
                                           This had two main components: (1)
                                           training and capacity building on
                                           extractive industries and EITI for a group
                                           of 30 indigenous leaders, with trainings
                                           and workshops both in Guatemala City and
                                           in the producing regions; and (2)
                                           Communication and dissemination in local
                                           communities (Comunicacion social) which
                                           consisted in production, translation to
                                           indigenous      people     language,    and
                                           dissemination of EITI materials to local
                                           communities; feasibility study for the
                                           setting up of a public information center on
                                           EITI and extractive industries; and
                                           workshops with the grupo ampliado, the
                                           CSO coalition mainly with indigenous
                                           organizations participating in the EITI (in
                                           Quetzaltenango and San Marcos).

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   No   This policy is not triggered given that
                                           project activities are not expected to cause
                                           any physical or economic displacement,
                                           nor any restriction in access to natural
                                           resources.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No   This policy is not triggered given the
                                           project is not financing any dam
                                           construction or rehabilitation nor any
                                           activities that rely on the operations of
                                           existing dams.
Projects on International Waterways   No   This policy is not triggered given the
OP/BP 7.50                                 project is not financing any activities in
                                           international waterways as defined by the
                                           policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No   This policy is not triggered given the
                                                                        project is not financing any activities in
                                                                        disputed areas as defined by the policy.
.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.

        A. Will an Appraisal stage ISDS be required? No.




IV. APPROVALS
    Task Team Leader:                     Name: Kristina Svensson
    Approved By:
    Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Glenn Morgan                                               Date: 3/19/15
    Practice Manager:                     Name: Paulo de Sa                                       Date: 3/19/15


.
    1
      Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
    InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
    affected persons.
