                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring

                                                                                 Report No.: 89919

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:           05-Aug-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
 1. Basic Project Data
 Country:                       Guinea                 Project ID:                  P123900
 Project Name:                  Productive Social Safety Net Project (P123900)
 Task Team Leader:              Philippe Auffret
 Estimated Board Date:          19-Jun-2012
 Managing Unit:                 GSPDR
 Sector(s):                     Other social services (70%), Public administration- Other social services
                                (16%), Primary education (9%), Health (5%)
 Theme(s):                      Social safety nets (68%), Nutrition and food security (13%), Education
                                for all (11%), Gender (8%)
 Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00                      No
 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
 Total Project Cost:        25.00                       Total Bank Financing:         25.00
 Financing Gap:             0.00
     Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                                            25.00
     Total                                                                                                25.00
 Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
 Is this a Repeater project? No
 Is this a Transferred          No
 project?

 2. Current Project Development Objectives
 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to provide income support to vulnerable groups and to
 lay the foundations of a social safety net strategy by testing some of the building blocks necessary for
 a larger system.
 Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
3. Project Description
The proposed Level II restructuring and Co-Financing would maintain the PDO of the original Project
to (i) provide income support to vulnerable groups, and (ii) lay the foundations of a social safety net
strategy by testing some of the building blocks necessary for a larger system.
The proposed restructuring and Co-Financing would maintain the three components of the original
Project. However, the co-financing will focus on component 1 and 3.

The objective of the first component would remain to implement a labor intensive public works
program to provide income to vulnerable groups. However, it would not restrict the interventions to
Conakry and the seven regional capitals. Instead, would open the possibility to intervene in all urban
and peri-urban areas where vulnerable groups are located. Also, the labor-intensive program would
keep focusing on women who are expected to represent at least half the beneficiaries. The restructured
project will also facilitate information and education activities to contribute to ongoing prevention
efforts to mitigate the impact of the ongoing Ebola Viral Disease (EVD) Crisis in Guinea. This will
include distributing pamphlets and holding information campaigns outside of hospital settings.The
objective of the second component would continue to pilot safety net programs to determine the most
appropriate design for scale up. However, it would expand the pilot programs to non-monetary
transfers. More specifically, the Project would implement conditional cash transfer programs and
school lunch programs and assess their relative impact on households’ decisions to improve their
children’s welfare. Finally, the third component would be renamed to reflect the fact that Project
management represents the bulk of the activities to be implemented. It is expected that this component
will support the development of a social protection strategy. However, it would not seek to necessarily
build institutions. Instead, it would finance institutional capacity building only to the extent that this
would be a prerequisite without which the development of a social protection strategy could not take
place.
After the proposed restructuring and Co-Financing, the Project would comprise the following three
components of which only Component 1 and component 3 would be financed from the proposed
Co-Financing:

Component 1: Labor intensive public works program with a focus on women and youth, and life skills
development (US$16.5 million from the Original Project, US$1.65 from the Co-Financing). This
component would support a program of labor-intensive public works aimed at providing income for
vulnerable groups including women and youth in selected urban and peri-urban areas in Guinea. Funds
have been allocated by region according to population data. The beneficiary targeting process would
combine a self-selection approach (the daily remuneration rate is currently set at 35,000 FGNG for 30
days of work, which is slightly lower than the market rate), and community based selection. A
targeting committee would be created in each community to select beneficiaries among all those who
would have registered after the sensitization campaigns. At least 40 percent of beneficiaries would be
women. The communities themselves would select a highly-labor intensive-micro-project and send
their proposal to the communes for official submission to the Safety Net Unit. The Safety Net Unit
would validate the selection of micro-projects and ensure that they comply with safeguard policies. It
would recruit NGOs to conduct sensitization campaigns. The NGOs will also conduct information and
education campaigns on EVD at the community level. The Safety Net Unit would contract NGOs,
meeting pre-defined criteria, to implement micro-projects, supervise their implementation and make
payments to beneficiaries.

Component 2: Pilot transfer programs to protect human capital (US$4.5 million from the Original
Project). The restructuring would revise the design of this Component. More specifically, it would
support the design of a pilot Conditional Cash Transfer Program (CCT Program) aimed at transferring
cash to households in selected communities. The amount to be transferred would be proportional to the
number of children who are below 14 while differentiated amounts would be tested. Future transfers
would be conditional upon children’s health being regularly checked up at health centers (for children
under 6 years of age) and school attendance (for children between 6 and 14). The National Institute for
Statistics would be recruited for data collection, beneficiary identification and the production of
beneficiary cards. The Safety Net Unit would contract payment agencies to transfer cash to the
beneficiaries, and consultants or NGOs to supervise compliance with the conditionalities. This
component would also finance the World Food Program to implement a School Feeding Program in
selected communities. This would permit to compare conditional cash tra nsfer programs to school
feeding programs and determine the most appropriate design for scale-up. This component would be
implemented in accordance with the Cash Transfer Program Operations Manual which is currently
being prepared by the Safety Net Unit.

Component 3: Project management (US$4.0 million from the Original Project, US$0.32 from the
Co-Financing). This component would remain unchanged.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The LIPW will be implemented in all urban and peri-urban areas where vulnerable groups are located.
The pilot cash transfer project will be implemented in selected rural areas.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Upulee Iresha Dasanayake ( AFCF1 )

6. Safeguard Policies                        Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Yes
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11       No
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12          Yes
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60        No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as Environmental Category B as the potential environmental and social
impacts are expected to be be small-scale, site-specific and thus easily manageable. The Labor
Intensive Public Works (LIPWs) to be financed under this operation consist of primarily: (a) sanitation
and drainage maintenance and rehabilitation, (b) road rehabilitation and maintenance of municipal
roads; and (c) potential other activities to be determined benefiting vulnerable communities, such as
social and economic infrastructure (such as rehabilitation of existing markets) and construction and
rehabilitation of public latrines. With regards to road rehabilitation and maintenance, the specific
activities undertaken would consist of: clearing and pruning of bush/tree branches hanging onto roads,
filling of potholes, cleaning of existing drainage pipes/canals and culverts; clearing sand of roadways
and road shoulders, road cleaning; and creation and maintenance of public green spaces and gardens.

Initial reviews indicate that the project can generate positive social, economic, and environmental
impacts. In spite of these potential positive impacts, there is the also the recognition of potential
negative impacts, which calls for appropriate mitigation measures and institutional arrangements for
their implementation. The project has triggered two safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on
Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. An Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared,
reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal of the original
project. The ESMF and RPF were disclosed in-country on April 9, 2012. While the ESMF was
disclosed at the infoshop on April 30, 2012 the RPF was disclosed May 2, 2012.The general
environmental management clauses for civil works rehabilitation will be inserted into the bidding
documents and contracts. Detailed environmental assessments or Environmental Management Plans
and Resettlement Action Plans, if and when necessary, would be carried out for all project activities
that will trigger them and disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s Infoshop before specific or
rehabilitation civil works could start.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale, site-specific and thus
easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected during project
implementation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since the location, size and magnitude of the LIPW micro-projects were not known, an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover all
activities to be financed under the project were prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country
and at the Bank’s InfoShop prior to the appraisal of the original project. The Safety Nets Unit has
recruited an environmental and social safeguards specialist fully dedicated to manage the safeguard
aspects of the micro-projects, hence has the institutional capacity to manage the incremental safeguard
aspects brought about by the Co-Financing.

The Safety Nets Unit will use Bank screening procedures to identify, assess, evaluate, mitigate and
monitor the environmental and social impacts of the LIPW micro-projects. These assessments will
involve consultations with key stakeholders and will inform the design of specific resettlement action
plans and environment management plans if and when necessary. Once the plans have been drafted,
public consultations will be held and community systems to handle grievances will be established. All
key stakeholders will be sensitized and trained on the mitigation measures.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders including government representatives, NGOs, civil society, community
representative, the media, and potential partners in micro-project implementation (the local association
of entrepreneurs) will participate in the public consultations process. All the relevant bodies have been
adequately informed of the Project. Concerns of the communities and some details of consultations
have been provided as Annexes in the ESMF and RPF. One of the key principles of this project from
the outset is to foster participation of all relevant stakeholders. This approach will be sustained
throughout project implementation. The environmental and social assessment studies, namely the
ESMF and RPF, were also carried out according to the same principle, using broad-based public
consultation approach, involving the above stakeholder groups. The objective was to raise awareness
of project activities and impacts and foster ownership on their part.

B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Guinea                                                                         09-Apr-2012
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Guinea                                                                         09-Apr-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [        ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process Yes [        ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?


III. APPROVALS

Task Team Leader:               Name: Philippe Auffret
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                       Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:       Name:                                    Date:
