                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3349

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Haiti                            Project ID:      P133352
                            Project Name:      HT Center and Artibonite Regional Development (P133352)
                            Task Team          Pierre Xavier Bonneau
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Feb-2014                      Estimated        20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSTR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (56%), Urban Transport (12%),
                                               Central government administration (10%), Public administratio n-
                                               Transportation (8%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (14%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Natural disaster management (15%),
                                               Other urban development (15%), Other public sector gover nance (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     58.00                     Total Bank Financing:         50.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  50.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                      8.00
                              Total                                                                        58.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           Project Development Objective (PDO): The objective of the proposed Centre Artibonite Regional
                           Development Project (CARDP) is to support the development of the Center and Artibonite Loop
                           (CAL) region by enhancing transport connectivity and logistics, territorial planning capacity, the
                         region’s resilience to climate change, and the country’s capacity to respond efficiently to an (eligible)
                         emergency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This PDO would be achieved through: i) enhancing transport connectivity between the CAL and
                         other regions; ii) enhancing the access of inhabitants and agricultural producers to markets by
                         improving internal connectivity within the CAL as well as market facilities; iii) developing regional
                         knowledge and tools to enable public and private actors in the region to better plan investments and
                         activities; iv) improving the region’s resilience to climate change; and v) providing GoH with
                         resources and capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.
                         C. Project Description
                         COMPONENT 1 – Enhancing logistics and transport connectivity and strengthening road
                         maintenance systems (US$40 million, o/w US$34 million IDA and US$6 million Pilot Program for
                         Climate Resilience (PPCR))

                         This component would aim to link the CAL to economic growth poles outside the region and to
                         improve the internal connectivity of the CAL, by increasing all-weather access to agricultural
                         production areas, markets and services, and improving Rural Access Index (RAI). Complementing
                         significant investments made by other donors in the primary and secondary road networks on the
                         CAL, the project would target the protection, rehabilitation and construction of critical segments to
                         maximize efficiency and impact. Specifically, this component would finance:

                         •         Subcomponent 1.1. Improvement of the primary and secondary road network, with a focus
                         on all-weather access and resilience to climate change (US$25 million). This would include works
                         and related studies for the rehabilitation of vulnerable road sections, bridges, river crossings, and
                         critical spot interventions along the Dessalines-Saint Raphaël, the Titanyen-Saut d’Eau, and the
                         Maissade-Hinche roads (see map). To ensure the long-term sustainability of these investments,
                         adaptation measures to climate change (such as the reinforcement of hydraulic protection for bridges
                         or slope’s stabilization works) would be mainstreamed into infrastructure design and maintenance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Subcomponent 1.2. Improvement of the tertiary and rural road network, with a focus on all-
                         weather access and resilience to climate change, and connection points facilitating the transit and
                         transport of agriculture products (US$10 million). This would include works and related studies for:

                         - Rehabilitation or upgrading of selected tertiary and rural roads and pathways, to facilitate all-
                         weather access, especially for Intermediate Means of Transport (IMT) in isolated areas;
                         - Construction of small logistical facilities, such as collection points for agricultural production;
                         - Development and dissemination of infrastructure design, construction and maintenance guidelines,
                         especially for roads and pathways dedicated to IMTs.

                         •        Subcomponent 1.3. Improvement of local road maintenance mechanisms (US$5 million).
                         This would include:
                         - Development of a Regional Maintenance Strategy for the CAL;
                         - Partial funding of the maintenance of the road and infrastructure network in the CAL for the
                         duration of the project through the Road Maintenance Fund (FER), with the involvement of MSMEs
                         and local communities;
                         - Rehabilitation of the local road maintenance equipment centers of Ministry of Public Works,
                         Transportation, Energy and Communications (MTPTEC) and the National Equipment Center (CNE)
                         in Hinche and Mirebalais, and possibly construction of a center in Saint Michel;
                         - Trainings and development of technical guidelines for road maintenance.

                         COMPONENT 2 – Support to inclusive economic growth and local development (US$8 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component would complement infrastructure investments under Component 1, leveraging their
                         efficiency and development impact. This component would also serve to complement o          ther
                         donor-financed and Bank-financed projects in the agriculture, energy and business development
                         sectors in the region. Investments under this component would go towards the rehabilitation or
                         construction of markets. They would finance works and related studies for the following:

                         •       Rehabilitation, upgrading or construction of regional markets in Saint Michel, Saint Raphaël
                         and possibly Mirebalais;
                         •       Rehabilitation or upgrading of selected rural markets;
                         •       Development of technical standards for market design and operation, Training and Technical
                         Assistance to municipalities and communities to enhance management capacity of markets.

                         COMPONENT 3 – Territorial development databases and tools, in support to building planning
                         capacity (US$5 million, o/w US$3 million IDA and US$2 million from PPCR)

                         This component would support the GoH, municipalities and local stakeholders to build and
                         disseminate improved territorial knowledge of the CAL. It would support the development of
                         methodologies and tools to inform territorial and urban planning and opportunities for public and
                         private investment.

                         •        Subcomponent 3.1. Improved knowledge with territorial development databases and tools
                         (US$2 million): analytical studies and guidelines, inter alia economic, social and environmental
                         studies, spatial analyses, urban studies and plans, plans for adaptation and resilience to climate
                         change.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Subcomponent 3.2. Support to the development of regional planning capacity (US$3
                         million):
                         - Facilitate broader exchange of information and consultation between regional stakeholders, using
                         existing administrative local consultation tables chaired by the local representatives of the national
                         government, expanded to include municipalities, selected communities, and local stakeholders, such
                         as Chambers of Commerce and associations of producers;
                         - Support the development of (i) a regional agenda which would serve to plan and coordinate the
                         development of the CAL, by identifying and sequencing regional and local investment needs, and (ii)
                         a dashboard tool capturing key development indicators and investments in the region;
                         - Support the establishment of participatory decision-making mechanisms at the local level to
                         identify local priorities and investments, within the scope of the Components 1 and 2.

                         COMPONENT 4 – Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$1 million)

                         Due to the high risk of a catastrophic event in Haiti, the proposed project would include a provisional
                         component, designed as a mechanism that would allow for rapid response in the event of an
                         emergency. Such components, which include triggers and conditions for the use of funds, are
                         included in most investment projects in Haiti in keeping with the recommendations of the 2011
                         WDR on Fragility and with the operational experience acquired in Haiti since the 2010 earthquake.
                           COMPONENT 5 – Project Management and Monitoring (US$4 million)

                           This component would finance the activities of the implementing agency, the Unité Technique
Public Disclosure Copy




                           d’Exécution (UTE), a project implementation unit under the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance
                           and Economy (MEF). This unit implements projects financed by several donors including the WB
                           and would coordinate, evaluate, supervise and implement the project. Funding would be provided to:
                           (i) strengthen UTE’s capacity to comply with its responsibilities under the proposed Project’s
                           Operational Manual, including the hiring of specialized staff (such as social and environmental
                           specialists, procurement and financial management specialists), training and operating costs; (ii)
                           cover staffing and operating costs for governmental institutions or ministries involved providing
                           technical support to UTE, such as CIAT, the Ministry of Public Works, Transport, Energy and
                           Communication (MTPTEC), and the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARNDR);
                           and (iii) conduct project audits and project studies, including performance reviews and impact
                           evaluations.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The CAL is comprised of 14 communes, situated in 3 departments: Artibonite, the Center and the
                           North. Approximately 1.2 million inhabitants live in a space of 4,643 km2. Only 23% of the
                           population (222,000) inhabitants live in urban centers. The perimeter of this loop is 240 km long and
                           is equidistant (24km away) from 10 urban centers. The majority of investments would take place in
                           two defined areas termed "micro-regions" within the CAL. One of these micro-regions centers on
                           the town of Mirebalais. The other has not yet been chosen by Government. The project would focus
                           on basic infrastructure investments along these routes.

                           The primary and secondary roads pre-identified for improvement already exist and would not
                           necessitate large-scale resettlement. No land acquisition is envisioned. At the connection between
                           the loop and RN1 in Tinanyen, investments may include limited resettlement of vendors and semi-
                           permanent structures to improve road safety and basic services at the Titanyen market that is held
Public Disclosure Copy




                           twice a week. Adaptation measures to climate change to ensure sustainability may also necessitate
                           minor diversion from the existing right of way into agricultural land, particularly around bridges.
                           Tertiary roads have not been pre-identified yet but are unlikely to result in resettlement.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower's capacity for implementation of safeguard policies is relatively weak and would need
                           to be enhanced. UTE has one environmental specialist, based in Port au Prince. However, he has a
                           number of projects to monitor and supervise. Since there is another Bank project under preparation
                           with the same PIU, it is likely that both projects would recruit a supervision team or firm
                           (international, regional or local if capacity exists). This firm/team would be responsible for
                           monitoring, capacity building, interacting with contractors and reporting environmental supervision
                           activities to the Bank and the PIU on a monthly basis.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (LCSEN)
                           Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes   The client has agreed that road rehabilitation
                         BP 4.01                              would be financed under the project. However,
                                                              the actual sections of the roads, and the length
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              of these sections, would be determined during
                                                              preparation. All other works detailed at this
                                                              PCN stage are subject to discussion and
                                                              negotiation with the client as preparation
                                                              advances.

                                                              The following describes the possible works
                                                              under each component:

                                                              Component 1: 80% of the grant ($40 million)
                                                              would be used for the rehabilitation and
                                                              construction of critical segments of the
                                                              Artibonite road network (loop). The loop runs
                                                              from Mirebalais through the towns of
                                                              Thomonde, Hinche, Pignon, Saint Raphael,
                                                              Saint Michel de L' Attalaye, Marchand
                                                              Dessalines, Petite Riviere, La Chapelle and Saut
                                                              D' Eau. There is also a small segment from
                                                              Mirebalais to Boucan Carre. The project would
                                                              focus on:

                                                              i) constructing or improving primary and
                                                              secondary road to ensure climate resilience and
                                                              road connectivity in the Artibonite agricultural
                                                              area. For example, the project would ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              that there is adequate road drainage, and would
                                                              also focus particularly on sections of the road
                                                              that may be more vulnerable to hurricanes and
                                                              tornadoes, which produce erosion or water
                                                              damage;

                                                              ii) repairing or rebuilding critical infrastructure
                                                              (bridges, culverts) across river networks. To
                                                              date, because of the lack of or inadequacy of
                                                              these infrastructures, cars have to cross rivers,
                                                              sometimes fairly large, to get to the next section
                                                              of road.

                                                              iii) improvement of tertiary and rural road to
                                                              make these more resilient and usable for the
                                                              transport of agricultural produce from the
                                                              region;

                                                              iv) the project would also finance small
                                                              facilities (sheds, buildings) as collection points
                                                              for agricultural production along those routes.

                                                              The environmental impact of these works would
                                                              certainly be positive - road networks and
                                                              transportation in general would be more climate
                                                              resilient and able to withstand weather related
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Since there are several works in the watershed
                                                                 area, the area may include some important
                                                                 aquatic habitat areas. The final determination of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 whether this is triggered or not would be made
                                                                 in the appraisal stage ISDS.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This is not triggered- there are no forests in the
                                                                 area and most of the trees along the routes are
                                                                 planted by communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   The project would invest in the productive
                                                                 sector (markets) but would not finance any
                                                                 pesticides. However, the engagement in the
                                                                 sector may offer an opportunity to discuss the
                                                                 use of integrated pest management with the
                                                                 client.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    Screening during project preparation did not
                         BP 4.11                                 find that physical cultural resources would be
                                                                 affected by the project. The ESMF would
                                                                 provide guidance and procedures to deal with
                                                                 chance finds of physical cultural resources in
                                                                 accordance with OP/BP 4.11.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no indigenous peoples present in the
                                                                 project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   This policy is triggered as the road rehabilitation
                         4.12                                    and upgrading of rural and urban markets are
                                                                 likely to result in limited temporary or
                                                                 permanent involuntary resettlement. Land
                                                                 acquisition is not expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Because the identification of the project
                                                                 subcomponents that would be financed would
                                                                 only be done using a participatory approach
                                                                 during project implementation, a Resettlement
                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) would be prepared in
                                                                 accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of
                                                                 the appropriate safeguard policies. The RPF
                                                                 would reflect the following principles:

                                                                  - Prior to the approval of sub-projects, the
                                                                 client would need to ensure that the sites,
                                                                 boundaries and ownerships of the relevant land
                                                                 plots are clearly identified and confirmed using
                                                                 a community-based mapping exercise that goes
                                                                 beyond simply checking for legal title.
                                                                  - In case there is resettlement, agreement on the
                                                                 compensation scheme and its payment or
                                                                 realization would be settled prior to the
                                                                 commencement of that particular sub-project.
                                                                                                                                  - In cases where there are disputed claims to
                                                                                                                                 eligibility to compensation or to land ownership
                                                                                                                                 or use, conflict resolution would be facilitated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 by the client, and though works may begin,
                                                                                                                                 proper compensation would be kept in escrow
                                                                                                                                 until the conflicts are resolved. In cases where
                                                                                                                                 this does happen, the client would remain in
                                                                                                                                 constant contact with the affected people and
                                                                                                                                 apply the best available dispute resolution
                                                                                                                                 mechanisms in the country.

                                                                                                                                 Given the objective to spur regional
                                                                                                                                 development, all upstream support that may
                                                                                                                                 spur downstream impacts on resettlement, as
                                                                                                                                 defined by the policy (e.g. through the
                                                                                                                                 preparation of bidding documents, etc.) would
                                                                                                                                 include reference to the principles of OP 4.12 in
                                                                                                                                 terms of, among other things, eligibility for
                                                                                                                                 compensation, asset valuation methodologies,
                                                                                                                                 and consultation and participation.

                                                                                                                                 Given the levels of poverty in the project area,
                                                                                                                                 voluntary donations of land would be avoided,
                                                                                                                                 but guidance would be given in the RPF to
                                                                                                                                 ensure that it can be regulated according to the
                                                                                                                                 principles of OP 4.12 on an exceptional basis.

                                                                                                                                 At PCN stage no decisions have been taken on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 which roads would be rehabilitated. A PCN
                                                                                                                                 stage, this Project was authorized to be
                                                                                                                                 processed using the OP 10.00, Special
                                                                                                                                 Circumstances, thus allowing for the
                                                                                                                                 preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAP)
                                                                                                                                 for the roads, where necessary, to be done
                                                                                                                                 during the first 6 months of project
                                                                                                                                 implementation in the event that the specific
                                                                                                                                 tracts of roads would be identified during the
                                                                                                                                 course of project preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            No dams are envisioned under this project

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not involve international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not in a disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Dec-2013



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The ESMF and RPF will be prepared within the end of the calendar year 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Pierre Xavier Bonneau

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                          Date: 28-Nov-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)                          Date: 30-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
