                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6979
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Haiti                              Project ID:    P133352
                            Project Name:     HT Center and Artibonite Regional Development (P133352)
                            Task Team         Pierre Xavier Bonneau
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         03-Feb-2014                        Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSTR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (56%), Urban Transport (12%),
                                              Central government administration (10%), Public administratio n- Transportation
                                              (8%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (14%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Natural disaster management (15%),
                                              Other urban development (15%), Other public sector gover nance (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      58.00           Total Bank Financing:                50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             50.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                             8.00
                              Total                                                                                   58.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Project Development Objective: The objective of the proposed Project is to support the development


                                                                      Page 1 of 17
                         of the Centre Artibonite Loop (CAL) region, primarily by enhancing all-weather connectivity and
                         logistics for producers, and the region’s resilience to climate change.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Project Development Objective would be achieved through: (i) enhancing transport connectivity
                         between the CAL and other regions; (ii) enhancing the access of inhabitants and agricultural
                         producers to selected markets by improving internal connectivity within the CAL, as well as selected
                         market facilities; (iii) developing regional knowledge and tools to enable public and private actors in
                         the region to better plan investments and activities; (iv) improving the region’s resilience to climate
                         change; and (v) providing the Government of Haiti (GoH) with resources and capacity to respond
                         promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.
                         3. Project Description
                         COMPONENT 1 – Enhancing logistics and transport connectivity

                         This component aims to link the Centre Artibonite Loop (CAL) region to economic growth poles
                         outside the region, and to improve the internal connectivity of the CAL by increasing all-weather
                         access toagricultural production areas, markets and services, and improving the Rural Access Index
                         (RAI). To complement on-going national and donor-financed infrastructure investments in the
                         primary, secondary and tertiary road networks, the Project would finance the protection rehabilitation
                         and/or construction of critical spots along the road network, and introduce climate-proofing measures
                         contributing to infrastructure resilience. This focused intervention has proven to be an efficient
                         investment strategy, bringing in maximized development impacts. Investments would be made at
                         three levels to improve: (i) the primary, secondary and tertiary road networks; (ii) the rural road
                         network (feeder roads and rural pathways); and (iii) road maintenance.

                         Subcomponent 1.1. Improving the structuring road network

                         The Project would strengthen regional connectivity and logistics, focusing investments on three
                         major connecting roads, selected tertiary roads, and selected basic infrastructure along the road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         network. This subcomponent would finance works and related studies for the rehabilitation of
                         vulnerable road sections, bridges, river crossings, and critical spot interventions along three major
                         connecting roads: outbound to the capital/South (Saut d’Eau-Titanyen), outbound to the North
                         (Dessalines-Saint Michel-Saint Raphaël), internal corridor West-East across the loop (Maïssade-
                         Hinche). The Project would pay particular attention to the integration of road safety best practices in
                         designs and promote share used design of the road for pedestrian, Intermediate Means of Transport
                         (IMTs) and vehicles. The Project would also finance the rehabilitation of selected tertiary roads in
                         the priority areas of intervention identified with the participatory mechanism defined under
                         Components 1.2 and 2. The Project also aims to facilitate the transport conditions of rural
                         households through improved basic infrastructure along the road network: where relevant and
                         feasible, investments at critical spots would be complemented by basic social infrastructure with a
                         special focus on gender related issues. Those complementary investments would be identified by a
                         gender and social assessment.

                         The Project would strengthen the macro-resilience of the road network of the loop and mitigate risks
                         of isolation of population and traffic cuts in extreme weather events. To that end, as well as to
                         ensure the long-term sustainability of the investments in general, the Project would finance
                         adaptation measures to climate change such as the reinforcement of hydraulic protection for bridges,
                         improved drainage, slope stabilization works in mountainous or steep areas. Investments would be
                         identified through a vulnerability assessment.


                                                                      Page 2 of 17
                         Subcomponent 1.2. Improving the rural road network
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project would improve internal connectivity and in particular the transit and transport of
                         agriculture products all year round through the rehabilitation or upgrading of selected feeder roads
                         and rural pathways, and the construction of small logistical facilities, such as collection points for
                         agricultural production, drinking points along pathways, or shading areas. The purpose would be to
                         increase all-weather access, especially for IMTs in isolated areas, and improve basic conditions along
                         transit routes. Technical guidelines would be developed and disseminated for infrastructure design,
                         construction and maintenance. They would mainstream context-specific climate resilience best
                         practice, and particularly promote simple and lower cost design for roads and pathways dedicated to
                         pedestrians or IMTs.

                         The selection of the roads (tertiary roads, feeder roads and rural pathways) would follow an approach
                         combining a top-down and bottom-up process. The former would consist of a prioritization and
                         screening process based on economic and technical viability criteria, while the latter would allow for
                         participation of the full range of local stake holders, and for local competition. This bottom-up
                         process would be facilitated by the services of a contracted Operator.

                         Subcomponent 1.3. Strengthening of road maintenance capacity and mechanisms at the local level

                         The Project would finance a mix of goods, works, technical assistance, trainings and services, with
                         potential use of the force account mechanism, to support road maintenance mechanisms and
                         strengthen capacities of the Ministry of Transport, Public Works, Energy and Communications
                         (MTPTEC) road maintenance services at central and local levels. At the central level, the
                         Component would finance an institutional reinforcement plan, complementing undergoing
                         strengthening activities already financed by the Bank and other donors involved in the Transport
                         sector (IDB and EU, in particular). At the regional level, the Component would finance an
                         operational road maintenance strategy for the CAL region, technical guidelines for road maintenance,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mainstreaming context-specific climate resilience best practice, and trainings. At the local level, the
                         Component would finance works needed to rehabilitate the local road maintenance centers of
                         MTPTEC in Hinche and Mirebalais, and, possibly, construct a new center in Saint Michel. The
                         Component would also support the existing and the development of new road maintenance
                         microenterprises operating in the CAL region, by providing trainings and technical assistance, with a
                         special focus on community-based organizations. Finally, if necessary and for the duration of the
                         Project, the Component may finance part of the maintenance costs needed for the projected
                         investments. This funding, which would decline over the years, would go through the Road
                         Maintenance Fund (FER) for the eligible road network, and use the force account mechanism, as
                         well as involve directly the local communities for the rural network. FER would be in a position to
                         fully take over once the Law, aiming at increasing its resources and currently under review by the
                         Parliament, is approved.

                         COMPONENT 2 – Improving infrastructure and management capacity of markets

                         This Component would improve the infrastructure and management capacity of key selected urban
                         and rural markets to link agricultural producers with the roads identified under Component 1. Given
                         the differences between urban and rural markets, there would be a different approach for establishing
                         local consensus, design and management for each.



                                                                      Page 3 of 17
                         Subcomponent 2.1: Urban markets

                         30.      The Project would improve a limited number of urban markets that are strategically located
Public Disclosure Copy




                         along the loop. Between two and four urban markets would be selected for financing of upgrading
                         and/or construction. The upgrading works would potentially include works on facilities that are
                         typically associated with markets to improve connected services of freight and trade. The project
                         would finance a mix of goods and works, which would be complemented with training and technical
                         assistance. An investment and management plan would be developed with the support of a
                         contracted Operator, while the construction or upgrades would be executed by a private contractor
                         and would include climate resilient infrastructure.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Rural markets

                         This subcomponent would finance the same activities as subcomponent 2.1 but through a competitive
                         scheme. This component would combine a top-down and a bottom-up approach, where CIAT would
                         play a strategic role. A call or calls for proposals would be issued for short-listed rural markets to
                         prepare and submit an investment and management plan. These plans would be prepared by the local
                         authorities, in consultation with the civil society and with support and facilitation from an Operator
                         hired by the implementing agency. The proposals would be evaluated by a dedicated technical team
                         from the implementing agency against agreed criteria and submitted to the Technical Councils,
                         usually called and chaired by the Departmental Delegates (“Conseil Technique Départemental”).
                         The construction would be executed by a private contractor, while the Operator would work on the
                         supervision and training. Women’s participation in the management of the market would be strongly
                         encouraged as they typically represent a large share of the market uses.

                         COMPONENT 3 – Supporting the development of territorial knowledge, planning capacity and local
                         participation

                         The Project would support the development of knowledge, methodologies and tools to inform
Public Disclosure Copy




                         territorial and urban planning and opportunities for public and private investments. This Component
                         would finance technical assistance, trainings, goods and costs that would support the GoH,
                         municipalities and local stakeholders to build and disseminate improved territorial knowledge of the
                         CAL region, and to effectively plan and make consensual decisions.

                         Subcomponent 3.1. Improving territorial knowledge

                         This subcomponent would finance analytical studies and information systems, including technical
                         guidelines, inter alia economic, social and environmental studies, spatial analyses, urban studies and
                         plans, climate modeling and adaptation plans to inform decision-makers and practical guidelines to
                         enhance infrastructure investments’ resilience. The Project would support CIAT’s services and
                         provide technical assistance to strengthen CIAT’s capacity. It would also finance the development of
                         a dashboard tool capturing key development indicators and investments at regional level.

                         Subcomponent 3.2. Supporting the development of regional planning capacity and local participation

                         The Project would support the development of participatory decision-making mechanisms that would
                         combine both top-down and bottom-up approaches. First, the Project would support the development
                         of a regional programmatic agenda. The regional agenda would help to provide guidance to
                         stakeholders and to better coordinate the development of the CAL by identifying and sequencing

                                                                     Page 4 of 17
                         regional and local investment needs. Second, the Project would support the establishment of
                         participatory decision-making mechanisms at the local level to identify local priorities and
                         investments, within the scope of Components 1 and 2.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This subcomponent would also support broader dissemination and exchange of information between
                         regional stakeholders, using existing local administrative consultation tables chaired by the local
                         representatives of the national government (called “Conseils Techniques Départementaux”),
                         expanded to include municipalities, local stakeholders, such as Chambers of Commerce and
                         associations of producers, and the civil society.

                         The mechanisms developed under this subcomponent, though specifically designed to implement the
                         activities financed by the Project, would support the initiative from the GoH to strengthen, drive and
                         implement the overall development agenda for the CAL region, which goes beyond the activities
                         financed by Component 1 and 2. This initiative is similarly underway in the other regions of the
                         country such as the North/Northwest corridor and the South Peninsula.

                         COMPONENT 4 – Contingent Emergency Response Component

                         Due to the high risk of a catastrophic event in Haiti, the proposed project would include a provisional
                         component, designed as a mechanism that would allow for rapid response in the event of an eligible
                         emergency. Such components, which include triggers and conditions for the use of funds, are
                         included in most investment projects in Haiti in keeping with the recommendations of the 2011
                         WDR on Fragility and with the operational experience acquired in Haiti since the 2010 earthquake.

                         COMPONENT 5 – Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation

                         This component would finance the activities of the implementing agency for the Project, an existing
                         project implementation unit under the responsibility of the Ministry of Finance and Economy (MEF)
                         called Unité Technique d’Exécution (UTE). UTE has been implementing projects financed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         several donors and would coordinate, evaluate, supervise and implement the Project. Funding would
                         be provided to: (i) strengthen UTE’s capacity to comply with its responsibilities under the proposed
                         Project’s Operational Manual, including the hiring of specialized staff (such as social and
                         environmental specialists, procurement and financial management specialists), training and operating
                         costs; (ii) cover staffing and operating costs for governmental institutions or ministries involved
                         providing technical support to UTE, such as CIAT, MTPTEC, and MARNDR; and (iii) conduct
                         project audits and project studies, including independent performance reviews and impact
                         evaluations.

                         This component would also contribute to generating an information system that tracks crucial
                         development outcomes and their changes over time, which would help understand project results,
                         their magnitude and their sustainability. A set of Monitoring and Evaluation indicators would help
                         track how transformational the Project is, and in particular how the Project generates inclusion in
                         gender and other dimensions, and more broadly, how it contributes to shared prosperity and extreme
                         poverty reduction in the CAL region.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The CAL is comprised of 14 communes, situated in 3 departments: Artibonite, the Center and the
                         North. Approximately 1.2 million inhabitants live in a space of 4,643 km2. Only 23 percent of the


                                                                      Page 5 of 17
                         population (222,000) inhabitants live in urban centers. The perimeter of this loop is 240 km long and
                         is equidistant (24km away) from 10 urban centers. All investments would take place within the
                         CAL, particularly Mirebalais, Saint Raphael, Saint Michel and Hinche. Additionally, the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would finance works and related studies for the rehabilitation of vulnerable road sections, bridges,
                         river crossings, and critical spot interventions along three major connecting roads: outbound to the
                         capital/South (Saut d’Eau-Titanyen), outbound to the North (Dessalines-Saint Michel-Saint
                         Raphaël), internal corridor West-East across the loop (Maïssade-Hinche).

                         The primary and secondary roads pre-identified for improvement already exist and would not
                         necessitate large-scale resettlement. No land acquisition is envisioned. At the connection between
                         the loop and RN1 in Tinanyen, investments may include limited resettlement of vendors and semi-
                         permanent structures to improve road safety and basic services at the Titanyen market that is held
                         twice a week. Adaptation measures to climate change to ensure sustainability may also necessitate
                         minor diversion from the existing right of way into agricultural land, particularly around bridges, and
                         in those cases may involve minor land acquisition. Tertiary roads have not been pre-identified yet
                         but are unlikely to result in resettlement as no new roads are envisioned.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (LCSEN)
                         Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Component 1: 80% of the grant ($40 million)
                         BP 4.01                                              would be used for the rehabilitation and
                                                                              construction of critical segments of the Artibonite
                                                                              road network (loop). The loop runs from
                                                                              Mirebalais through the towns of Thomonde,
                                                                              Hinche, Pignon, Saint Raphael, Saint Michel de
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              L' Attalaye, Dessalines, Petite Riviere, La
                                                                              Chapelle and Saut D' Eau. There is also a small
                                                                              segment from Mirebalais to Boucan Carre. The
                                                                              project would focus on:

                                                                              i) reconstructing and rehabilitating existing
                                                                              primary and secondary roads to ensure climate
                                                                              resilience and road connectivity in the Artibonite
                                                                              agricultural area. For example, the project would
                                                                              ensure that there is adequate road drainage, and
                                                                              would also focus particularly on sections of the
                                                                              road that may be more vulnerable to hurricanes
                                                                              and tornadoes, which produce erosion or water
                                                                              damage;

                                                                              ii) repairing, rebuilding or, in limited cases,
                                                                              constructing select critical infrastructure (bridges,
                                                                              culverts) across river networks. To date, because
                                                                              of the lack of or inadequacy of these
                                                                              infrastructures, cars have to cross rivers,


                                                                      Page 6 of 17
                                 sometimes fairly large, to get to the next section
                                 of road.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 iii) improvement of existing tertiary and rural
                                 road to make these more resilient and usable for
                                 the transport of agricultural produce from the
                                 region;

                                 iv) the project would also finance small facilities
                                 (small existing road maintenance centers, sheds,
                                 buildings) as collection points for agricultural
                                 production along those routes.

                                 The environmental impact of these works would
                                 certainly be positive - road networks and
                                 transportation infrastructure in general would also
                                 be more climate resilient and able to withstand
                                 weather related shocks.

                                 Negative environmental impacts are largely
                                 related to the construction phases of the project
                                 and would require the appropriate action plans to
                                 ensure proper waste disposal, erosion mitigation
                                 and strong occupational health monitoring. In
                                 this project, EMPs will focus on the risk of water
                                 contamination. This is because much of the
                                 infrastructure works would occur around or over
                                 rivers and streams. Very often, these water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 sources are the communities’ potable water
                                 source. The project would focus on maintaining
                                 the integrity of the water source during
                                 construction. The EMP and contracts would
                                 ensure that contractors include environmental
                                 management measures including maintaining the
                                 quality of the water from the water source
                                 through proper disposal and monitoring of
                                 construction equipment and supplies, engine oil,
                                 gas, chemicals, solvents and other pollutants that
                                 might impact water quality.

                                 In addition, this area is prone to flooding,
                                 particularly in the rainy season. It is therefore
                                 important to ensure that i) construction materials
                                 (soil, etc) do not run-off into rivers and streams;
                                 ii) the road design is cleared by a technical
                                 specialist with some expertise in building climate
                                 resilient infrastructure, particularly for flood-



                         Page 7 of 17
                                 prone areas; iii) other flood related controls are
                                 recommended by a hydrologist and put in place
                                 (in sensitive areas) to avoid the loss or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 deterioration of the infrastructure that is being
                                 invested.

                                 Positive social impacts will include improved
                                 mobility, particularly of the rural population,
                                 improved access to markets, and the construction
                                 of small facilities along the way that will be
                                 identified through community consultations.

                                 Negative social impacts are primarily related to
                                 minimal permanent resettlement in instances
                                 where the climate adaptation or road safety
                                 measures require minor diversion from the
                                 existing right of way. Other potential negative
                                 social impacts include road safety resulting
                                 increased, higher speed traffic, particularly where
                                 the connecting roads enter urban centers and
                                 markets or pass community water points, and risk
                                 of increased spread of HIV/AIDS that is
                                 associated with improved access between areas of
                                 high and low HIV prevalence and presence of
                                 transport workers.

                                 Component 2 (US$8 million) will focus on the
                                 rehabilitation, upgrading or new construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 2-4 regional urban markets and select rural
                                 markets.

                                 The urban markets will be selected and prioritized
                                 based on specific criteria, such as current state of
                                 the market, governance, access to undisputed
                                 land, support from local authorities, retail/
                                 wholesale dynamic, agricultural production
                                 (existing and potential) and trade patterns in the
                                 area. 16 urban markets were pre-identified
                                 around the loop, of which 10 are located in towns
                                 directly on the loop, four are located in other
                                 communes and two are in urban neighborhoods.
                                 The markets vary in size and range between
                                 300-1000 merchants per market. Two markets
                                 have already been selected: the market of Saint
                                 Raphel (upgrading) and of Saint Michel (new
                                 construction). Up to two additional markets
                                 (possibly Titanyen and Mirebalais) may be



                         Page 8 of 17
                                 selected using the criteria above).

                                 Rural markets to be rehabilitated or upgraded
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 would be selected based on a competitive scheme
                                 during Project implementation and would consist
                                 of existing rural markets, therefore there would be
                                 no new construction of rural markets. Rural
                                 markets in the CAL region would typically have a
                                 footprint of 3,000-4,000m2 and host between 50
                                 to 200 merchants.

                                 The rehabilitation/upgrading of select urban and
                                 rural markets and new construction of select
                                 urban markets would focus on improving social
                                 conditions for vendors and customers in the
                                 market through a range of interventions that focus
                                 on improved accessibility, improved hygiene and
                                 food safety, provision of sanitary facilities,
                                 provision of child care facilities, sanitation of
                                 areas with live and dead animals, etc. Negative
                                 social impacts may include an increase of “rents”
                                 for market vendors and exclusion of the poorest,
                                 temporary and permanent resettlement during the
                                 works as a result of upgraded or expanded market
                                 areas. Other negative impacts may include
                                 temporary movement of stalls or products during
                                 the construction phases. However, every effort
                                 will be made to limit the impact of this on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 incomes.

                                 In terms of the environmental impact, some of the
                                 pre-identified markets currently exist, however
                                 some markets would be newly constructed,
                                 including in Saint Michel. Siting would be
                                 particularly important for new markets to ensure
                                 not only aspects such as accessibility, community
                                 interest in a market, etc., but also access to water
                                 for sanitary/toilet facilities. In areas where the
                                 water table is high, building these facilities can be
                                 more challenging. The contract should ensure that
                                 the contractor has sufficient knowledge of
                                 building these facilities in areas with a high water
                                 table and ensuring that waste does not
                                 contaminate ground or surface waters. One
                                 generic EMP for the markets to be rehabilitated or
                                 upgraded would suffice with detailed sections on
                                 the specific site related issues of each site. This



                         Page 9 of 17
                                  EMP would address the adequacy and impact of
                                  current and proposed waste disposal mechanisms
                                  and whether the current system (for existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  markets) is adequate in the face of market
                                  expansion. The EMP would also examine
                                  sanitation (adequacy of sanitary waste disposal
                                  and impact on ground water, etc), as well as water
                                  supply and food management (storage, food
                                  safety, disease and vector control, etc). Contracts
                                  will also include environmental management
                                  measures identified in the EMP.

                                  Another EMP would be prepared for the
                                  construction of new urban markets that would
                                  address the same issues mentioned above, but
                                  also detailed sections on the specific site related
                                  issues of each site.

                                  Component 3 and 5 have no safeguard
                                  requirements. Component 3 would finance the
                                  establishment of informational databases and the
                                  facilitation of consultation and decision-making
                                  processes. Component 5 would finance project
                                  management.

                                  Component 4 (US$1 million) is a contingency
                                  emergency fund for a catastrophic event. As
                                  such, it would be classified under OP 10.00,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  Special Circumstances, if used and safeguard
                                  requirements would be prepared according to
                                  those requirements.

                                  The project activities consist primarily of
                                  upgrading/improvement of existing infrastructure
                                  (roads, culverts, bridges) to ensure good
                                  connectivity as well as climate resilience and the
                                  upgrading of markets in key areas. There would
                                  be some new structures, but these are likely to be
                                  in sites with previously existing infrastructure that
                                  no longer functions or no longer exists. The
                                  individual works are discrete and small in scale:
                                  new construction for transportation and markets
                                  will be limited to Category B type investments
                                  and the ESMF will screen out any subprojects
                                  with potential significant and irreversible long-
                                  term environmental impacts. As a result, the
                                  environmental impact of the proposed project



                         Page 10 of 17
                                                                      would be small, with reversible impacts.

                                                                      Safeguard instruments for Components 1 and 2
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      would include: i) an Environmental and Social
                                                                      Management Framework (ESMF) for the project;
                                                                      ii) an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                                                                      for the roads with a detailed section for each road
                                                                      segment; iii) an EMP for the market construction
                                                                      and/or rehabilitation and issues related to
                                                                      sanitation, waste management, etc during and
                                                                      after construction. One generic EMP for the
                                                                      rehabilitation and upgrading of markets would
                                                                      suffice with detailed sections on the specific site
                                                                      related issues of each site; iv) specific EMPs for
                                                                      the construction of new Markets; v) Resettlement
                                                                      Policy Framework (RPF); vi) a Resettlement
                                                                      Action Plan (RAP), if needed, associated with the
                                                                      particular activity.

                                                                      A strategic environmental and social assessment
                                                                      will also be developed with specific attention to
                                                                      gender and consultation to inform the project and
                                                                      the development of safeguards procedures.

                                                                      The initial PCN review (in June 2013) and the
                                                                      follow up review of the revised PCN (in October
                                                                      2013) authorized the deferral of the preparation of
                                                                      social and environmental instruments to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      project implementation phase under the special
                                                                      considerations facility provided in OP 10. The
                                                                      key documents, particularly the Environmental
                                                                      and Social Management Framework and
                                                                      Resettlement Policy Framework, will be
                                                                      completed prior to Effectiveness. A time-bound
                                                                      Safeguards Action Plan was developed for the
                                                                      preparation of environmental and social
                                                                      safeguards instruments to ensure compliance with
                                                                      the safeguards policies.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            There are some natural habitats in terms of
                                                                      aquatic life in streams, rivers through which
                                                                      bridges would cross. The EMPs would outline
                                                                      precautions and mitigation measures to avoid
                                                                      contamination of natural water bodies.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No             This is not triggered- there are no forests in the
                                                                      area and most of the trees along the routes are
                                                                      planted by communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No             This policy is not triggered because the project is


                                                             Page 11 of 17
                                                                          not financing the purchase or significant use of
                                                                          pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             Screening during project preparation did not find
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                          that physical cultural resources would be affected
                                                                          by the project. The ESMF would provide
                                                                          guidance and procedures to deal with chance
                                                                          finds of Physical Cultural Resources in
                                                                          accordance with OP/BP 4.11.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             There are no indigenous peoples as defined by the
                                                                          policy present in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            This policy is triggered as the road rehabilitation
                         4.12                                             and upgrading of rural and urban markets are
                                                                          likely to result in limited temporary or permanent
                                                                          involuntary resettlement. Rural markets typically
                                                                          only meet once or twice per week and works
                                                                          would be planned to ensure minimal disruption or
                                                                          temporary resettlement. Land acquisition is not
                                                                          expected because right of way, location of the
                                                                          emergency bridges and market upgrading would
                                                                          occur in existing locations. However, the RPF
                                                                          would include guidance for land acquisition in the
                                                                          event that technical studies recommend a
                                                                          diversion of the currently existing sites.
                                                                          Because the identification of the project
                                                                          subcomponents that would be financed would
                                                                          only be done using a participatory approach
                                                                          during project implementation, a Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          Policy Framework (RPF) would be prepared in
                                                                          accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of
                                                                          the appropriate safeguard policies. The RPF
                                                                          would reflect the following principles:

                                                                           - Prior to the approval of sub-projects, the client
                                                                          would need to ensure that the sites, boundaries
                                                                          and ownerships of the relevant land plots are
                                                                          clearly identified and confirmed using a
                                                                          community-based mapping exercise that goes
                                                                          beyond simply checking for legal title.
                                                                           - In case there is resettlement, agreement on the
                                                                          compensation scheme and its payment or
                                                                          realization would be settled prior to the
                                                                          commencement of that particular sub-project.
                                                                           - In cases where there are disputed claims to
                                                                          eligibility to compensation or to land ownership
                                                                          or use, conflict resolution would be facilitated by
                                                                          the client, and though works may begin, proper
                                                                          compensation would be kept in escrow until the


                                                                 Page 12 of 17
                                                                   conflicts are resolved. In cases where this does
                                                                   happen, the client would remain in constant
                                                                   contact with the affected people and apply the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   best available dispute resolution mechanisms in
                                                                   the country.

                                                                   Given the objective to spur regional development,
                                                                   all upstream support that may spur downstream
                                                                   impacts on resettlement, as defined by the policy
                                                                   (e.g. through the preparation of bidding
                                                                   documents, etc.) would include reference to the
                                                                   principles of OP 4.12 in terms of, among other
                                                                   things, eligibility for compensation, asset
                                                                   valuation methodologies, and consultation and
                                                                   participation.

                                                                   Given the levels of poverty in the project area,
                                                                   voluntary donations of land would be avoided,
                                                                   but guidance would be given in the RPF to ensure
                                                                   that it can be regulated according to the principles
                                                                   of OP 4.12 on an exceptional basis.

                                                                   Resettlement Action Plans for transport and
                                                                   market works that will be defined during project
                                                                   implementation will be prepared in accordance
                                                                   with the RPF prior to the commencement of the
                                                                   works according to the principles of OP 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   A PCN stage, this Project was authorized to be
                                                                   processed using the OP 10.00, Special
                                                                   Circumstances, thus allowing for the preparation
                                                                   of Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the
                                                                   roads, where necessary, to be done during the first
                                                                   6 months of project implementation in the event
                                                                   that the specific tracts of roads would be
                                                                   identified during the course of project
                                                                   preparation. In accordance with OP 10.00, an
                                                                   Action Plan was formulated to define the
                                                                   institutional responsibilities, timeline, and key
                                                                   milestones for completion of the safeguards work,
                                                                   as well as a draft table of contents or outline of
                                                                   the proposed safeguards documents, and draft
                                                                   ToRs to facilitate their preparation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No            This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                   will not finance the construction of dams nor will
                                                                   rely on the activities of existing dams.
                                                     No


                                                          Page 13 of 17
                            Projects on International                            The project activities will not affect international
                            Waterways
                            Projects    OP/BP 7.50
                                     in Disputed  Areas OP/BP No                 The projectas
                                                                                 waterways      not in a by
                                                                                             is defined     the policy.
                                                                                                         disputed area as defined by
                            7.60                                                 the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project activities are largely upgrading/improvement of existing infrastructure (roads,
                              culverts, bridges) to ensure good connectivity as well as climate resilience. The project would also
                              finance the upgrading of markets in key areas. There would be some new structures, but these are
                              likely to be in sites with previously existing infrastructure that no longer functions or no longer
                              exists. The works are often discrete and small in scale: new construction for transportation and
                              markets will be limited to Category B type investments and the ESMF will screen out any
                              subprojects with potential significant and irreversible long-term environmental impacts. As a
                              result, the environmental impact of the proposed project would be small, with reversible impacts.

                              The scope of resettlement would be dependent on the technical studies. The roads that would be
                              rehabilitated already exist and there is virtually no encroachment on the right of way. The critical
                              points, mainly where bridges would be constructed, as well are located in places where there are
                              no existing structures. In the event that the feasibility study would recommend that these bridges
                              be built at different locations than where they are currently planned, it is possible that minor
                              diversions in the right of way will affect some agricultural land. Titanyen is most likely location
                              to be affected by resettlement, as there is encroachment (both structures and market activities) on
                              the road by the crossing and the rehabilitation of the road there may include interventions to
                              improve traffic safety . The scale of potential impact in case of encroachment would consist of
                              approximately 100 people. Rural markets typically only meet once or twice per week, and works
Public Disclosure Copy




                              will be planned to ensure minimal disruption or temporary resettlement resulting in temporary
                              livelihood impacts. Where temporary resettlement of market activities is required during the
                              upgrading of markets, abbreviated resettlement action plans would mitigate for potential
                              temporary livelihood effects during construction, using a participatory approach for community
                              benefits.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The positive impact that the project is looking for is to improve connectivity, particularly for
                              people and agricultural goods in the area. Increased connectivity would hopefully lead to a higher
                              producing area and an improvement in incomes and growth. There are no long term negative
                              environmental or social impacts or indirect impacts envisioned. Shorter term social impacts would
                              likely to include some resettlement of people, particularly when markets are improved. However,
                              this movement is very temporary and may even be within the grounds of the market itself to
                              reduce undue disruption to services and incomes.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The project has and would continue to explore options to minimize adverse social impacts when
                              markets are being upgraded. The RAP process would involve consultations with market users to
                              ensure that all options are considered.


                                                                        Page 14 of 17
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           UTE would issue calls for proposals to be addressed to Mayors and CASECs of the “priority
Public Disclosure Copy




                           zones” for them to have the opportunity to submit an investment and maintenance plan for rural
                           roads or markets. The plans would cover aspects such as investment needs, maintenance costs and
                           plans, initial investment design, budget, environmental and social safeguard issues, etc. UTE
                           currently has an environmental safeguards coordinator based in Port au Prince and a social and an
                           environmental specialist based in Cap Haitien. An additional social specialist would be hired and
                           shared with the Heritage and Sustainable Tourism project to oversee implementation and
                           supervision of the social aspects of the project, including social safeguards, consultations and
                           gender aspects. Another supervision team would be hired to provide on the ground supervision.
                           This approach has worked well in Haiti. Finally, a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) would
                           be developed prior to the start of project activities to complement other safeguard instruments.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders include the Government (i.e., all the agencies involved in the project -UCE, CIAT,
                           local government including Mayors, etc) as well as the UN agencies and civil society. The TORs
                           for the ESMF and RPF were completed prior to appraisal to ensure that these instruments would
                           be developed, consulted and disclosed prior to Effectiveness. Consultations would occur during
                           the preparation of the ESMF and RPF and the discussions held with community members,
                           particularly project affected persons and institutions would be recorded in these documents. The
                           documents would be disclosed on GoH websites and at the Bank's Infoshop. Both ESMF and RPF
                           will include detailed guidelines on ensuring consultation of the EMPs and RAPs that will be
                           developed during project implementation under the special consideration clause for countries that
                           experience capacity constraints because of fragility or specific vulnerabilities under OP 10.
                           Additionally, a GRM would be developed to help mitigate and address potential impacts on
                           affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  31-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               03-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                        03-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  31-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               03-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                        03-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the



                                                                   Page 15 of 17
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or  EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Pierre Xavier Bonneau


                                                                       Page 16 of 17
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)    Date: 24-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Advisor:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)    Date: 24-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 17 of 17
