                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS OATASHEET
                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                      Report No.: 84953
Date f3FeJ3ared/updatcd: January 16, 2014

I. Basic Information
I. Basic Project Data

Country                          India                  J rroject ID              I PI48870

Project Name                     India Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project -Additional Financing

Task Team Leader                Saurabh Suresh Dani

Appraisal Date                   November 30, 2009           Appraisal Date
                                                                                          January 10, 2014
Estimated Board Date             March 31. 2014              (Additional Financing)

Managing Unit                    SASOC                       Lending Instrument

Sector(s)                       General Water. Sanitation and Flood Protection (I 00%)

Theme(s)                        Natural Disaster Management (80%); Other Urban Development (20%)

Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or                     OP
                                                                                                   Yes
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?

Project Financing Data (In USD Million)

Total Project Cost               USD 137.0 million           Total Bank Financing            USD 105 million

Financing Gap:                  -
  Financing Source                                                               Amount

   13orrower/Recipicnt                                                       USD 32 million

   International Development Association (IDA)                               USD 105 million

   EC European Commission                                                             -
Environmental Category              A

Is thjs a Repeater project'!         Yes

Is this a Transferred project?      No


2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is "to reduce the vulnerability of coastal communities to cyclone
and other hydro meteorologicaJ hazards through (i) improved early warning and communication
systems, (ii) enhanced capacity of local communities to respond to disasters, (iii) improved access to
emergency shelter, evacuation, and protection against wind storms, flooding and storm surge in high
risk areas, and (iv) strengthening disaster risk management (DRM) capacity at central, state and local
levels in order to enable mainstreaming of risk mitigation measures into the overall development
agenda." It remains the same as the original project.

3. Project Description
Background. The National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project I (P092217, Credit 4772-IN) has been the
first phase of an Adaptable Program Loan (APL) designed to assist the Government of India and the
vulnerable coastal states in mitigating cyclone related risks by focusing on ex-ante risk mitigation
interventions as part of a strategy to integrate disaster risk mitigation into the longer-term national

                                                  Page 1 of 12
development process. About 5,700 kilometers of India's coastline is exposed to severe cyclones and
approximately 40 percent of its total population lives within 100 kilometers of the coastline increasing
potential natural disaster losses.. The first phase of this APL focuses on the states of Odisha and
Andhra Pradesh for early warning and cyclone risk mitigation infrastructure components while
technical assistance strengthening disaster risk management capacity has been made/is available for
all coastal states. The original credit in the amount of US$255 million was approved by the Board of
Executive Directors on June 22 20 I 0, and became effective on March 30, 20 I I.
The original project included four components:
Component A: Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) and Capacity building for Coastal
Communities (US$15 million from IDA). This component reduces the vulnerability of coastal
communities by addressing the existing gap in dissemination of warning to the communities. The
component supports: (i) installation and operation of EWDS allowing the state and/or district/sub
district level control centre to send communication directly to the villages; and (ii) strengthening the
capacity of communities in disaster preparedness and response by preparing disaster management
plans and arranging mock drills.
Component B: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure (US$186 million from IDA). This component
improves access to emergency shelter, evacuation and protection against cyclone and other hydro
meteorological hazards such as wind storms, flooding and stonn surge in high risk areas. Each of the
states reviewed the existing system and gaps and developed risk mitigation infrastructure portfolio.
For emergency shelters, identification mechanism included assessment oftotal requirement, available
shelters including other government and private buildings and the gap. The portfolio includes a broad
set of measures such as investments in multipurpose emergency shelters, up-grading of existing roads
and providing bridges suitable for evacuation, drainage improvement measures and repair and up-
grading of existing embankments, and creation of corpus funds for operation and maintenance of
cyclone shelters.
Component C: Technical Assistance for National and State Level Capacity Building and Knowledge
Creation (US$6 million from IDA). This component provides assistance to help understand risk and
vulnerabilities better, and prepare the key institutions for addressing them effectively across all
coastal states and Union Territories. This component consists of studies, assessments, training and
capacity building activities related to risk and damage assessments, development of training modules
and action plans and implementing them through identified partner agencies.
Component 0: Project Management and Implementation Support (US$20.7 million from IDA). This
component provides support for project management by financing incremental operating costs for
PMU, PlUs, nodal units in Line Departments and National institute of Disaster Management (NIDM),
office equipment, training and ex·posure visits and consulting services for specialist activities.
Current Implementation Status. Risk mitigation infrastructure is proving to be an important element
of disaster resilience under present circumstances: currently under NCRMP 1, 286 cyclone shelters are
being built (150 in Odisha and J 36 in Andhra Pradesh), more than 1000 kilometers of evacuation
roads and 23 bridges to enhance connectivity and evacuation and around 200 kilometers of existing
coastal/saline embankments are being strengthened.
Despite a slow start, the project achieved significant progress in its two and half years of
implementation : it currently has 89 percent of its program committed and is on its way to achieve its
project development objective. In terms of cyclone risk mitigation infrastructure under component B,
the state agencies awarded 95 percent of the planned work contracts, including the majority of multi-
purpose shelters and road contracts. The construction of nine shelters as well as 150 kilometers of
evacuation roads and 7 bridges has already been completed; saline embankment works have been
contracted in Odisha while one contract for similar works has been delayed in Andhra Pradesh.
Capacity building contracts under component C have also been awarded including the hazard and
vulnerability assessment and technical consultants to support the PMU within the National Disaster
Management Authority (NDMA) and to develop Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) Guidelines



                                             Page 2 ofl2
with NLDM. Project Implementation Performance was upgraded from Moderately Unsatisfactory to
Moderately Satisfactory in October 2013 given recent progress.
Cyclone Phailin. The project was on course to achieve its Project Development Objective before
cyclone Phailin. On October 12 2013, Cyclone Phailin hit the states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh
with wind gusts up to 220 kilometer per hour, heavy rains measuring up to 25 centimeter and storm
surge over 3 meters; the sea pushed in as much as 40 meters along parts of the coast. It was the
strongest cyclone to hit the Indian coast in the past 14 years: a category 4 cyclone (Katrina in
comparison, was category 3 upon landfall) similar to the Super Cyclone 058 of 1999 to hit Odisha
and kill more than I 0,000, destroying 275,000 homes and leaving 1.67 million homeless. The cyclone
hit a densely populated area, with 4.5 million people within the hurricane force wind path and
significant informal housing.
Reports however came of a death toll of 44, 0.5 percent that of the 1999 cyclone. The state
governments, in collaboration with the National Disaster Management Authority (NOMA) evacuated
over 900,000 people from low-lying coastal areas in ttie states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh - the
target states of the NC RMP - the largest such operation in India's history. The NCRMP contributed to
this enhanced resilience. State authorities set-up over I ,200 relief camps and stocked over 500
cyclone shelter with adequate food, water and supplies. Over 2,300 officers from the National
Disaster Response Force and 600 personnel from the Indian Army fanned out to provide relief and
assess the damage across 14,500 affected viII ages.
Despite limited loss of life, the impact on the lives of coastal residents is still massive. In the Ganjam
District of Odisha alone, about 90,000 homes were partially or fully damaged along the coastal areas,
many of them mud homes belonging to poor fishermen and farmers. Crops in over one million
hectares of agricultural land have reportedly been destroyed. Power and communication lines were
also severely affected across Odisha with estimates of over 6,000 k.m of power lines and 7,500
telephone poles damaged; over 30 km of water line and 10,000 km of roads were also severely
damaged.
In response to a request for assistance from the Government of India dating November 16 2013, a
Rapid Disaster Needs Assessment was conducted revealing a totaJ damage of US$1.45 billion. This
same request also solicited an additional assistance under the existing NCRMP I project, which
prompted the proposed additional financing.
Additional Financing
Given the particularly vulnerable coastal states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh with large exposed
populations and the observed increase in hazard frequency to cyclones of high intensity in the region,
the Government of IJ1dia considers resilient infrastructure worthwhile investments and is requesting to
scale-up the project 's impact and development effectiveness by increasing the amount of risk
mitigation works under component B. In particular, it is requesting tl:rte construction of 162 additional
multipurpose cyclone shelters with related 185 km of evacuation roads and bridges in Odisha
and 150 additional shelters and 270 km of evacuation roads and bridges in Andhra Pradesh.
For this, the Government of India has requested the proposed additional credit in the amount of USD
105 million, which would be complemented by additional counterpart financing in the amount of
USD 32 million equivalent. The proposed additional financing would further the engagement of the
state of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh in mitigating cyclone related risks by focusing on additional risk
mitigation interventions. It would provide improved access to emergency shelter and evacuation
against wind storms, flooding and storm surge in high risk areas cur.-ently not covered by the original
project.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis

Like the parent project, the NCRMP l's additional financing proposes to support targeted
interventions as ment ioned above in the coastal areas of two Indian states, namely Odisha and Andhra
Pradesh.


                                              Page 3 of 12
Andln·a Pradesh: The 974 kms long coastline of Andhra Pradesh, a very productive stretch along the
Bay of Bengal on the cast coast of India, supports a variety of economic activities. Multifarious
industrial complexes, human settlements, fisheries, tourism, are all coming up along the coastline. The
areas proposed for investment under Additional Financing are the same as those under component B
of the parent project. The sub-projects will be located in the coastal areas of the districts of
Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam, East Godavari, West Godavari. Krishna, Guntur, Ongole,
Prakasam and Neltore.
Odisha: The Odisha coast, which is 480 km long and I 0 to I00 km in width, forms a part of east coast
of India. The coastal territory is drained by a number of rives like Mahanadi, Brahmani, Baitarani,
Devi, Budhabalanga, Subarnarekha and Rushikalya. The areas proposed for investment under
Additional Financing are the same as those under component B of the parent project. The sub-projects
will be located in the coastal areas of the districts of Ganjam, Khurda, Puri, Kendrapara,
Jagjitsinghpur, Bhadrak and Balasore.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

Neha Vyas, Senior Environment Specialist, SASDI
Venkat Rao Bayana, Social Development Specialist, SASDS

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered

                     Safeguard Policies Triggered                              Yes            No          TBD

 Environmental Assessment (OPIBP 4.01)

 While the project interventions arc likely to have an over-all positive impact in mitigating risks from
 disasters. specific interventions envisaged under the project such as upgrading/expansion of access/local
 roa<.ls if designed without a<.lequatc drainage provisions or due to poor siting of cyclone shelters may have
 some potential a<.lverse environmental impacts in the local context. On the whole. such impacts may include:
 (i) direct/indirect impact.'> resulting due to poor site selection for sub-projects; (ii) impact on the drainage
 pattern of the area; (iii) felling of trees and clearance of vegetation for sub-project construction; (iv) impacts
 on water resources used by the people such as ponds, river/streams, canals .and hand pumps; (v) occupational
 health and safety concerns during the construction stage: (vi) impacts due to construction material (such as
 sand. water. earth. aggregate) sourcing and transportation and: (vii) issues associate<.! with improper disposal
 of debris and construction wastes.
 More so. like the parent project. the most environmental concern pertains to avoiding the highly sensitive
 ecological areas and/or environmental features in the vulnerable coastal environs. which is possible by using
 the screening mechanisms (including use of GIS) diligently. OP 4.01 has been triggered to facilitate
 creation/strengthening of mechanisms whereby sub-projects can be planned, designed and maintained in an
 environmentally sound manner through integration or appropriate approaches into the over-all decision
 making process of the pr~ject- as was done for the parent project.

~tural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                              I             .__.~
                                                                                            __       ...J.__ _ _  -1

 OP 4.04 is not being triggered for this project as no interventions arc envisaged in natural habitats. including
 those defined as ·critical" under the policy.

 forests (OP/BP 4.36)

 OP 4.36 is not being triggered for this project as no interventions arc envisaged in forest areas and therefore
 no conversion/dcgra<.lation of this natural resource is expected to occur. The screening mechanism that has
 been formulate<.! for the project enables in early identification or such issues. 13ased on the screening result.
 site assessment and the availability of alternative sub-pr~ject sitc/s, further decision about inclusion/exclusion
 arc made.



                                                   Page 4 of 12
                    Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes           No          TBD

 Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                                   ./

 OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as biological/environmental control methods or reliance on
 synthetic chemical pesticides is not envisaged.

 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.1 1)                                     ./

 The implementation of the project/program is not likely to affect religious structures of local signil'icance or
 other physical cultural resources. Impacts, if any would be addressed through design interventions. Chance-
 found cultural properties. if any will be addressed through contract requirements and project's due diligence
 process set forth in ESMF.

 Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                ./

 Assessment on tribal population both in parent project and for Additional Financing indicates that there arc
 no tribal populations with unique socio cultural identity vis-a-vis the main stream population in the sub-
 project locations. However, the ESMF outlines the provisions to follow as and when any sub-project comes
 across tribal population unique to the features stated in the Bank's OP 4.10 - as was done for the parent
 project.

 Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                         ./

 Almost all the road infrastructure sub-projects would usc the existing alignments and therefore arc unlikely to
 involve land acquisition except for widening/up-grading where required by design. The new multi-purpose
 shelters arc also planned either within the existing school premises or on other vacant government land or on
 lands donated by the community/gram panchayat. The land acquisition will therefore be not there. except in
 very exceptional cases. The policy however. has been triggered to allow required mechanisms to be put-in
 place in cases where land may be required in such exceptional circumstances.

 Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                 ./

 OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as there is no construction of new dams or activities that arc
 concerned with safe functioning of existing dams.

 Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                            ./

 OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as there arc no interventions planned/ proposed over or around
 an international waterway that could cause a po(cntial conflict. There are also no activities that may affect the
 usc or pollute such a waterway.

 Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                     ./

 OJ> 7.60 is not being triggered as U1e project is not proposed in any disputed area.

 Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address Environmental
 and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP                               ./
 4.00)


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1.    Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
Creation of cyclone risk mitigation infrastructure has the potential to have both positive as well as
some adverse environmental and social impacts, particularly in the construction of cyclone shelters,
widening/improvement of roads, provision of bridges and drainage improvement measures. The
planned investments under Additional Financing primarily involve either construction of
multipurpose cyclone shelters and repair/ improvement of the existing evacuation roads providing


                                                   Page 5 of 12
connectivity to cyclone shelters .. Under Additional Financing, it is proposed to construct about 162
additional multipurpose cyclone shelters with related 185 kms of evacuation roads and bridges in
Odisha and ISO additional shelters and 270 km of evacuation roads and bridges in Andhra Pradesh.
These sub-projects will have positive impacts on the community as a whole as these will help them to
be better prepared to face the challenges of cyclone and other disasters. Community participation in
disaster management at local level will also help in making the efforts sustainable. All the sub projects
under the Additional Financing will come-up in the same geographical area where the sub-projects
under the parent project are located.
As part of project preparation for the parent project, National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project, the
likely social and environmental impacts (both positive and adverse) associated with the project
activities were identified in the Environment and Social Management Framework. The key issues
identified then have been re-confirmed during the on-going implementation of the parent project.
These are summarized below:
Environmental Issues: While the project interventions are likely to have an over-all positive impact
in mitigating risks from disasters, specific interventions envisaged under the project such as
upgrading/expansion of access/ local roads if designed without adequate drainage provisions or due to
poor siting of cyclone shelters may have some potential adverse environmental impacts in the local
context. On the whole, such impacts may include: ( i) direct/indirect impacts resulting due to poor site
selection for sub-projects; (ii) impact on the drainage pattern of the area; (iii) fe lling of trees and
clearance of vegetation for sub-project construction; (iv) impacts on water resources used by the
people such as ponds, river/streams, canals and hand pumps; (v) occupational health and safety
concerns during the construction stage; (vi) impacts due to construction material (such as sand, water,
earth, aggregate) sourcing and t ransportation and; (vii) issues associated with improper disposal of
debris and construction wastes. The activities per se are not likely to have any significant and/or
irreversible adverse environmental impacts and can be managed/mitigated by adopting the
standard/typical management measures.
More so. like the parent project, the most environmental concern pertains to avoiding the highly
sens itive ecological areas and/or environmental features in the vulnerable coastal environs, whic h is
possible by using the screening mechanisms diligently. In the case of the parent project, the
application and use of GIS based tools, particularly by Odisha helped in not only avoiding
unwarranted environmental impacts but also significantly helped in managing project's requirement
of regulatory clearances. By and large, the nature, scale and level of interventions, however will
continue to remain contextual and will vary between and sometimes, even within the state.
Socifll lmpacts/l."i.m es: Almost all the road infrastructure sub-projects would use the existing
alignments and therefore are unlikely to involve land acquisition except for widening/up-grading
where required by design. The new multi-purpose shelters arc also planned either within the existing
school premises or on other vacant government land or on lands donated by the community/gram
panchayat. The land acquisition will therefore be not there, except in very except ional cases, which so
far going by field assessment has not identified till date. Assessment of Phase I sub projects (part of
parent project) in both states reveals no land acquisition requirement with the exception of a small
private land that was required for a n approach road in Andhra Pradesh. Further, no livelihood
disturbances have been observed in the parent project. The adverse impacts, if any, will therefore be
largely restricted to a modest loss of land from the construction of new infrastructure that too at only a
few locations.
Assessment on tribal population both in parent proj ect and for Additional Financing indicates that
there are no tribal populations with unique socio cultural identity vis-a-vis the main stream population
in the sub-project locations. However, the ESMP outlines the provisions to follow as and when any
sub-project comes across tribal population unique to the features stated in the Bank's OP 4.1 0.
There is also a very little possibility of impacting cultural properties in the project as the project
interventions and construction activities arc relatively flexible in nature. Chance-found cultural
properties will be addressed through contract requirements and project's due diligence.




                                               Page 6 ofl2
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
   in the project area.

The long-term impacts will be generally positive as the project will help in bringing economic and
social development in the targeted areas. Most significantly, the reduction in the vulnerability of
coastal communities, in the two participating coastal states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh, to the
adverse impacts of cyclones and climate related hazards will be a desirable long term impact from the
project. Considerations of environment and social dimensions in operation and maintenance cycle of
assets would help in ensuring the soundness and sustainability of the program from an environmental
perspective.
Further, the experience gained during the project implementation would help the implementing
agencies, both at the central and state level, to address environmental and social issues more
systematically in their regular disaster risk reduction operations as well. The project's treatment of
environmental and social issues specifically with regard to the approach used for screening sub-
projects (which is based on a robust and scientific methodology) has a potential to set an important
precedent for non-project activities/areas now and in the future. At the same time, long-term/indirect
adverse environmental and social impacts may result if road infrastructure is designed and
implemented without due considerations to local environmental and social features, including
drainage and safety aspects.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
   impacts.

The environment and social screening tool developed as part of the Environment and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) for the parent NCRMP project has been used effectively for early
identification of key environmental and social issues associated with sub-projects, which are not only
many in number but also spread across a wide geographical coastal realm of two states. This exercise,
carried out in parallel with the project identification/engineering feasibility study, has also helped in
precisely identifying the location for a sub-project (primarily multi-purpose cyclone shelters and
associated access roads). For locationls falling within the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) line, an
alternative site was identified in Odisha. For sub-projects with significant social issues, land
acquisition and displacement issues and the ones fal ling within the CRZ with no alternative sites,
were either dropped or considered for Phase II, depending on the nature and scale of issues. The
already established methodology for environment screening exercise, supported by use of scientific
tools such as GIS and remote sensing techniques, has helped in avoiding/ minimizing adverse
environmental impacts on sensitive habitats and in finding alternatives, wherever possible. This
system adopted for the parent project will be followed for the Additional Financing project as wei I.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
   assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

 E11virollme111al ami Social Manageme111 a11d Safeguards lflslrume111: Safeguard policy issues were
 considered by applying OP 4.0 I, OP 4.11, OP 4.10 and OP 4.12. This had resulted in preparation of a
·distinct safeguard instrument for the parent operation - the Environment and Social Management
 Framework (ESM F). It includes: (a) Environment and Social Screening approach and methodology
 and (b) Environment and Social Assessment for certain type of sub-projects (such as saline
 embankments while these were supported under the parent project, such type of works are not
 included under Additional Financing).
 Manageme11t of E11viro11melllal and Social Issues/Risks: The ESMF prepared by the National
 Disaster Management Authority (NOMA) and endorsed/accepted by the State Governments ofOdisha
 and Andhra Pradesh for NCRMP, the parent project, remains valid for the Additional Financing
 project as well. The document, finalized in November 2009 serves as a comprehensive guide covers
 policies. procedures and provis ions, which are being/will be integrated within the over-all project
 cycle to ensure that the environmental and social aspects are systematically identified and addressed
 in all the sub-projects.

                                              Page 7 of 12
The implementing agencies will carry out an environmental and social screening of the individual
sub-projects, based on methods described in the ESMF, prior to inclusion of sub-projects in the final
list of works to be supported under the Additional Financing project - a system that has been
successfully applied to the parent project. Based on screening results, if a sub-project does not require
an EA, the generic/standard activity-specific EMP, developed as part of the ESMF, will apply. These
generic/standard activity-specific EMPs provide over-all guidance on avoidance, minim ization and/or
mitigation measures to be adopted during the planning, design, implementation and operation stages
of the concerned sub-project.
As in the parent project, environmental and social issues identified during such screening exercises
will be integrated in the sub-project design and implementation, as required. In case significant
impacts are identified or in case there are time constraints with regard to completing Additional
Financing project, either the sub-project in question will be dropped or sub-project specific social and
environmental management plans will be prepared in accordance with the ESMF.
The ESMF identifies the potential adverse environment and social impacts (such as land take,
partial/full displacement, livelihood disturbances) and describes the measures that need to be taken to
avoid/ reduce/ mitigate these impacts. These adverse impacts will be addressed following the already
developed ESMF for NCRMP (parent Project) based on Bank' s safeguard policies and also Central
and State government's R&R policies. The framework has provisions to compensate the Joss of land
and structure at replacement cost and the vulnerable will be assisted with additional support measures
over and above the compensation. Wherever appropriate, the better and enhanced provisions of the
new Act - Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition and Resettlement and
Rehabilitation Act (RFCT- LARRA), 2013 will be followed for the Project. The new Act though has
become effective, will have to be adopted formally by Project States (Andhra Pradesh and Odissa) by
forming appropriate rules and regulations. The provisions of new Act are largely in conformity with
the provisions of the Project's R&R policy, except in case of non-titleholders (NTHs). ln addition to
the better provisions under the new Act, the R&R provisions of parent project on NTH will be
adhered for all components under the Additional Financing.
Institutional Ammgements: The NOMA will continue to provide technical and monitoring support
and will coordinate the over-all program. The preparation of safeguard documents and
implementation ofthe RAPs and EMPs is the responsibility of the State PIUs and will be monitored
by the concerned SDMA/nodal department. The state Project Implementation Unit in each state will
have nodal Social and Environmental Experts to continuously review the ESMF implementation in
the project. These experts will be responsible for ensuring proper preparation and implementation of
safeguard documents/instruments. All the Detailed Project Reports prepared by the line/implementing
agencies will be certified by the Environment and Social Development Experts of the State PIUs. The
project also has a provision for Third Party Audit covering technical, environmental and social aspects
to support NDMA/SDMA/Nodal Department in attaining quality and safeguard compliance
objectives. All arrangements and staff positions would continue during the Additional Financing
phase of' the project.
In case of grievances, the matter will be brought to the notice of local tehsildar/Sub Divisional
Magistrate (SDM). He/she shall hear the case in presence of all concerned and will try to reach an
amicable solution. In case ofnon-satisfactory solution, the matter will be brought to the notice ofthe
District Collector and he is the final authority to decide the case. As and if required, certain cases will
be referred to State Steering Committee which would examine and address the grievances. The Social
Management Specialist from the PIU/SDMA will be responsible for maintaining a record of the
proceedings and the final decisions.
.Borrower Ct~pacity: The NOMA and the State implementing agencies now have the experience of
implementing Bank financed NCRMP project. Lnsights into typical issues/problems have been
developed at most levels, reporting and , other monitoring mechanisms have been
developed/standardized, sensitization/ awareness among implementers in the field (consultants,
contractors and line agency staff) has been gradually built and the over-all institutional capacity to
manage the program, including planning and implementation of actions to meet social and
environmental needs and safeguards has improved.


                                               Page 8 of 12
While the Borrower's performance in Odisha has by and large remained satisfactory, there were a few
institutional challenges at the national level and in Andhra Pradesh, particularly in the first two years
of project implementation. The most pertinent issue was related to the staffing deployment and
continuity (and also some capacity issues in case of Andhra Pradesh) required for systematic
planning, integration and execution of environmental management measures as part of the over-all
engineering works. However, with deployment of the Environmental and Social Experts in NOMA,
integration of standard EHS conditions in the Bidding documents and some sensitization/training of
the field staff, improvements have been noted, particularly after a close monitoring following slow
progress ofthc over-all project since mid-term review.
Currently, Andhra Pradesh, where staff turn-over continues to be an issue, the PIU is in advanced
stage of filling-in the vacant Environment Expert's position. It has already recruited Social Officer at
PMU level. In addition to the market based experts, a govt. officer also is being given additional
responsibilities to manage the safeguards aspects during staff transition/turn-over. Also, a firm (being
competitively selected) will help in discharging the safeguard responsibilities, including those
pertaining to screening and its documentat ion and capacity building of field personnel. Andhra
Pradesh is in the process of recruiting Social Mobilisers to assist the implementation of the safeguard
aspects of the project.
The current set-up of OSDMA in Odisha needs at least one additional Environmental and Social
Specialist each to support implementation of activities under Additional Financing. This staff
augmentation is required as OSDMA is vested with the responsibility for preparing and implementing
ODRP, another Bank assisted project and safeguards documentation, including conducting of
screening exercises for this project. For the field work, however Odisha has recruited about fifteen
number of Social Mobilisers to assist the implementation of the safeguard aspects of the project.
With these, the borrower would have adequate capacity to manage the safeguard issues in the project.
The Bank continues to regularly follow-up these issues on the institutional arrangements and capacity.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the local residents/villagers living along the coastline
in the two states of Odisha and Andhra Pradesh and being supported by targeted interventions under
the proposed operation. The secondary stakeholders include officials from NOMA, OSDMA,
Revenue Disaster Management Department in Andhra Pradesh, local governments/village
Panchayats; local NGOs; and selected government departments such as Public Works, Irrigation and
other administrative officials/staff in the two said states associated with the planning and
implementation of the NCRMP.
Consultatio11s: Stakeholder consultation, information dissemination and social mobilization have
remained integral part of NCRMP's planning and implementation. [n accordance with the applicable
Bank policies, public consultations (in areas where specific investments were proposed) have been
carried out for investments funded under NCRMP (the parent project) in both Odisha and Andhra
Pradesh. The public consultation process for the parent project was designed in a way that: (i) affected
people are included in the decision making process; (iii) public awareness and information sharing on
project alternatives and benefits are promoted; and (iii) views on designs and solutions from the
communities are solicited. This process included a state level workshop that was organized (both in
Odisha and Andhra Pradesh) to obtain inputs on the draft ESMF and to seek views the approach
towards minimization/mit igation of potential negative impacts on people and the environmental
resources.
The approach involved communities and local level institutions in identification, planning,
implementation, operation and maintenance (in case of multi-purpose cyclone shelters) of the sub-
projects. During the preparation of the ESMF for the parent project and planning of sub-projects,
extensive consultation have been carried out with communities, intended beneficiaries, implementing
departments, experts (as needed), local NGOs and other stakeholders. The outcomes of these
consultations have been integrated in the ESMF and are also documented in the screening reports.
Beneficiary consultations and participatory planning have continued through the implementation

                                              Page 9 of 12
period as well. The same approach and mechanisms will continue for sub-projects/interventions
proposed under the Additional Financing project.
Disclosure: The Environment and Social Management Framework (November 2009 version) has
been made public through NDMA (http://ncrmp.gov. in/ncnnp) and SDMA (www.osdma.org and
http://disastermanagement.ap.gov.in) websites. The document and its executive summary have also
been made available in the districts where major sub-projects were proposed and at concerned sub-
project offices during the construction stage, including those of the project consultants. This document
continues to remain valid for the Additional Financing project too.
Environment Screening Reports for investments supported under the parent project are also in public
domain (in the statc/SDMA websites). Similar mechanism will be adopted for disclosing for
safeguard documents (such as Screening Reports) for the project interventions proposed under
Additional Financing project.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Rank                                                    November 20, 2009

Date of submission 10 lnfoShop                                                 December 15. 2009

"In country" Disclosure                                                        November 12, 2009

For category 1\ projects, date of distributing the                               December 15.2009
Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process/Social Assessment
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    November 20. 2009

                        oShop
Date of submission to lnf                                                      December 15. 2009

"In country" Disclosure                                                        November 12, 2009

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework (as part of SA)

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                    November 20. 2009

Date of submission to lnfoShop                                                   December 15. 2009

"In country" Disclosure                                                        November 12. 2009

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/AudiUor EMP.
Pest Management Not Applicable/ Policy Not Triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources- Done- Covered under E/\.

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not Applicable


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

 OP/BP/GP 4.01 -Environment Assessment

Docs the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?   Yes   I .J I    No    I J   NA    [ J
If yes. then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager
(SM) review and approve the EA report?
                                                                 Yes      L-41      No    I J   NA    I 1
Arc the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in
the credit/loan?
                                                                    Yes   I .J I    No    I J   Nl\   rl


                                               Page 10 of 12
    OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats

Would the project result in any significant conversion or
                                                          Yes                  L J      No   [.,II       NA    [   1
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation
of other (non-critical) natural habitats. does the project include Yes         r1       No   [ ]         NA    I .J J
mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
    OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the Ei\ adequately address the pest management issues?            Yes      I I     No       L1      Ni\   I .J J
Is a separate PMP required?                                            Yes      I 1     No       L.JI    NA     I1
                                                                       -
Arc PMP requirements included in project design?                       Yes       fl     No       LJ      NA    r..t1
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources

Docs the EA include adequate measures related to c ultural
property?
                                                                       Yes     1.,11    No       [ ]     NA    l 1
Docs the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                                                                       Yes ·   I .J J   No       I I     NA    r 1
    OP/BP 4.10- Indigenous Peoples
-
!las a separate Indigenous Peoples PlanfPianning Framework (as
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Yes                   l .J J   No   L J         NA    LJ
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes. then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan?
                                                                       Yes     r.J 1    No   [ ]         Ni\   r1
If the whole project il> designed to benefit IP. has the design been
reviewed and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit          Yes     I I      No   [       1   NA    I .J J
or Sector Manager?

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement

Has a rcsculement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framcworkf
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                                                                       Yes     L .J J No         I I     NA    r I
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or
Sector Manager review the plan?
                                                                 Yes           I .J I   No       r1      NA     l1
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and
constraints been carried out?
                                                                    Yes        I J      No       I J     NA    I .J J
Docs the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome
                                                                       Yes     L]       No       I   ]   NA    t.JJ
these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting. and if so. docs it
                                                                       Yes     L   1    No       [   1   NA    [ .J]
include provisions for certification system?

OP/BP 4.37- Safety of Dams

I lave dam safety plans been prepared?                                 Yes      l ]     No       l J     NA    r.J 1
I lave the ToRs as well as composition for the independent Panel of
Experts been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
                                                                    Yes         l J     No       l J     NA    r.,~ J
lias an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                                                                       Yes      l J     No       I J     NA    l .J J

OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways



                                                 Page 11 of 12
I lave the other riparians heen notified of the project?                 Yes             I J       No    r         I     NA    I .J J
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement. has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and Yes                    I    ]    No     l I            NA    r .J 1
the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
What arc the reasons for the exception? Please explain:                      Yes         [    1    No    [ 1             NA    r .J J
lias the RVP approved such an exception?                                     Yes          [   1    No    I 1             NA    I .J I
OP/BP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Ha~ the memo conveying all pertinent information on the
international aspects of the project. including the procedures to be Yes                                                       [.J[
                                                                                          [ ]      No     L ]            NA
followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the issue, been
prepared
Ooes the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in Yes
the OP?
                                                                                          r   J    No     I I            NA    I .J I

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
I lave relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World
Dank's lnfoshop?
                                                                             Yes        I .J 1     No        II          NA    I J
llave relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public
place in a form and language that are understandable and accessible Yes                  [ .J J    No        1'1         NA    I J
to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

All Safeguard Policies
I lave  satisfactory calendar. budget and clear institutional
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures Yes                    [ "'J     No     I I            NA    I ]
related to safeguard policies?
                                  ---                                                                                     - ---
I lave cosl~ related to safeguard policy measures been included in Yes                                                         l ]
the project cost?
                                                                                         I .J J No        I I            NA

Docs the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to Yes                          r.J 1     No     [ j            NA    L   1
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project Yes                   I ..J l   No     rl             NA    I J
legal documents?

D. Approvals
Sig11ed a11d submittetl by                                        Name                                             Date
Task Team Leader                                           Saurabh Suresh Dani                           Jan. 21.2014
 Environmental Specialist                                       Ncha Vyas                                Jan. 20, 2014
 Social Development Specialist                             Vcnkat Rao Bayana                             Jan. 20.20 14
Approved by
 Regional Safeguard~ Coordinator                   rfv-.rF'rancis V. Fragano                        raJ?. c.,~ ao1Cj
   Comments                                        C--t.~(                  A At"' ~ Jl-                               ~,
 Sector Manager                                       ~;;ni'~e K . y~n B~onrhors'(  "'
                                                                                   -:h                                  ('    " •I
                                                      L- 111 '.LA~-    ~.t    r-_ ..                                   IV, "l/V/1-t
   Comments                                          _,. -+1"        'VJl(            0
                                                                             jl t tf\iJ....
                                                                                                    I(.' J.-'.




                                                    Page 12 of 12
