                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1046

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Vietnam                          Project ID:       P152460
                            Project Name:       Vinh Phuc Flood Risk and Water Management Project (P152460)
                            Task Team           Lixin Gu,Quang Vinh Nguyen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           01-Dec-2015                      Estimated         29-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWADR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Flood protection (60%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                                (40%)
                            Theme(s):           Water resource management (40%), Natural disaster management (25%),
                                                Climate change (25%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Deliv ery (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    180.00                       Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        30.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          150.00
                              Total                                                                          180.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           19. The development objective of the project (PDO) is to strengthen flood management and
                           wastewater management in the central catchment of Vinh Phuc Province.

                           20. The PDO will be achieved through (i) supporting structural measures for flooding control and
                           river rehabilitation; (ii) improving wastewater collection and treatment in districts, small towns and
                         rural villages; (iii) establishing water resource and water quality monitoring and flooding and
                         emergency response systems; and (iv) institutional development and training for the government
                         departments and water sector practitioners aiming at managing the river basin and water related
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sectors in an integrated manner.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project includes 3 components that are interlinked each other:

                         Component 1 - Flood Risk Management (estimated cost US$ 110 million)
                         1.       Vinh Phuc is hydraulically divided into three drainage basins: (i) Northwest Basin (Basin A);
                         (ii) Central and South Basin (Basin B); and (iii) Northeast and East Basin (Basin C). Basin B is the
                         central part of the province with most of the economic and administrative activities are located. Basin
                         B drains to the Phan River and from there to the Ca Lo River. Basin C incorporates the hilliest areas
                         where rainfall runoff to Ca Lo River flows downstream to the Cau River about 70km from Vinh
                         Phuc. The confluence of the Phan River with Ca Lo River is in Nam Vien Commune, Phuc Yen
                         Town. The flooding in Vinh Phuc occurs mainly in Basin B, due to rainfall within that catchment,
                         interaction with Catchment C and downstream tidal effects. Basin A is hydraulically independent and
                         does not contribute to the flooding in Basin B and Vinh Yen City.
                         Component 1 includes support for controlling flooding through structural measures in Basin B
                         (including sub-basins B-1, B-2 and B-3) and Basin C; Flood control will be through construction/
                         rehabilitation of retention lakes to increase regulation capacity, construction of drainage pumping
                         stations and canals to divert storm water from basin B to Pho Day or Red River, dredging of Phan
                         River to augment flow capacity, and construction of flood control gates with associated
                         embankments to prevent storm water entering Basin B from Basin C. The key activities include:
                         •        Sub-basin B1: (i) construction of Kim Xa pumping station with capacity of 45m3/s with
                         outlet sluice gate to Pho Day River; (ii) dreading Nhi Hoang and So retention lakes with area of
                         about 100ha; and (iii) rehabilitation of Yen Lap flood control gate;
                         •        Sub-basin B2: (i) construction of Ngu Kien pumping station with capacity of 45m3/s
                         including outlet sluice gate and 2km of outlet canal to Red River; (ii) dredging Rung retention lake
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with area of about 150ha; (iii) dredging 3km of canal connecting Rung retention lake and Phan
                         River; and (iv) dredging middle section of Phan River (Thuong Lap – Lac Y) with length of about
                         28km.
                         •        Sub-basin B3: (i) construction of Nguyet Duc pumping station with capacity of 75m3/s
                         including 7.5km of inlet canal connecting to Sau Vo lake, outlet sluice gate and 2km of outlet canal
                         to Red River, (ii) dredging Sau Vo retention lake with area of about 180ha, and (iii) dredging lower
                         section of Phan River (Lac Y – Cau Sat) with length of about 18km.
                         •        Basin C: (i) construction of 2 flood control gates (Cau Ton and Cau Sat) and related
                         embankment works, and (ii) dredging 3 rivers with total length of about 66km.

                         Component 2 Water Environmental Management (estimated cost US$ 23 million)
                         2.       This component includes support to improve wastewater management and collection in
                         districts small towns and number of rural villages along the Phan River. It would include:
                         •        Wastewater management for district small towns: construction of wastewater collection and
                         treatment facilities in a number of towns, each facility is capable to provides service to about 20,000
                         peoples;
                         •        Wastewater management for rural communities: construction of about 100 small scale
                         wastewater collection and treatment schemes in rural villages that are located along and at less than
                         3km from the Phan River. Each scheme can serve 1,000-1,500 peoples.
                         Component 3 Implementation Support (estimated cost US$10 million), Technical Assistance and
                         Institutional Strengthening (estimated cost US$7 million)
                         3.       This component includes measures to improve water resource and water quality monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and emergency flooding early warning; institutional development to support the integrated
                         management of the river basin and water related sectors in an integrated manner; support to project
                         implementation and other TA activities. It would include:
                         •        Support project implementation: (i) consulting services for sub-project feasibility studies and
                         detailed design; (ii) procurement support; (iii) construction supervision; (iv) safeguards monitoring;
                         (v) audits, (vi) project implementation monitoring and evaluation; (vii) equipment/software for
                         project implementation; and (vii) other consultants as necessary.
                         •        Technical assistance and capacity building: (i) providing water resources and water quality
                         monitoring systems; (ii) providing flood early warning and emergency response system; and (iii)
                         training and capacity building activities for government departments and water sector practitioners in
                         water resource management, pollution control, asset management etc.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         4.       Vinh Phuc is a land-locked province located in the north of Hanoi. Vinh Phuc is positioned
                         in three main key development regions of Vietnam: the Red River Delta Region, the Hanoi
                         Metropolitan Region, and the Northern Key Economic Region.

                         5.       The project will be developed in two drainage basins in the center and east of Vinh Phuc
                         Province. Due to its low elevation in the Red River floodplain, two thirds of the province is prone to
                         flooding. There is an especially high risk from flooding in the areas of the Phan River basin where
                         the provincial capital city of Vinh Yen and most of FDI zones are located. Frequent floods have
                         caused serious impacts on agriculture in rural areas, the city of Vinh Yen and the industrial zones and
                         enterprises, including significant loss of agricultural and industrial productivity - impacting on
                         livelihoods - and deterioration of infrastructure in both rural and urban areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6.        The project includes construction of pumping stations, connecting canals and dredging
                         works in retention lakes like Nhi Hoang, So, Rung, Sau Vo, dredging and civil works in connecting
                         canals and construction in small towns adjacent to waterways. The main civil works are included
                         under component 1 which will mostly be implemented in lakes and existing canals in agricultural
                         areas. In some lakes there are fishing and aquaculture activities. There will be some permanent and
                         temporary land acquisition required and dredging activities may also impact current fishery
                         activities. The area of project impact will be confirmed through hydraulic modelling and therefore
                         complete a detailed assessment of the project area.

                         7.        Accelerated deterioration of water quality has been observed in Phan River catchment,
                         including rivers and lakes around Vinh Yen City. The main water pollution sources are domestic and
                         industrial wastewater; organic pollutants are the main source of pollution, especially high level of
                         biological oxygen demand (BOD) and total suspended solids (SS). Especially along the Phan River,
                         domestic wastewater is discharged without any treatment, even in some areas the garbage from the
                         village is thrown on the banks of the rivers and lakes. Surface water quality no longer meets the
                         national Category A standard (for water supply purpose) and, in the dry season, is well below
                         Category B (for irrigation purpose) in some cases.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         8. The Vinh Phuc PPC is the ultimate local authority responsible for the project. Vinh Phuc PPC has
                           established an ODA promotion and preparation agency (established by Decision No. 636/QD-UBND
                           dated March 5, 2014) to prepare this project. Furthermore, Vinh Phuc PPC will upgrade this agency
                           to be an ODA Project Management Office (PMO), responsible for project preparation and later for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project implementation, including safeguards management. Dedicated staff have been assigned to the
                           PMO in the course of project preparation to coordinate preparation of the Environmental Assessment
                           (EA).

                           9.        In addition, a Project Steering Committee chaired by PPC’s chairman with members at
                           director levels from related provincial departments as well chairmen of related city and district
                           peoples committees will be established to oversee and provide necessary support and guidance to
                           PMU during project preparation and implementation.

                           10. Department of Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE) will coordinate with Department
                           of Construction (DOC) and Department of Planning and Investment (DPI) for all the issues and
                           inputs that have been considered during the design as well as during the implementation. In addition,
                           DONRE will provide guidance to PMO and monitor compliance of project activities with the
                           Government’s regulations on environment protection.

                           11. Despite the experience listed above, the PPC does not have experience in preparing and
                           implementing decentralized projects at a similar size and scope to the proposed Vinh Phuc Flood
                           Risk and Water Management project. In addition, although the provincial departments have
                           experience under donor-funded projects and their staff are capable of designing and implementing
                           investment projects, it needs to be realized that those resources are scattered across the sector units.
                           These identified weaknesses may limit the capacity to prepare and effectively safeguard policies. The
                           Bank team will need to support the Vinh Phuc project preparation team in the elaboration of the TOR
                           ´s of the EA instruments and providing close guidance for the preparation of safeguard documents (e.
                           g good quality EIA and RP) as well as implementation of feasible EMP and RPs will be required.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Chaohua Zhang (GSURR)
                           Roxanne Hakim (GSURR)
                           Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo (GSURR)
                           Tuan Anh Le (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            OP 4.01 is triggered due to the potential
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       environmental and social impacts associated with the
                                                                            projects investments and activities. Activities to
                                                                            manage flood risk, including dredging and canal
                                                                            rehabilitation will impact the quality of water, soil
                                                                            and air. Disposal of waste from dredging and during
                                                                            construction of the wastewater treatment plant may
                                                                            also impact the environment within the area of
                                                                            influence of the project.
                                                                            Based in the environmental screening and the
                                                                            information available at this stage, the EA category
                         proposed for the project is Category A, as there may
                         be significant impacts up and downstream of the area
                         of influence. The assessments being completed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         during project preparation will determine the area of
                         influence of the project
                         It has been noted that the locations of investment
                         under component 1 have been known while those for
                         waste water collection and treatments facilities/
                         schemes in town and rural communities under
                         component 2 would be finalized during preparation
                         phase. And feasibility studies (FS) for the proposed
                         investments will be completed before appraisal. In
                         the case all the investment items under components 2
                         and the relevant FS are finalized during preparation
                         phase, a full project EIA would have been prepared
                         to cover the potential impacts. On the other hand, in
                         any case that the location and FS for any investment
                         items under component 2 would be pending till
                         implementation period, in addition to the project
                         ESIA, an Environmental and Social Framework
                         (ESMF) would be developed to provide guidance
                         and requirements on environmental assessment for
                         investments.
                         A full environmental EA will be conducted,
                         including; an Environmental Impact Assessment
                         (ESIA), an Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                         as part of the ESIA and an Executive Summary (ES).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The EA will contain:
                         Project area: Definition of the direct and indirect area
                         of influence likely to be affected by the project,
                         including lakes, canals, crops field, infrastructure,
                         disposal areas for the dredged materials, worksites
                         and camps for construction workers.
                         Baseline Study: The ESIA will provide a description
                         of the environment of the project area, especially for
                         aquatic habitats or other environmentally sensitive
                         area and social issues, if there are any vulnerable
                         groups or resources of high cultural value.
                         Impact Assessment and Mitigation measures: Based
                         on the results of the impact screening and baseline
                         study, the ESIA will assess the impacts of project
                         investments as well as of the ancillary facilities (e.g.
                         dredged material disposal site). This also comprise
                         due diligence social and environmental for any
                         existing ancillary facilities. The impacts assessment
                         should include generic impacts occurred for
                                                             proposed interventions as well as site-specific
                                                             impacts for investments at each sub-basin. The ESIA
                                                             shall develop mitigation measures to manage these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             impacts.

                                                             Cumulative Impacts: Since the project consider the
                                                             works across two hydraulically connected basins, it
                                                             will be important to assess cumulative impacts. The
                                                             ESIA will include a chapter on cumulative impacts in
                                                             the project area of influence following acceptable
                                                             methodology (e.g. IFC Good Practice Handbook on
                                                             CIA).

                                                             The ESMF will include a Social Management
                                                             Framework (SMF) will be prepared for the project
                                                             appraisal. The SMF will cover resettlement and
                                                             other social issues involved. It will include the RPF,
                                                             a gender strategy, public health intervention, public
                                                             consultation and stakeholder engagement plan as
                                                             well as a communication strategy.

                                                             ESMP: Including measures to be taken during the
                                                             implementation (dredging, embankments works,
                                                             widening canals and land clearing), and operation of
                                                             the project. The ESMP would also include
                                                             institutional arrangement, capacity building,
                                                             monitoring plan, and cost for safeguard
                                                             implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The ESIA will comply with the Bank safeguard
                                                             policies and the Vietnamese regulations. In addition,
                                                             the ESIA will apply WBG Environmental, Health,
                                                             and safety Guidelines. In addition, the EA process
                                                             will comply with WBG’s requirements on public
                                                             consultation and information disclosure for category
                                                             A project.

                                                             A Social Assessment will also be undertaken. The
                                                             ESMF also include a Social Management Framework
                                                             (SMF) will be prepared for the project appraisal.
                                                             The SMF will cover resettlement and other social
                                                             issues involved. It will include the RPF, a gender
                                                             strategy, public health intervention, public
                                                             consultation and stakeholder engagement plan as
                                                             well as a communication strategy.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The policy is triggered as the project will impact the
                                                             environment of the Phan and Ca Lo river. The
                                                             project activities such as dredging river and lakes,
                                                             embankment works, widening canals and land
                                                             clearing will take place primarily in agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             areas. However once the area of influence is defined,
                                                             the EA process will assess any possibility of project
                                                             impacts on natural habitats or sensitive ecological
                                                             sites, for which provision of appropriate conservation
                                                             and mitigation measures would be required.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not involve any forest restoration,
                                                             plantation development, changes in forest use or
                                                             management or protection. There are no forest areas
                                                             that could be affected, hence OP/BP 4.36 is not
                                                             triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The project interventions will help to reduce the
                                                             flood in the project area, which would lead to the
                                                             increased crop production in linked with the
                                                             increased use of pesticides as an indirect impact. Pest
                                                             Management will be addressed through ESIA
                                                             process with an IPM will be prepared as a part of the
                                                             project ESMP..
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   The policies are triggered as the project involves
                         OP/BP 4.11                          large excavation activities. As such, chance find
                                                             procedures would be developed as part of the ESMP.
                                                             In addition, the EA process will assess any
                                                             possibility of impacts on physical cultural resources
                                                             (PCR) based on the area of influence, to be defined
                                                             and site-specific measures would be developed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             accordingly as part of the ESMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   As part of the ethnic minority screening, Bank’s
                         4.10                                review of secondary data indicated that there are 29
                                                             ethnic minority (EM) groups (about 47,000 people)
                                                             living across Vinh Phuc province. These ethnic
                                                             minority peoples are likely to be concentrated in the
                                                             project area, including Tam Dao district, Ngoc
                                                             Thanh commune of Phu Yen Township, and some
                                                             communes of Binh Xuyen. A social assessment (SA)
                                                             will be carried out in the project area to screen the
                                                             project impacts and confirm the presence of ethnic
                                                             minority population in the project area and determine
                                                             whether OP4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is triggered
                                                             under this project.

                                                             The project is also expected to have gender and
                                                             public health impacts. A gender analysis will be done
                                                             as part of the SA to explore opportunities to promote
                                                             gender equality, and to ensure the project is gender
                                                              informed, as required by the World Bank procedures.

                                                              If the SA findings confirm EM peoples (as per OP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              4.10 definition) are present in the project area, the
                                                              SA will be expanded to assess (a) the potential
                                                              project impact (positive and adverse) on the
                                                              identified EM groups, (b) to confirm whether there is
                                                              a broad EM community support for the project
                                                              implementation and (c) explore how EM peoples can
                                                              benefit from the project. The project will also
                                                              prepare an Ethnic Minority Policy Framework
                                                              (EMPF) to guide preparation of site specific Ethnic
                                                              Minority Development Plans (EMDP), where
                                                              necessary. Subprojects scheduled for implementation
                                                              during the first year of implementation will have
                                                              EMDP(s) prepared prior to project appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The project will undertake construction and
                         BP 4.12                              engineering works which will require permanent and
                                                              temporary land acquisition. Local people could be
                                                              affected by the loss of assets. It is anticipated the
                                                              impacted area would be mostly agricultural land.
                                                              Although an estimated 6,500 households are
                                                              potentially affected, no physical resettlement is
                                                              anticipated at this stage given the nature and scope of
                                                              the construction activities. The magnitude of impact
                                                              due to land acquisition are anticipated to be limited
                                                              as works will largely be contained in or adjacent to
                                                              watercourses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              A social assessment will be done to examine the
                                                              overall social impact of the project, including the
                                                              impact caused by land acquisition/resettlement as
                                                              well as the impact caused by construction activities –
                                                              as identified through the environmental impact
                                                              assessment. Thus, this SA will address the
                                                              requirements of OP 4.10, OP 4.12, and OP 4.01.

                                                              As land acquisition is required, (a) a Resettlement
                                                              Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared for the civil
                                                              works that will have their detailed engineering
                                                              design completed before the project appraisal –
                                                              approximately 30% of the works – and (b) a
                                                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                              developed as part of the Social Management
                                                              Framework to guide the preparation of the RAP for
                                                              the remaining sub-projects. The RPF will specify the
                                                                                                                        steps for the preparation, review, and clearance of
                                                                                                                        subproject RAPs.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   TBD                        The project will not involve any dam construction or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        rehabilitation or works on related reservoirs.
                                                                                                                        However, it is informed that there is an irrigation
                                                                                                                        dam, namely Lien Son dam in Pho Day river which
                                                                                                                        would be the upstream of Phan river to meet the
                                                                                                                        irrigation demand of Basin B during the dry season.
                                                                                                                        Further information and assessment during
                                                                                                                        preparation is needed to determine if project
                                                                                                                        investment is dependent on the operation of the
                                                                                                                        upstream dam, and mitigate measures would be
                                                                                                                        designed as appropriate.
                                 Projects on International                                   Yes                        Component 1 includes the construction of pumping
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   stations that will discharge water to the Red River, an
                                                                                                                        international waterway. However there will be no
                                                                                                                        trans-boundary impacts as Vietnam is the
                                                                                                                        downstream riparian and the area of influence of the
                                                                                                                        project is far from the international boundary. Upon
                                                                                                                        the EA results, the team will facilitate discussion
                                                                                                                        with LEGEN and RSS to conclude if the Project is
                                                                                                                        warranted notification exception and if it is, a Memo
                                                                                                                        to RVP justifying such exception would be prepared
                                                                                                                        accordingly before appraisal.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is located in Vinh Phuc province.
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                Disputed areas will not be involved. The policy is not
                                                                                                                        triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Sep-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      To be determined
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Lixin Gu,Quang Vinh Nguyen

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards                             Name:                                                                                             Date:
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/                               Name:                                                                                             Date:
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
