                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1046

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                           Project ID:      P152210
                            Project Name:      India: Andhra Pradesh Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P152210)
                            Task Team          Parmesh Shah
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Oct-2014                     Estimated        29-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Health (20%), Other
                                               social services (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural policies and institutions (20%), Rural markets (20%), Gender (20%),
                                               Nutrition and food security (20%), Social Inclusion (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    107.00                     Total Bank Financing:        75.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           32.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  75.00
                              Total                                                                       107.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO would be to enable selected poor households to diversify and enhance sources of income
                           and secure increased access to human development services and social entitlements.

                           This would be achieved by supporting Government of Andhra Pradesh in scalingupthe rural poverty
                           reduction initiatives and the existing institutional platforms of the rural poor under previous IDA
                         supported APDPIP and APRPRP with an emphasis on inclusive economic growth and livelihood
                         sustainability. These programs will be implemented in selected geographies based on value chain
                         potential and inclusion deficit in accessing services and entitlements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement through Producer Organizations : This component will
                         work with those small and marginal producers who have built up productive assets and have
                         previously participated in productivity improvement and technology introduction programs. The
                         focus of this component will be to add value through investment in economic organizations of small
                         and marginal farmers like producer organizations and producer companies and investments in value
                         addition, quality enhancement and partnerships with agribusiness enterprises in private and
                         cooperative sector. Special programs will be developed for promoting economic organizations
                         focused on tribal and indigenous producers. Value chain approach will be adopted in key sub-sectors
                         like agriculture (grains like paddy, maize, red gram, green gram, etc.), plantation and horticulture
                         crops (fruits and vegetables, cashew & coffee) which have potential to scale up and impact large
                         number of poor households. The proposed project will tap the market opportunities arising from
                         consumer led innovations like organic value chain, fair trade, etc. taking advantage of farmer
                         mobilization under Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture initiative. Cluster approach in
                         promoting rural non-farm enterprises, handicrafts, handlooms and other specialty goods with strong
                         geographical identity will be adopted to open up new opportunities for the small rural producers to
                         participate in urban markets.

                         The identification of value-chains or clusters could take two routes (a) resource based approach or
                         producer driven value chains based on pre-dominant activity in the area (for e.g. food grains,
                         handloom, handicrafts, etc.), and (b) market induced approach or buyer driven value chain (for e.g.
                         dairy, fresh fruits and vegetables, etc.). The key organizing principles for this component include
                         strengthening support systems like community based extension, collective inputs supply and output
                         marketing, appropriate technology, skill development, local value addition, logistics and market
                         linkages and bundled service provision for improved productivity and competitiveness of small
Public Disclosure Copy




                         holder production systems. This component will invest in TA, training and institution building, small
                         scale productive infrastructure and viability gap funding for selected value chain investments.

                         Component 2: Human Development: This component will invest in a ‘lifecycle approach’ to
                         achieving MDGs in health and education, focusing on the various phases of an individual’s life, and
                         specifically target poor households and vulnerable segments of the population (such as adolescent
                         girls, pregnant women and children under two years of age) that may not have benefited adequately
                         from previous government interventions. Two alternative modalities for achieving this objective will
                         be supported and assessed for their effectiveness/viability. First, the project will support the
                         expansion and enhancement (including better targeting) of the offerings of the Nutrition Cum Day
                         Care Centers (NDCCs) created under the earlier Bank supported Andhra Pradesh Rural Poverty
                         Reduction Project. These programs have enabled poor households to access health services
                         entitlements, improve their health and nutrition status and reduce health expenses. The enhancements
                         will involve the provision of additional health, nutrition, child rearing and sanitation services to the
                         ones already being provided. The expansion of the NDCCs and early childhood education centers
                         will entail the inclusion of specific tribal areas of the State, with packages introduced to cater to the
                         unique needs of these tribal populations. Second, the project will support the implementation in
                         selected blocks of the recently issued government order (No. 249) that aims, through a program
                         called “Maarpu,” to facilitate the convergence of existing flagship government programs in health
                         and nutrition (such as ICDS and NRHM) with the demand side interventions being promoted by
                         SERP. Maarpu has eight key components ranging from the implementation and monitoring of 20 key
                         interventions that are expected to reduce MMR, IMR and malnutrition to convergence in service
                         delivery at the habitation level and convergent behavioral change communication (BCC). The Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Observatory set up by DIME in collaboration with the WB livelihoods projects in India is measuring
                         the impact of NDCCs in Andhra Pradesh. The baseline collected by them will be used for
                         undertaking rigorous impact evaluation of the two modalities in order to assess their impact on the
                         outcomes of interest and, further, to facilitate a scaling-up of the preferred model across the state.

                         Community-based organizations have also partnered with the Department of Education to establish
                         early childhood education centers and offer higher education for poor children. Building on such
                         initiatives, the project will help strengthen community mechanisms to improve the functioning of
                         school systems and their social accountability. Provision of supplementary learning opportunities to
                         children from poorest households will also be made.

                         Overall, the component seeks to build on program innovations in Andhra Pradesh and elsewhere in
                         order to improve access of the poor and vulnerable to good quality nutrition, health and educational
                         services. The key organizing principles for this component will be the targeted mobilization of poor
                         households, and the bundling of community contributions, public services and entitlements through
                         convergence with existing flagship government programs like ICDS and NRHM for effective last
                         mile service delivery. Annual consumer feedback surveys/service delivery reports will also be
                         supported to identify specific areas of public service improvement. The project will invest in This
                         component will finance TA, institution building, one time revolving grant and robust M&E including
                         Impact Assessment Systems to assess impact of various interventions.

                         Component 3: Access to entitlements and social development : Access to social safety nets and
                         entitlements will be the core agenda in the strategy for inclusion of the poorest households. This
                         component will invest in leveraging existing institutional platform to ensure reliable and universal
                         access to entitlements and public services (like food security, MNREGS, social pensions,
                         scholarships, etc.). The project will support convergence strategies with the government departments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and agree upon business process re-engineering for streamlined enrollment processes and delivery of
                         key entitlements. Assistance will be provided for technology up-gradation assistance for improved
                         efficiency, transparency and social audit mechanisms in the last mile. Besides, strengthening the
                         existing smart card and UID linked electronic benefit transfer solutions; the project will also support
                         design, implementation and evaluation of cash transfer schemes.

                         The community institutions through social action committees (SACs) and ‘help line’ pro-actively
                         address gender issues such as violence against women, early girl child marriage, female infanticide,
                         etc. The project will deepen the SACs agenda to even address intra household, community level
                         gender issues and issues related to adolescent girls. Special emphasis will be given to households
                         with Persons with Disability (PwD), and other vulnerable categories. The neighborhood centers
                         managed by communities will be mainstreamed for provision of recreational, therapeutic and referral
                         services for the disabled. Support will be extended for decentralization & increased community
                         management of life and disability insurance programs will be encouraged.
                         9.      The project will leverage institutions experience and expertise like Center for Good
                         Governance (CGG), Society for Social Audit, Accountability and Transparency (SSAAT) for
                         strengthening accountability of public services and entitlements in the last mile. The key organizing
                         principles for this component include the following: (i) engaging community institutions network for
                         mobilizing eligible clients for entitlement and public services, (ii) single stage enrollment for
                         package of entitlement schemes, (iii) arranging IEC, counseling and support services, (iv)
                         Leveraging ICT for predictable service delivery, and (v) social accounta bility mechanisms. This
                         component will finance TA, institution building, systems development and robust M&E and Impact
                         Assessment Systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: ICT & Partnerships: The objective of this component will be to improve the
                         performance of project implementation and enhance coordination mechanisms with supply/demand
                         side partner institutions by providing them technical assistance, strategic advisory and knowledge
                         management services with national and international expertise in the above three areas. The project
                         will encourage productive partnerships with public, private and social enterprise sectors to increase
                         the integration of poor in performing and remunerative value chains. The project will organize
                         solutions and innovations marketplaces for identifying high impact innovations and developing
                         productive alliances between small and marginal producers and the public, private and social
                         enterprise sector aimed at improving technical service provision and market linkages in the project
                         areas. A framework for Public-Private-Community Partnerships (PPCP) will be developed that
                         allows the community institutions to form productive alliances at the local level. The project will
                         make strategic investments in ICT and m-Governance systems to develop state of the art IT platform
                         for hosting and delivering variety of project services like management information system (MIS),
                         decision support systems (DSS), financial management system (FMS), etc. This digital grid
                         connecting village to the State level will be Aadhar (UID) enabled and will be leveraged to deliver
                         ICT based services to rural poor households in the last mile.

                         Component 5: Project Implementation Support: The objective of this component is to strengthen the
                         project implementation and will finance dedicated staffing for the project activities that are
                         attributable to outcomes of the project, consultancies, training and related material, office equipment,
                         and operational costs. It will also support establishing Monitoring, Evaluation and Learning (MEL)
                         systems, Financial Management systems, Procurement Management, Governance and Accountability
                         Systems, Knowledge Management and Communication, etc.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         State of Telangana

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The state has some level of understanding and capacity in environmentally sound and sustainable
                         interventions through earlier Bank funded projects. These included initiatives to mitigate micro level
                         environmental risks and steps to promote climate friendly initiatives, including sustainable
                         agriculture practices and convergence with national programs supporting land improvement, ground
                         water development and soil fertility treatments. Society for Elimination of Rural Poverty (SERP) was
                         the implementing agency for the earlier IDA operations, viz. APDPIP and APRPRP and will also
                         implement the proposed project. Over last 10 years, SERP has built capacity in project and financial
                         management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, including environment and social safeguards.
                         However there is no systematic and formalized approach towards environmental due diligence of all
                         program activities.

                         SERP has mainstreamed operational strategies on poverty targeting, social inclusion, gender equity
                         and women’s empowerment in all its programs on micro-credit, livelihoods, entitlements and
                         vulnerability reduction. However, capacity for systematically implementing, monitoring and
                         reporting on Bank’s social safeguard policies does need a more ‘institutionalized’ approach, and the
                         capacity in this area needs strengthening. The capacity for environmental and social safeguard
                           assessments, mitigation and monitoring will be reviewed as part of project preparation and any
                           capacity and/or human resource gaps will addressed. SERP will designate an Environment Specialist
                           and a Social Development Coordinator, with required qualifications and background to design and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           conduct the safeguards assessments and prepare the environmental management framework and
                           social strategy for the proposed APRIGP, with guidance from the Bank's task team.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
                           Varun Singh (GFADR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes            •From an environment safeguards perspective,
                           BP 4.01                                           the individual livelihood activities are likely to
                                                                             have very little adverse impact. However, the
                                                                             collective impact of many such little activities
                                                                             could lead to a more visible impact, which is
                                                                             also likely to have little or no adverse impact.
                                                                             Given that at this stage the actual activities and
                                                                             their scale is not known, a framework approach
                                                                             would be appropriate. Some activities under
                                                                             Component 2 (Human development) could have
                                                                             an impact on environment (especially health and
                                                                             safety, for example if drinking water or
                                                                             sanitation services are to be managed by
                                                                             communities). These could also be covered
                                                                             under a framework approach. From a safeguards
                                                                             + approach, it has been found that that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             promulgation of good environmental
                                                                             management in livelihoods is best achieved
                                                                             through demonstration of eco-friendly practices
                                                                             – initially through pilots followed by scaled-up
                                                                             interventions. Going further, when these eco-
                                                                             friendly practices can be linked to a business
                                                                             process, then these become Green Business
                                                                             Opportunities. As part of the framework
                                                                             approach, it would be useful to identify a set of
                                                                             such Green Business Opportunities and
                                                                             integrate them into the livelihoods promotion
                                                                             plan. The project is most likely to be
                                                                             categorized as a Category B project.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        TBD

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 TBD

                           Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           Many of the project districts would have
                                                                                                                                 schedule tribes (STs), and project interventions
                                                                                                                                 specifically targeting tribal populations will
                                                                                                                                 have significant beneficial impacts. Provisions
                                                                                                                                 of OP 4.10 will be used for holding systematic
                                                                                                                                 and informed consultations with the beneficiary
                                                                                                                                 tribal communities and preparing the tribal
                                                                                                                                 development strategy and framework of the
                                                                                                                                 project.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard related studies have been completed and are expected to be disclosed both in-country
                                      and by InfoShop before Appraisal in early October, 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Parmesh Shah

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 25-Sep-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)                                                                                                 Date: 26-Sep-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
