                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                  APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                      Report No: 92617
Date updated: November 11, 2014

I. Basic Information
1. Basic Project Data

Country                        India                    Project ID               P132665
Project Name                   Enhancing Teacher Effectiveness in Bihar Program
Task Team Leader               Shabnam Sinha
Appraisal Date                 October 9-17, 2014
(Parent Project)
Estimated Board Date           January 6, 2015
Managing Unit                  GEDDR           Lending Instrument       Investment Project Finance
Sector(s)                      General Education (100%)
Theme(s)                       Human Development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) No
or               OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Project Financing Data
Emergencies)?
- Total Project Cost          USD 25 million for the TA (USD 357 million for the P4R, including TA)
 - Total Bank Financing        USD 25 million for the TA (USD 250 million for the P4R, including TA)
 - Financing Gap               Nil
Financing Source               Amount
 - Borrower/Recipient          USD 107 million

 - International Development      PforR Program                      USD 225 million
   Association (IDA)              Technical Assistance               USD 25 million
Environmental Category         B – Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project?    No
Is this a Transferred          No
project?
2. Project Objectives
The development objective for the Program - Enhancing Teacher Effectiveness in Bihar using P4R
as a financing instrument, is to improve effectiveness of elementary school teachers in the state. To
support the said Program in attaining its objectives/outcomes, a specific set of technical
assistance activities (this project) towards strengthening and supporting client capacity will be
financed (US$25 million), using as IPF as a lending instrument.
3. Project Description
The proposed World Bank-financed operation (P4R + IPF) aims to improve the effectiveness of
elementary school teachers in Bihar, by supporting the state in developing a robust teacher education
program towards producing teachers who are effective, qualified, accountable and responsive. This will
be a part is part of the Department of Education, Government of Bihar’s newly launched Mission
Manav Vikas program that includes a wide-ranging set of reforms for providing quality education and

                                             Page 1 of 10
improved learning outcomes for all elementary level children. The proposed operation supports a
portion of the Mission Manav Vikas program and aims at improving teacher effectiveness.
As mentioned above, the proposed operation will use a hybrid instrument, combining PforR and IPF
mechanisms for financing. Under the operation, US$25 million will be dedicated to financing a specific
set of technical assistance (TA) activities. The objective of the TA support is to strengthen the
capacities of Bihar State Education Infrastructure Development Corporation (BSEIDC), the Directorate
of Training and Research and State Council Educational Research and Training (SCERT) for improved
program implementation, policy development and monitoring and evaluation.
Capacity building and technical assistance activities will be financed under two main categories:
    (i) program implementation, and
    (ii) policy development and impact evaluation.
The first category supports program implementation through: (i) enhancing existing capacities in
financial management, planning, ICT, distance learning and planning through a Program Management
Unit (PMU), plus additional TA in specialized areas as needed, (ii) capacity building to use information
for decision-making and action; and (iii) third party validation studies. TA will support implementers to
frequently review and analyze data, including teacher performance and student assessment and to
identify what is working and what needs further attention. TA will also support implementers at the
district and block levels to use change management approaches address problems and document both
successes and failures as a means of sharing lessons with other implementers.
Some of the specific activities that are likely to be supported under this category include hiring of
consultants for: (a) Supporting Project Management Unit in management, reporting and coordination
between various players; (b) ICT related activities such as procurement of hardware and multi-media
content, data base management etc.; (c) Design, procurement, installation and supervision/functioning
of non-conventional energy sources (solar) in the Teacher Training Institutes; (d) Strengthening
procurement and Financial Management Systems; (e) Supporting Continuous Professional
Development (CPD) , including development of suitable curriculum frameworks; (f) Leadership
Training Programs for Teacher Educators; (g) Mid and end-line studies on Teacher Performance and;
(h) Impact Evaluation Studies (of various activities).
The second category of support will focus on improving policy design and evaluation through: (i) the
design of policies for teacher incentives and management reform, and (ii) a series of prospective
experimental evaluation designs. Impact evaluations will capture the impact of alternative interventions
to enhance teacher performance, including the provision of teacher incentives.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis

Bihar, a state located in eastern India between Uttar Pradesh on west and West Bengal in the east.
Bihar is India’s poorest State, with income per person at about 39 percent of the national average. With
a population of 104 million, it is the third largest state. Ninety percent of the population lives in rural
areas, where poverty incidence is 56 percent (2009-10: National Sample Survey and Planning
Commission Poverty Line). Not surprisingly, human development indicators are extremely low: literacy
rates are 73 percent among men and 53 percent among women; 42 percent of children under 3 are
stunted, 58 percent are underweight, and only 24 percent of rural households have toilets. Quality of
drinking water is a big problem, as a result of poor sanitation and fluoride, arsenic, nitrate and iron
contamination.
Bihar is ranked 35th in the country in Educational Development Index (EDI) ranking, an index
generated from 20 variables covering outcomes, access, infrastructure, and teachers. Most of the
districts of Bihar are in the bottom quartile for the EDI distribution for the country. Bihar has close to
70,000 elementary schools (primary education (Grades I-V) and upper primary (Grades VI-VII),
teaching about 20 million children. Almost all schools (97.91 percent) are government schools. Girls’
enrollment – at 48 percent – is close to parity. The state has a total of 343,000 teachers out of which


                                               Page 2 of 10
257,000 are contract teachers that have been hired by the Panchayats (local bodies) – a significant
proportion of the teachers not trained – while the others are regular teachers, hired by the State
government. The state has a vacancy of another 205,000 teachers to meet Right to Education (RTE)
norms.
Bihar faces the challenges of recruiting teachers to meet the RTE criteria, providing them with effective
pre-service training and ensuring their continuous professional development to raise their quality and
making them more accountable to the stakeholders. Recognizing the importance of teacher quality, the
state is embarking on a major reform in the whole area of teacher development and management and
the proposed program to be supported by the Bank is expected to support these reforms further.
Considering that the Teacher Training Program will require ICT infrastructure (which requires assured
power supply) to deliver the results on the ground, the TA activities will include specific support to
facilitate this. The TA will provide support on capacity building and management that includes
planning, design, installation and operation aspects of such infrastructure. This becomes necessary as
the annual energy deficit in Bihar during the 6-year period from FY08 to FY13 has been in the range of
13% and 21%. During the same period, the peak deficit in Bihar has been in the range of 14% to 34%
with large areas not having access to grid supply and around 83% of the households still do not have
access to power in the state. Keeping this in mind, it is proposed to hire a firm/agency under the TA
(this project) to provide necessary support on selection, procurement, supervision and monitoring the
development of non-conventional energy sources (solar) for use in Teacher Training Institutes.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team

Neha Vyas, Senior Environment Specialist, GENDR
Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera, Social Development Specialist, GURDR

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered

                 Safeguard Policies Triggered                         Yes          No          TBD

 Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                

 The activities proposed under TA/this project are not likely to have any adverse or significant
 environmental impact. However, as part of the enabling infrastructure to be created for Teacher
 Training in Bihar, there is a need to provide a reliable and a cost-effective energy source for
 energizing ICT equipment. In this context, a specific activity included in the proposed project (TA)
 relates to facilitating the design, planning and execution of renewable energy interventions (solar PV
 technology, which has been chosen after a thorough energy assessment), which has some minor
 implications on safeguard requirements.
 OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that the capacity building support to be provided under the TA
 for deployment of renewable energy technology (RET) factors in appropriate management
 approaches during planning, installation and operation of such infrastructure and remains consistent
 with the Bank’s operational policy. On the whole, this activity will create a long term positive impact
 on environment by promoting the use of efficient and clean energy source in the educational
 institutions of the state.

 Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                     

 OP 4.04 is not being triggered for this project as no interventions are envisaged in natural habitats,
 including those defined as ‘critical’ under the policy.




                                              Page 3 of 10
                Safeguard Policies Triggered                         Yes          No         TBD

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                              

OP 4.36 is not being triggered for the TA as no interventions are envisaged in forest areas and
therefore no conversion/degradation of this natural resource is expected to occur.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                         

OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as biological/environmental control methods or
reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not envisaged.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                              

The implementation of the project/program is not likely to affect religious structures of local
significance or other physical cultural resources.

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                       
Social safeguard issues, including any significant, long term or adverse impacts on tribal
communities, is not anticipated due to activities/interventions proposed under this operation as this
TA primarily consists of consultancy services and evaluation studies. However, since the project has
a state wide coverage, OP 4.10 has been triggered to ensure that the tribal communities are not
adversely affected by, or excluded from, the project, and that they receive culturally appropriate
benefits from the project.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                                 
OP 4.12 is not triggered as no resettlement is envisaged due to the implementation of the activities
under this TA.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                           
OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as there is no construction of new dams or activities
that are concerned with safe functioning of existing dams.
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                      
OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as there are no interventions planned/ proposed over or
around an international waterway that could cause a potential conflict. There are also no activities
that may affect the use or pollute such a waterway.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                               
OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is not proposed in any disputed area.
Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-                                    
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)




                                             Page 4 of 10
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
   describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

The TA/this project primarily consists of consultancy services and evaluation studies and therefore no
significant, long term or adverse environment or social issues are anticipated from the proposed
interventions/activities.
The activities proposed under TA/this project are not likely to have any adverse or significant
environmental impact. However, as part of the enabling infrastructure to be created for Teacher
Training in Bihar, there is a need to provide a reliable and a cost-effective energy source for energizing
ICT equipment. In this context, a specific activity included in the proposed project (TA) relates to
facilitating the design, planning and execution of renewable energy interventions (solar PV technology,
which has been chosen after a thorough energy assessment), which has some minor implications on
safeguard requirements.
OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that the capacity building support to be provided under the TA for
deployment of renewable energy technology (RET) factors in appropriate management approaches
during planning, installation and operation of such infrastructure and remains consistent with the
Bank’s operational policy. On the whole, this activity will create a long term positive impact on
environment by promoting the use of efficient and clean energy source in the educational institutions of
the state and will also contribute towards attaining the over-all Program objectives.
Social safeguard issues, including any significant, long term or adverse impacts or risks are not
anticipated due to activities/interventions proposed under this operation as this TA primarily consists of
consultancy services and evaluation studies. OP 4.12 is not triggered as no resettlement is envisaged
due to the implementation of the activities under this project. However, since the project has a state
wide coverage, OP 4.10 has been triggered to ensure that the tribal communities are not adversely
affected by, or excluded from, the project, and that they receive culturally appropriate benefits from the
project.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
   the project area.

No potential indirect and/or long term adverse impacts due to activities under the TA component are
envisaged. Over-all, the impacts are likely to be positive as the proposed Program and the associated
TA addresses Bihar’s challenges in providing quality elementary education through upgrading teacher
quality and accountability for greater teacher effectiveness. The Program is located in the context of a
broader reform agenda of the state to develop teachers with the right skills, knowledge and motivation
to perform well in the classroom. It addresses these issues through a comprehensive results-based
approach.
A specific activity under the project/TA on supporting and building capacity for deployment of
renewable energy technology (RET) will create a long term positive impact on environment by
promoting the use of efficient and clean energy source in the educational institutions of the state apart
from contributing towards the attaining of over-all Program objectives.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
   impacts.

In the context for deployment of renewable energy technology (RET), a study was conducted to assess
available renewable energy technologies in Bihar and their suitability with anticipated ICT load
requirement. The study adopted a graded evaluation approach to assess and evaluate all the possible
renewable energy technologies and filtered out the most feasible ones through a three step process

                                               Page 5 of 10
involving: (1) the assessment based on state wide renewable resource potential availability; (2)
evaluation of suitability of infrastructural conditions and; (3) Technology Management, Supply Chain
and Cost Parameters. The data and information collection through both secondary and primary research
was used for the first two stages of elimination. In the ultimate analysis, biomass and solar technologies
were the two RE technologies shortlisted for the third stage. These have been assessed by developing a
technology selection matrix comprising of three parameters viz. technology acceptability, applicability
and technology management and cost.
Based on the analysis, the solar PV technology was found to have greater acceptability and technology
adaption for the requirements of teacher’s training infrastructure spread all over the state. The
technology enjoys policy and fiscal benefits from both central and state government making it more
cost competitive in the market.
A detailed technical analysis for the SPV design shows that the crystalline silicon (c-Si) is more
appropriate as compared to the Thin Film (TF) technology as it requires less area per kW and is also a
more commercially established technology. The proposed technical design is based on solar grid hybrid
with storage and manual switchover facility for DG set option. This has been proposed based on the
conditions at the sites where the grid connected and un-interrupted power supply is not available. The
findings and suggestions/recommendations from this study will be taken forward for detailed designing
and execution through specific support under this project.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
   assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

None of the activities under the TA entail any potential large-scale, significant or irreversible adverse
environmental or social impact. On the contrary, the project is intended to strengthen the capacity of
state and the implementing agencies for mitigating and managing concerns in a more systematic and
comprehensive manner to deliver the training programs for teachers.
The training and support to manage environmental safeguards would be integrated as part of the over-
all Technical Assistance component planned for the Bihar Teacher Education project. This will be
specifically applicable to the activity pertaining to capacity building and technical support for
deployment of Renewable Energy Technology (RET).
A stand-alone Technical Assessment Report has been prepared for this. The findings and
suggestions/recommendations from this study will be taken forward for detailed designing and
execution through specific capacity building support under this project. The Terms of Reference (ToR)
to be prepared for hiring consultancy services for this specific activity/task will factor in requirements
for appropriate environmental management for such infrastructure – to ensure that the activity remains
consistent with the requirements set forth in the Bank’s operational policy (OP 4.01). In line with
Bank’s procedures, an approval from the Regional Safeguards Advisor will be obtained prior to
finalization of this ToR, which will also address several technical, procurement and project
management related expectations and deliverables from the consultant. From an environmental
safeguards perspective, it would address the core principles of sustainability, health, safety during
planning, installation and operation of such infrastructure.
On the social safeguards front, OP 4.10 has been triggered to ensure that the tribal communities are not
adversely affected by, or excluded from, the project, and that they receive culturally appropriate
benefits from the project. If any significant or adverse impacts result on account of the proposed
interventions/activities on communities of indigenous people is envisaged, a Tribal Development Plan
to avoid/mitigate/manage such impacts will be prepared in line with the guidance provided under the
Tribal Development Framework (TDF) prepared for this project. The TDF describes the principles,
procedures and organizational arrangements to be applied to tribal communities for the Project to fully
meet the objectives of OP 4.10 and facilitate active participation of these communities. This framework
also describes the requirements to address grievances, if any. Additionally, the Project will take
necessary action for awareness raising, mobilization and training campaigns tailored to the needs of
vulnerable groups including tribal communities in the relevant locations so that the statutory rights and


                                               Page 6 of 10
privileges are not hampered and their customs and norms are not disturbed, rather adequately complied
with.
Institutional Arrangements: The governance structure and institutional arrangements are designed to
strengthen existing institutions to perform their roles more effectively within a regulatory framework
deemed to already be sound. Pedagogical leadership will be provided by the SCERT, which already has
this responsibility but needs enhanced capacity to carry this out more effectively. The Bihar State
Education Infrastructure Development Corporation (BSEIDC) will continue its work on procurement,
which it already does effectively for the Education Department. The program will strengthen its
capacity to manage procurement, including consultancies of higher value and activities associated with
renewable energy infrastructure. The Principal Secretary, Education Department, will be responsible for
overall program management and coordination, given his/her role as line manager for the Directorate of
Research and Training, SCERT and BSEIDC.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

Stakeholders: The primary beneficiaries of the over-all program (P4R+IPL), which the TA component
would be supporting, will be approximately 450,000 teachers in government elementary schools in
Bihar who will benefit from a strengthened teacher education system. Specifically, 90,200 unqualified
teachers who will be certified with the D.El Ed. Diploma through the ODL program along with the new
unqualified entrants will be benefitted. Among the current number of teachers in service, 41% are
female teachers and out of the newly recruited teachers, 50% are women in line with Bihar’s policy to
reserve 50% of all positions for women. The program will also benefit elementary school students
(approximately 22.7 million) who will gain access to improved classroom teaching and learning.
Consultation and Disclosure. The technical assessment report on ‘Deployment of Renewable Energy
Technologies (RETs) for Teacher Effectiveness in Bihar’ and the ‘Grievance Redressal Mechanism’ ,
were prepared after consultation/stakeholder involvement at various levels and with different players.
The final versions of both these reports have been informed and revised incorporating comments
obtained from consultation with stakeholders.
The Department of Education, Government of Bihar has a program-specific website wherein all
important documents of the program have been disclosed. The two said reports/documents pertaining to
this project have also been disclosed in the Bank’s Infoshop.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 March 31, 2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            November 11, 2014
"In country" Disclosure                                                   September 29, 2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the
                                                                            Not Applicable
Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process/Social Assessment
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Not Applicable

Date of submission to InfoShop                                              Not Applicable

"In country" Disclosure                                                     Not Applicable

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework (as part of SA)
Date of receipt by the Bank                                                October 24, 2014



                                               Page 7 of 10
Date of submission to InfoShop                                                           November 11, 2014
"In country" Disclosure                                                                    November 3, 2014
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
Pest Management – Not Applicable/Policy Not Triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources - Not Applicable/Policy Not Triggered

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not Applicable


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?              Yes   []       No   [ ]       NA   [ ]
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report?
                                                                               Yes   []       No   [ ]       NA   [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan?
                                                                               Yes   []       No   [ ]       NA   [ ]

 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of
critical natural habitats?
                                                                         Yes         [ ]       No   []       NA   [ ]

If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
(non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures Yes    [ ]       No   [ ]       NA   []
acceptable to the Bank?

 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?                     Yes   [ ]       No   [ ]       NA   []
Is a separate PMP required?                                                    Yes   [ ]       No   [ ]      NA   [ ]
Are PMP requirements included in project design?                               Yes   [ ]       No   [ ]       NA   []

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?            Yes   [ ]       No   [ ]       NA   [ ]
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
adverse impacts on cultural property?
                                                                               Yes   [ ]       No   [ ]       NA   []

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework (as
appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected Indigenous            Yes   [ ]      No    [ ]      NA   [ ]
Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
Manager review the plan?
                                                                               Yes   []       No   [     ]   NA   [ ]

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design been reviewed
and approved by the Regional Social Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                                                                               Yes   [ ]       No   [     ]   NA   []

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ process
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                                                                               Yes   [     ]   No       [ ]   NA   [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
Manager review the plan?
                                                                               Yes   [ ]       No       [ ]   NA   [ ]



                                                      Page 8 of 10
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
been carried out?
                                                                                  Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
constraints?
                                                                                  Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
provisions for certification system?
                                                                                  Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []

OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                              Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]
Have the ToRs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts
been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
                                                                                  Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                                                                                  Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]

OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?                            Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo        Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []
to the RVP prepared and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:                           Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                                           Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []

OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the international
aspects of the project, including the procedures to be followed, and the          Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []
recommendations for dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to in the OP?           Yes   [ ]    No   [ ]   NA   []

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
Infoshop?
                                                                                  Yes   [ ]   No   [ ]   NA   [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected      Yes   []    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]
groups and local NGOs?

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard             Yes   []    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
cost?
                                                                                  Yes   []    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project includes the
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
                                                                                  Yes   []    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal              Yes   []    No   [ ]   NA   [ ]
documents?




                                                         Page 9 of 10
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by                      Name                      Date
 Task Team Leader                         Shabnam Sinha           November 3, 2014
 Environmental Specialist                   Neha Vyas             November 3, 2014
 Social Development Specialist     Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera   November 3, 2014
 Approved by
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator        Francis V. Fragano        November 11, 2014
   Comments
 Practice Manager                          Halil Dundar           November 11, 2014
   Comments




                                   Page 10 of 10
