                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE

                                                                               Report No.: 92583

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2014

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: India                                Project ID: P147820

Project Name: Program for Large Scale Solar in India (PROGRESS)
Task Team Leader: Ashish Khanna
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 23, 2015        Estimated Board Date: September 21, 2015
Managing Unit: GEEDR                           Lending Instrument: Investment Lending
Sector: Other Renewal Energy (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Other Private Sector
Development (25%), Other public sector governance (25%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):                          500
Private Sector Amount (US$m.):                440
Borrower (US$m.):                              50
Total:                                        990

Environmental Category: B, Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing               Simple [X]                 Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project       Yes [ ]                    No [ X]

B. Project Objectives [from section 2 of PCN]:
The Project Development Objective is to support large-scale solar power generation in India.

C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]:

As the Government of India (GoI) plans to rapidly scale-up the solar installations in the country,
the World Bank intends to partner with GoI and Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) across
a long-term programmatic engagement, totaling to around US$3-4 billion of World Bank
financing, encompassing:

      (i) Developing 5,000 MW of mega-sized solar capacity (minimum size of each project at
            500 MW) through solar parks
      (ii) Installing 1,000 MW of decentralized solar capacity
      (iii) A decade-long partnership with SECI for organizational strengthening and capacity
            building of SECI to successfully undertake the ambitious GoI program.

As part of the programmatic engagement, the World Bank intends to undertake the proposed

                                                1
project as Phase-1. This would offer the requisite demonstration and learning for assisting
Ministry of Non-Renewal Energy (MNRE) design the upcoming Phases and Batches of the
Jawahar Lal Nehru National Solar Mission (JNNSM).

This proposed phase I of the project would consist of the following components:

Component 1: Setting-up 700-800 MW Solar Ultra Mega Power Plant (Solar UMPP): US$400
million

As first phase of developing 5,000 MW of mega-sized solar installations, the World Bank is
proposing to be engaged in developing the first solar 700 to 800 MW UMPP in the Rewa District
in the state of Madhya Pradesh, India.

Two critical filters which need to be considered for any large scale solar installation, such as in
for Solar UMPP, are: (i) availability of large tract of government-owned contiguous land with no
alternate productive uses, and (ii) transmission and overall system stability. Specifically for the
World Bank financed solar UMPP in Madhya Pradesh, firstly, the identified land for the project
is almost all owned by the Government of Madhya Pradesh (GoMP). Around 1,350 hectares out
of the total 1,500 hectares of land is government-owned with private land dispersed within. The
private land is soon planned to be acquired to achieve a single contiguous piece of land.
Secondly, the land is close to the 765 kV transmission network of Power Grid Corporation of
India Limited, the Central Transmission Utility (CTU) of India, which has the capacity to
transmit more than 20,000 MW of installed generation and this would result in minimizing grid
variability.

It is proposed that the World Bank would finance around 50% of the total project to be financed
by the World Bank and the remaining project funding would be raised through equity and
commercial lending. The World Bank financing is proposed to flow to the private sector through
SECI (a fully owned govt. company) or a Joint Venture company (JV formed between SECI and
GoMP) following a transparent competitive bidding process. The objective is to strike the
balance between swift project implementation and achieving PDO. The salient features of the JV
are as follows: (i) The JV will have a 50:50 ownership between SECI and GoMP, (ii) Land will
be acquired by the JV, and (iii) Government’s subsidy for developing shared infrastructure will
be passed on to the JV

The solar UMPP would be built by the competitively-selected private sector developer. This
would be done through (i) direct on-lending of World Bank funds with ownership of assets with
the private sector, or (ii) some mode of passing-on of World Bank funds without transferring the
ownership with the private sector.

Within the above-mentioned two options, the project contract could be implemented through
revenue-sharing or some other form of Public Private Partnership (PPP) models. The details of
the structure would depend on (i) the legal and regulatory compliance to law of land and internal
policy; and (ii) ensuring adequate risk allocation between public and private sector.

A joint World Bank-IFC team is working on possible models for implementation. IFC’s
Investment team has vast solar transaction experience from Phase I of JNNSM and the same

                                                2
team is partnering on this project to assist in its design. IFC PPP Advisory’s expertise could be
leveraged for the project financial analysis, PPP structuring, legal due diligence, and private
sector consultations. IFC’s role could be explored to provide a bridge loan to the JV. IFC’s
Integrated Due Diligence (IDD) could be included at the bidding stage where developers could
explore IFC project financing in addition to other commercial lenders

Component 2: Setting-up 100 MW of decentralized solar installations for single large consumers:
US$90 million

As a first step in developing 1,000 MW of decentralized solar installations, the World Bank is
proposing to be engaged in setting-up 100 MW of solar installations primarily on rooftops of
large consumers such as Railways and Airports, through the Renewable Energy Service
Companies (RESCOs) model. This component would also finance some decentralized ground-
mounted solar PV systems within the premises of airports and railways on un-used lands.

This component would be built by a competitively-selected private sector developer. In line with
component 1 (solar UMPP), the implementing structures for the project would be similar: (i)
direct on-lending of World Bank funds with ownership of assets with the private sector, or (ii)
some mode of passing-on of World Bank funds without transferring the ownership with the
private sector. Within these two options, the project contract could be implemented through
revenue-sharing or some other form of Public Private Partnership (PPP) models.

For this component, SECI will have partnership arrangements (through formal agreements) with
consumers, which would be government departments starting with Railways and Airports
Authority.

Even though the JNNSM and state solar policies have given the initial push for the development
of solar power projects in India, the rooftop solar segment in India remains in a poor state as
compared to other countries such as Germany, the US and Japan.

SECI has been the key implementation agency for MNRE’s “Grid Connected Rooftop and Small
Solar Power” schemes and has already implemented solar roof-tops projects in four phases
bidding out a total of 75 MW. However, role of SECI under these schemes has been two-fold (a)
as a bidding agency to run a transparent bidding process, and (b) agency to provide GoI’s
subsidy assistance.

A joint World Bank-IFC team is working on possible models for implementation because of IFC
Advisory team’s prior experience in solar roof tops projects. The discussion is already underway
with SECI to sign a mandate of bid transaction advisory. The coordination with public sector
departments will be facilitated by the World Bank. Further, to ensure that the timeline for the
Bank’s appraisal is maintained, coordination between the activities of the World Bank and IFC
will be ensured.

Component 3: Organizational Strengthening and Capacity Building for SECI: US$10 million

Phase-1 of this component aims to assist SECI to conduct institutional assessments and prepare a
strategic business plan. It will focus on the key business processes, human resources

                                               3
requirement, and financial requirements needed by SECI to achieve its vision. This expression of
interest for the preparation of Strategic business plan has already been received. As seen in the
past engagements the assessment of the organization helps in the identification of key areas that
require capacity building. These capacity building activities will be undertaken under Phase-2 of
this component.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the analysis of
environmental and social risks and impacts (if known):
The project site is in Rewa district of Madhya Pradesh in Central India. Rewa lies between 240
18’ and 250 12’ north latitudes and 810 2’ and 820 18’.[1] The district is bounded on the north
by Uttar Pradesh, on the east and southeast by Sidhi, on the south by Shahdol, and on the west by
Satna. It is part of Rewa Division and has an area of 6,240 square km. According to the 2011
census, Rewa District has a population of 2,363,744, of which over 100000 are indigenous.
Though land is one of the most contentious issues as far as large solar projects are concerned,
this does not apply to the proposed project as GoMP owns the majority of the identified land for
solar UMPP. As per the information furnished by the client and site visit, the potential site
covers around 1,500 hectares (for around 750 MW) across two adjacent locations, with pockets
of scattered privately-owned land. During the site visit, no visible encroachment was found on
the project site. Agricultural activities were also scarce. Building of the solar UMPP will
positively affect the area in terms of infrastructure development and local employment being
created.

For component 2, the area for the rooftop and/or for the ground mounted solar installations is
already available with the bulk consumers, who are being selected on their willingness and
ability to move fast on this component. These consumers however will be consulted prior to the
installation of solar panels and agreement will be signed.

Though the alignment of transmission line for evacuation of power is not known, the facility may
entail adverse social and environmental impact issues which include loss of land and other
immovable assets; crops, livelihood or source of livelihood; adverse impact on environmental
hotspots; etc. Environmental and social assessment will be carried out to assess adverse impacts
and mitigation measures will be finalized in line with POWERGRID’s environmental and social
process and procedure (ESPP).

E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Effective SEMS:

The primary responsibility of coordinating work related to social and environmental safeguards
will rest with the Government. Since, Solar Energy Corporation of India (SECI) or Joint venture
is executing work of UMPP implementation and managing environmental and social issues, the
project will establish an Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU). The ESMU will
be staffed with specialized social and environment professionals either hired from the market or
on deputation from other government department with relevant experience for the project. An
Environmental and Social Specialist each will be posted at the project site to monitor the
implementation of environmental and social safeguards mitigation measures. The specialists will
be responsible for generating monthly progress reports as per the format devised during
environmental and social assessment of the project. The midterm and end term evaluation of
implementation process will be carried out by an independent agency. Once private sector is

                                               4
identified, the environmental and social system of the entity will be reviewed. In case any gap is
identified, an action plan will be prepared and agreed upon.

Social and environmental issues pertaining to the evacuation infrastructure will be addressed in
line with POWERGRID’s environmental and social process and procedure (ESPP), which is
already approved by the Bank under the Use of Borrowers’ System pilot.

F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:
Pyush Dogra, GENDR
Gaurav D Josh, GENDR
Parthapriya Ghosh, GURDR

II. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS THAT MIGHT APPLY

Performance Standards (please explain why)                              Yes           No        TBD
PS 1: Assessment and Management of Environmental                         X
and Social Risks and Impacts
Proposed conversion to solar energy to produce electricity will reduce the fossil fuel-based
power generation, hence no adverse environmental impacts are expected. The likely negative
environmental impacts are expected to be localized in nature and arise only during the
construction and future decommissioning of the systems at the end of their lifetime. The
preparation of the site-specific ESIA/EMPs/ESMS will follow the requirements of OP 4.01 in
regard to any public sector components and PS 1 in regard to private sector investments. As part
of project preparation an environmental and social management framework will be prepared
which will include procedures and standards to develop an appropriate Environmental and Social
Management System (ESMS) for private sector investments
PS 2: Labor and Working Conditions                                       X
This PS is applicable for the private sector investment activities. It will ensure ESMS
incorporates rights of the workers, promote safe and healthy working conditions, including
temporary stay facilities, and be in compliance with national employment and labor laws.
PS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention                       X
The choice of technology, i.e. use of Solar PV to harness solar energy is contributing positively
in the reduction of GHG emissions. In addition, setting up and operationalizing solar systems
will have no adverse impacts to the human health and environment. However, disposal of used
batteries, and solar PV cells after decommissioning can contribute to pollution. The ESIA will be
required to pay attention to the requirement of disposal of decommissioned parts including the
institutional responsibilities so it will not contribute to risk of pollution after the project
implementation is completed
PS 4: Community Health, Safety, and Security                             X
While the development of the park will require some ground levelling through cut and/or fill, there will
likely be only small impact on the communities nearby during site preparation. The installation of the
solar panel is a straightforward activity. During operation, cleaning would require water and would need
to be properly discharged. The selected Concessionaire’s ESMS would need to have the necessary
provisions
PS 5: Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement                        X
Though on a smaller scale, there will be private land acquisition of land leading to loss of livelihood or
sources of livelihood. Hence the OP 4.12 has also been triggered as land will be acquired by the

                                                     5
Performance Standards (please explain why)                           Yes         No        TBD
government entity. Since the site is known, a resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared as
per OP 4.12 on involuntary resettlement as well as RTFCLARR Act 2013 and state
government’s policies relevant to the project. As part of project preparation, an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared based on operational policy 4.03.
The ESMF will include procedures and standards to develop an appropriate Environmental and
Social Management System (ESMS) for private sector investments. The preparation of the site-
specific SIA/ RAPs will follow the requirements of OP 4.12 if planned and executed by
government and PS 5 if planned and executed by private sector.
PS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable                                              X
Management of Living Natural Resources
This will be confirmed once baseline confirms if any habitat or species are to be affected or there
is potential for restoration of habitat if the area is degraded.
PS 7: Indigenous Peoples                                                                     X
Rewa has more than 10,000 persons of Kaul tribal group. If screening results shows presence of
tribal households in the project area, an IPDP will be prepared based on social assessment and
consultations with the indigenous people
PS 8: Cultural Heritage                                               X
As construction activities such as ground leveling will be conducted, there are chance find
possibilities at the proposed fields. Chance find procedures for the SECI and/or JV would be an
important aspect of the pre-bid items that need to be incorporated into the site development
works contract. In addition, these also need to be integrated into the ESMS of the successful
Concessionaire


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the ESRS would be
   disclosed and the PAD-stage ISDS would be prepared: June 30, 2015
B. For Category C or Category FI projects that do not require an ESRS, the target date for
   preparing the PAD-stage ISDS:

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
       The safeguards preparation for the project comprises carrying out an Environmental and
       Social base line as well as Impact Assessment of the proposed investments, to identify
       critical safeguard issues and recommend strategies for compliance with the Bank, GoMP’s
       and GOI’s environmental and social policies. The environmental and social baseline will be
       initiated by October 15, 2014. The consultants are in the process of being hired. Once the
       baseline exercise is completed, the joint venture will hire consultants for environmental and
       social impact assessment and for preparation of EMP and RAP / IPDP. The environmental

1   Reminder: The Bank's Access to Information Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i)
at the InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.



                                                                  6
   and social issues including land acquisition and tribal population, if any will be managed by
   the JV prior to the private sector engagement. Hence, OP4.01 is triggered to develop an
   ESMF. The ESMF and site specific RAP/EMP/IPDP will be completed by March 2014. This
   ESMF will be prepared by SECI prior to appraisal indicating how the Performance Standards
   would be applied during implementation by the private sector entities and identify key E&S
   risks. The Bank will undertake E&S due diligence during implementation when the private
   entities are selected through the review and clearance of the private sector developed
   ESIAs/ESMPs, and ESMS. The Bank will prepare the Environmental and Social Review
   Summary (ESRS) based on this due diligence and will disclose this along the relevant
   assessments.

IV. APPROVALS

 Signed and submitted by:
 Task Team Leader:                  Name: Ashish Khanna                    Date: 10/21/14
 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:   Name: Francis V Fragano                Date: 10/23/14
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                    Name: Julia Bucknall                   Date: 11/06/14
   Comments:




                                               7
