                        INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                                APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: 89381
Date prepared/updated: 08/07/2014

I. Basic Information

1. Basic Project Data
Country: India                                   Project ID: P145419
Project Name: Creating Inclusive Business Models for Marginalized Tribal Communities in
Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand
Task Team Leader: Vinayak Narayan Ghatate
Appraisal Date: December 19, 2013                Estimated Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                             Lending Instrument: Japan Social
                                                 Development Fund (JSDF) Grant
Sector: Other Industry (100%)
Theme: Rural Non farm Income Generation (50%), Indigenous People (50%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: US$ 2.86 million (Japan Social Development Fund)
Environmental Category: B
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises      Yes [ ]    No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:
The proposed PDO is to create employment and sustainable livelihood opportunities to reduce
poverty amongst the unemployed youth, women and other marginalized communities in the
tribal regions of Odisha, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh.

The Project proposes to provide additional inputs in regard to the extensive product development
activities to develop its Jani and Jiva brand and test innovative marketing assistance to its nine
Jiyo! cluster organizations in the state of Bihar and Andhra Pradesh.

3. Project Description:

The proposed program, which is to be implemented by the Asian Heritage Foundation, is unique
in its vision of developing diverse, community-run cluster enterprises based on tribal/rural
wisdom and traditional knowledge/skills. This project will work at the grass root level with local
community owned institutions and existing tribal social structures. The project will be working
with tribal communities, which are amongst the most vulnerable and isolated groups in the
identified states in India. It will support the communities to manage all aspects of the value chain
created by the cluster enterprises themselves. The project will also connect clusters to
management training, financial assistance and market development, by working with tribal
communities to develop community owned indigenous enterprises based on their existing
traditional knowledge and skill set.

The project will also be assisting the nine Jiyo clusters in Andhra Pradesh and Bihar with new
product development and sales/marketing support, specifically targeted to strengthen and sustain
these operations for greater social and economic impact. This includes testing two innovative
brand concepts – (i) Jani (mass premium) and (ii) Jiva (local markets) - to increase market access
and provide increased employment and income generation opportunities to existing beneficiaries
and the new members, from the existing clusters as well as the new ones. Innovative design and
strategic sales and marketing tie-ups will be used for Jiyo, Jani and Jiva products by leveraging
Jiyo’s networks .Other sales channels i.e. luxury and private label sales for the Jiyo brand, pop-
up stores for the Jani and Jiva products which will be promoted by rural youth brand
ambassadors. The pilot would have the following four components:
Component A: Institution Building, Skill Up-gradation and Design Development (US$
0.728 m)

 A total of 8 new cluster enterprises will be developed in tribal areas in the three states, complete
with Common Facility Centers for production operations and auxiliary centers for packing,
tailoring, etc. Overall, an estimated total of 7650 community members will benefit from the
project. These clusters will receive specialized, interactive design skills training and capacity
building to develop the Jani and Jiva product lines.

The project will work with local institutional partners and local masters on the ground to
collectively train the skilled and semi-skilled cluster members who will further train the
unskilled members. This approach of having the trained beneficiaries conduct future trainings of
unskilled cluster members will serve as a role model in the village itself for others to be inspired
and will bring down costs for training and capacity building for the clusters in the future. The
project itself will act as a change-agent to make the village self-sufficient with the hope that
diverse communities from neighboring villages will follow the tested methods to be
interconnected and empowered. Importantly, this will also include functional literacy for poor
illiterate women in the project areas. As clusters are empowered through training and access to
markets, the entire value chain will eventually be located at the local level.

The goal will be to provide locally-based training, capacity building and focused hand-holding
support to communities in order to set up and strengthen their own organizations so they are fully
responsive to their needs. All of these efforts would substantially complement and help
strengthen on-going efforts of the World Bank assisted livelihood projects in building capacity of
the Self Help Groups/Federations that are being supported by the on-going World Bank
supported livelihood project in the States.

Component B: Community Cluster Fund (US$ 0.559 m)

Through this component, a Community Cluster Fund will be created for each CBO (cluster
enterprise) to fund the initial setting-up of 8 Common Facility Centers, which will be used for
production and Auxiliary Centers for value addition (to handle packaging, tailoring, etc) as per
the local cluster’s needs. These Centers will eventually allow the clusters to complete the entire
value chain operations at the village level itself. The Centers will be established in rented
premises or in unused Government buildings.

In addition, a portion of the Community Cluster Fund will be used for start-up capital for the
cluster enterprise. The working capital component in each Community Cluster Fund is intended
to be a self-replenishing resource to help maintain continuous production and sales cycles for the
cluster. This project will also support the local level cluster institutions to leverage commercial
bank financing. It will also provide technical support in helping them to design innovative
financial products that would be sustainable and viable in the long run, and most importantly,
attractive to the commercial banks and other private sector organizations.

Component C: Marketing, Trade Facilitation and Support Services (US$ 0.967m)

This component aims to provide front-end marketing and trade linkages for the Jiyo, Jani and
Jiva brands to efficiently link the cluster organizations developed in the project to international,
national and local markets. In addition to the Jiyo! brand, the project will assist the Nine Jiyo
clusters and 8 new tribal clusters to create two other brands (i.e., Jani and Jiva) with products and
services designed separately to meet the demands of the young urban and rural audiences,
respectively. The project will establish different sales and marketing channels for the three
brands. Brand promotion, sales and marketing will be strategically conducted as appropriate for
each brand.

The project proposes to set up at least 20 Mobile Kiosks in identified cities which will be
operated by rural unemployed youth from the clusters who will serve as brand ambassadors for
their own products. Talented rural youth will be identified and trained in sales and marketing to
operate the kiosks as businesses The kiosks will be located strategically at major Indian tourist
attractions, in airports and on university and corporate campuses which have a high density of
upper middle class families with disposable income.

Component D: Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination and Project
Management and Administration (US$ 0.605m)

Asian Heritage Foundation will work with cluster leadership to closely monitor and evaluate the
use of grant funds and prepare and submit reports. Throughout the 4 year grant period, AHF
staff and the clusters will gather information and lessons learned from the project. AHF will
share information on the Jiyo website, in relevant publications and by other means to the extent
appropriate and helpful to the larger community. This component will fund the hiring of
consultants to provide technical assistance and professional support where AHF doesn’t have
core competence, such as in M&E and Cluster funds.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The proposed districts for intervention are:
    Mayurbanj and Koraput in Odisha;
    Hazaribagh and Gumla in Jharkhand-
    Mandla, Jhabua and Dhar in Madhya Pradesh –.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:


Mr. R.R.Mohan (SASDS)/ Shankar Narayanan (SASDS)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please   Yes                  Explanation
explain why)
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)     X     The pilot is expected to produce lessons
                                                as to how to motivate communities to
                                                preserve the local environment. Project
                                                activities are likely to contribute to better
                                                environmental quality and individual
                                                activities may have small-scale impacts
                                                or may be environmentally benign,
                                                without significant and/or irreversible
                                                impacts. Any negative environmental
                                                impacts of the activities would be
                                                limited, short term and mitigated. But
                                                cumulatively, the impact could be larger
                                                scale and would require some
                                                environmental due diligence measures to
                                                be put in place. The project is
                                                categorized as a Category B project.
                                                These issues need to be properly
                                                managed and capacities need to be
                                                strengthened to implement due diligence
                                                measures along with effective
                                                supervision and monitoring.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                   The small scale activities under this
                                                project are not expected to have any
                                                impacts on natural habitats
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                            The projects activities will not have any
                                                impacts on natural habitats
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                       The Project will not finance procurement
                                                or use of pesticides
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP              The Project will not entail excavations
4.11)                                           which may unearth or disrupt localized
                                                cultural resources
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)           X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)           The project will not fund any activities
                                                that may result in land acquisition,
                                                involuntary resettlement and livelihood
                                                displacement. No construction will be
                                                undertaken and therefore no land will be
                                                acquired. Facilities will be rented for
                                                establishing the Common Facility
                                                Centers, which will be used for
                                                production and value addition (to handle
                                                packaging, tailoring, etc) as per the local
                                                cluster’s needs.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                     The project does not include any
                                                investments for infrastructure that would
                                                be used for community-level civil works
                                                such as small dams, embankments, etc.
Projects on International Waterways                        The Project does not impact or involve
(OP/BP 7.50)                                               international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                    This Project is not in a disputed area.


II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

From an environmental perspective, activities under Components A and C could have limited
environmental impacts. But cumulatively, the impact could be larger scale and would require
some environmental due diligence measures to be put in place. The pilot is expected to produce
lessons as to how to motivate communities to preserve the local environment. Any negative
environmental impacts of the activities would be limited, short term and mitigated.




                                                                                    The project is
categorized as a Category B project.




                                                                      India’s legislations for the
protection of the interests of the tribal communities and vulnerable groups and be consistent with
Bank’s Operational Policy (OP 4.10).

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:

The long-term impact on the natural environment, physical cultural resources and tribal/
indigenous people is expected to be positive, especially if it focuses on skills development in
areas which are non-forest products and promote environmentally sound practices.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts:

N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described:

Given that specific demand-driven nature of the activities, a mechanism for screening and
assessing possible negative short-term environmental and social impacts as well as preparing
mitigation plans will be developed during project preparation. The grant is associated with the
Bank funded rural livelihoods projects in these regions. Hence, a simple Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) has been developed, based on the larger EMF but focusing on
the key activities being financed under this project – which include Apiculture and Sericulture
and Handlooms and Handicrafts. This has been used for consultation with the tribal beneficiaries
and for sound management of project activities. The EMF comprises a detailed strategy and
procedures for mitigation measures related to project activities. The Social management
Framework (SMF) will emphasize culturally appropriate communication, extensive
consultations, informed consent and documentation of the entire process.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people:

Key stakeholders include (but are not necessarily limited to): tribal and vulnerable community
members and small businesses, local government members and employees, and NGOs/CBOs.
The EMF/SMF has been disclosed locally in the districts as well on the Bank’s InfoShop prior to
appraisal. They have also been used for consultation with the tribal beneficiaries which were
undertaken in a culturally appropriate manner and documented.


Since the plan preparation process will follow Bank OP 4.10 in spirit and letter, there would not
be a separate tribal development framework.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
                                                                          Separate Framework
                                                                           Not Required; but
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          relevant sections were
                                                                         extracted from NRLP
                                                                          ESMF and disclosed
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                                   Nov 2013
 Date of "in-country" disclosure
 Date of submission to InfoShop
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                              Not Required
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          Separate Framework
                                                                             Not Required
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                            Not required
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes [ ]      No [X]      N/A [ ]
EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     Extract of NRLP ESMF was sent for
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?               clearance and approval was received
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            Yes
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]      No [X]      N/A [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes [ ]      No [ ]     N/A [X ]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                 Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 – Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to            Yes [ ]   No []     N/A [ X]
cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning             Yes [ ]   No [X ]     N/A [ ]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the     Yes
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [X ]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 – Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional    Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [ X ]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                        Yes [ ]   No [ ]    N/A [ X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?      Yes [ ]   No [ ]     N/A [X ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
OP/BP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the      Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [X ]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [ ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
the World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X ]    No [ ]    N/A [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?
D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                              Name                               Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Vinayak Narayan Ghatate                          08/11/2014
 Environmental Specialist:           Ruma Tavorath                                    08/11/2014
 Social Development Specialist       R.R. Mohan/Shankar Narayanan                     08/11/2014
 Additional Environmental and/or
 Social Development Specialist(s):

 Approved by:
 Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Francis Fragano/Zia Aljalaly                     08/11/2014
   Comments:
 Sector Manager:                     Shobha Shetty                                    08/12/2014
   Comments:




                                                                    (Template Version November 2007)
