                                                                                    85586
                         INTEGRATEDSAFEGUARDSDATASHEET
                                 APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.: (generated once uploaded)
Date prepared/updated: February 5, 2014

I. Basic Information

 .
1 Basrc        . tD at a
        . P r0.1ec
Country: Indonesia                               Project ID: P147893
Project Name: Technical Assistance for the Surabaya Urban Transport Corridor Development
Project
Task Team Leader: Taimur Samad
Estimated Appraisal Date: February 27, 2014      Estimated Board Date: N/A
Managing Unit: EASIS                             Lending Instrument: NLT A
Sector: Urban Transport (75%), Public Administration (25%)
Theme: Urban Development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.): N/A
IDA Amount (US$m.): N/A
GEF Amount (US$m.): N/A
PCF Amotmt (US$m.): N/A
Other financing amounts by source: USD 1.25 million (Indonesia Infrastructure Support Trust
Fund)
Environmental Category: A
Is this a transferred project                    Yes []                 No [X]
Simplified Processing                            Simple [X]             Repeater •]
Is this project processed under OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises       Yes [ ]     No [X]
and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives:

The objectives of the Project is to provide Technical Assistance (TA) to conduct a feasibility
study to support the development of Urban Transport Corridors in Surabaya, which aim: (i) to
facilitate improvements in accessibility and mobility in Surabaya, and; (ii) to strengthen the City
Government of Surabaya' s capacity for integrated urban transport plarming and management.

3. Project Description:

The potential Urban Transport Corridor Development Project which will be supported by this
TA activity (hereinafter defined as the Project), aims to apply an integrated planning systems
approach to link infrastructure investments in mass transit with the development of urban
corridors, enabling Surabaya to maximize the social and economic returns from urban transport
investments. This T A is one of three T A activities under the Surabaya Urban Corridor
Development Program that form an umbrella engagement supporting the City with technical
assistance and advisory services at a total cost of US$1.63 million. This particular TA
component is funded in the form of an RETF of US$ 1.25 million, which will be implemented by
the Directorate of Transport, Bappenas.

The Project consists of two main activities and outputs:
I. Feasibility Analysis:
     (a) Ascertain best alignments, alternative investment options and sequencing.
     (b) Review, and revise where necessary, the demand forecasts and travel patterns along
          the alignments.
     (c) Conduct an economic cost-benefit analysis and assess financial and technical
          feasibility of transport technology.

2. Reference Design and Institutional Support:
      (a) Develop a reference design for core components of the selected routes, stations, and
          corridor improvements.
      (b) Propose associated institutional reforms required to ensure quality operations and
          management of the Surabaya transport system.
      (c) Prepare an environmental impact analysis (AMDAL), Land Acquisition and
          Resettlement Plan (LARAP) and Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan (as
          part of the Environmental Management Plan of the AMDAL) in compliance with the
          policies, principles and requirements of the World Bank safeguards policies. Capacity
          building related to the preparation of these instruments will be simultaneosuly carried
          out for the Directorate of Transport, Bppenas and the relevant officials of the City
          Government of Surabaya, in anticipation of the foreseen MRT system investment.
      (d) Prepare Pre-Qualification Documents and Bid Documents for a detailed design and/or
          a DBOT contract, depending on the COS' chosen development and procurement
          strategy.
      (e) Recommend an approprate formula for risk allocation and mitigation if a PPP
          arrangement is decided upon.
      (f) Assess regulatory environment and institutional setting to create a supporting
          environment for urban corridor management.

It is foreseen that the Feasibility Study will result in a choice of investments in a particular
sequence. For example, developing the N-S corridor and developing the E-W corridor in parallel
or in series, or combining alignments to maximize ridership potential for each level of
infrastructure investment.

Technical recommendations on regulatory, planning and institutional reforms and capacity-
building will be made to ensure sustainable operations and management of the Surabaya MRT
System, in line with the chosen financial structure.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

The Project will consist of a feasibility study and project preparation for an MRT system in the
City of Surabaya, Indonesia's second largest city and the provincial capital of East Java
Province. Hence, there are no physical works planned under the Project and not any physical
characteristics directly relevant to the safeguard issues arising from this Project. There are,
however, potential safeguards implications relating to the future potential investment and
implementation of an MR.T system, which is intended to arise from the activities in this Project.
Bank financing for that future investment has not yet been confirmed. The MRT system is likely
to traverse highly-populated areas of Surabaya's central city, which comprises a large number of
residents, a number of waterways, and sites of cultural heritage value that are being conserved by
the City of Surabaya. The initial estimation of the alignment of the MRT system will be 16.7 km
from North to South and 23 km from East to West. The focus of the feasibility study will likely a
first phase of the MRT system, i.e. the 16.7 North to South proposed tramline investment.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

Social Safeguards: Indira Dharmapatni
Environmental Safeguards: Krisnan Pitradjaja

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)
                                                                           Yes           No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                       X
The Project consists of Technical Assistance to the City Government
of Surabaya to prepare the Feasibility Study (FS) for the MRT
system. It is planned that the MRT will be built along the North-
South (approximately 16.7 km) and East-West (approximately 23
km) corridors in the city, in iterative phases. Given the scale of the
foreseen MRT investment, there is a large area of potential
influence, where significant environmental and social impacts may
occur. The Project should cover the preparation of an Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), or ADMAL study in
Indonesia term, for the future investment in the MRT system
consistent with Bank safeguards requirements for OP/BP 4.0 1. The
stand-alone ESIA will consist of environmental screening, scoping,
and analysis of alternatives and assessment of the project's area of
influence (including associated and ancillary impact to facilities,
linked activities and cumulative impacts). This ESIA should be
prepared to evaluate potential environmental and social impacts (due
to the urban setting of the project) and to prepare the mitigation
measures.. An Environmental and. Social Management Plan (ESMP)
should also be prepared as part of the feasibility study. In addition,
the Project should cover capacity building activities on
environmental management, including Physical Cultural Resources
(PCR), for the relevant stakeholders, particularly Directorate of
Transport, Bappenas and the City Government of Surabaya.
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                             X
Given the TA nature of this activity, the Project will not directly
involve activities that will cause significant degradation and
conversion to natural habitats and critical natural habitats.

However the feasibility study to be supported under the Project will
analyze potential investments that will require further assessment as
to their impact on natural habitats. This TA will prepare a stand-
alone Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the
planned project with adequate environmental screening, scoping,
analysis of alternatives and assessment of the investment's area of
influence (including associated and ancillary impact to facilities and
cumulative impacts), in order to ensure that there is no significant
degradation or conversion of natural habitats and critical natural
habitats. If the ESIA does determine that the future investment will
have an impact on natural habitat areas, the ESIA and ESMP should
prepare mitigation measures, according to the Bank's standards.

While no potential impacts to natural habitats are expected under the
grant, OP/BP 4.04 has been triggered as a precautionary measure for
this activity. The ESIA to be conducted under the activity will
identify any potential impacts to natural habitats that might be
caused by the proposed underlying investment and mitigation will be
incorporated into the associated ESMP.
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                          X
The Project is not expected to lead to an investment that is located in
or affect forest.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                     X
The Project does not relate to activities that use or lead to use of
pesticides.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                  X
The City Government of Surabaya is planning to build the MRT in
two urban corridors, North-South and East-West. The Project will
determine the most feasible alternatives for alignments, although
both routes are likely to pass through historic areas of Surabaya,
where various structures were built during the colonial period are
listed as conservation sites. The Project, as part of the feasibility
study, will need to prepare a plan for PCR Management for the MRT
investment to avoid adverse impacts on historic sites, or if this
cannot be avoided, to appropriately mitigate and manage impacts of
the impacted PCR. This will form part of the ESIA and ESMP.

Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                               X
No Indigenous Peoples are.present in the investment area within the
City of Surabaya
    Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                          X
    The Project's outputs will lead to investment in an MRT System,
    which is planned to pass through built-up areas of the City of
    Surabaya, where settlements, businesses, PCR, and public social
    facilities are located. The Project through the feasibility study should
    assess the social impacts of the MRT investment (including a social
    assessment, potential land acquisition and relocation), prepare a
    Draft Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARAP) to address
    potential impacts. These activities will be carried out as specific
    outputs of the Project. The Draft LARAP will be updated during the
    MRT implementation as better information regarding the investment
    would be available, results of the Detailed Engineering Design
    (DED) will be available and the number of PAPs may change
    accordingly. The capacity building component of the Project should
    include management practices for any involuntary resettlement that
    is expected to occur during the implementation of the MRT system.

    Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                                X
    The Project does not involve a plan to build a dam.

    Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                                           X
    The Project does not involve any activities that are, in any way,
    linked to International Waterways.

    Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                                    X
    The Project does not involve any activities that are, in any way,
    linked to disputed areas.


    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary ofKey Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project. Identify and describe any
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This Project triggers OP/BP 4.01, OP/BP 4.04, OP/BP 4.11, and OP/BP 4.12 as the foreseen investment in
the MRT System, which is prepared by the Project activities, will cause environmental and social impacts,
including involuntary resettlement. This should be accounted for in the design .and implementation of the
Project activities.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
The Project supports a Feasibility Study and preparation of the Surabaya Urban Transport Corridor
development, which is expected to lead to an investment in an MRT system in the City of Surabaya. The
potential future investment will have potential environmental and social impacts, including involuntary
resettlement, which will require that safeguards impacts are addressed.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to         h~lp   avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no alternatives to the current proposed activity. However, the Feasibility Study will evaluate
alternatives alignment and design for the proposed follow-on MRT investment, which will attempt to
avoid, or where it is required, minimize and mitigate the potential environmental and social impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The grant recipient and executing agent, Directorate of Transport, Bappenas, will be required to assess the
potential environmental and social impacts, including involuntary resettlement, which will be caused by
proposed future MRT System that the Project is supporting to develop through a feasibility study and
related project preparation activities. Hence, the Project will include the preparation of safeguard
instruments to address these potential impacts as discussed above.

The Terms of Reference (ToR) for the consultants to carry out the Feasibility Study will include the
preparation of safeguard instruments that meets the World Bank's environmental and social safeguard
policies, principles and requirements. The consultants will be required to prepare a LARAP and an ESIA
or AMDAL study (that includes the PCR Management Plan) for the MRT investment as part of the
Project's activity. The World Bank will provide support and oversight to Directorate of Transport,
Bappenas to assure that there is adequate compliance and attention to safeguard issues. The ToRs for the
consultant, related to the preparation of the environmental and social safeguard instruments, will need to
be approved by the Bank. A draft ToRs for the feasibility study, including environmental and social
aspects, has been prepared and reviewed by the Bank. Additionally, the ToRs for project preparation
should also include the design and implementation of capacity building on environmental and social
safeguards for Directorate of Transport, Bappenas and the City Government of Surabaya, with particular
focus on modules and delivery methods relevant to MRT Systems.

The Directorate of Transport, Bappenas has longstanding experience in coordinating the preparation of
multilateral investments in the roads, rail and urban transport sectors - including with the World Bank. As
such the Directorate is familiar with World Bank policies and procedures for environmental and social
safeguards. Nonetheless, the Directorate will need to be supported to assure sufficient oversight and
management of the consultants who are responsible for carrying out the environmental and social impact
assessments of the Project (i.e. ESIA, or AMDAL study, including PCR Management), preparing the
LARAP, as well as designing the capacity building on environmental and social safeguards.

At a later stage, beyond the scope of this Project and under the implementation of the proposed first phase
of the MRT investment, the City Government of Surabaya will be responsible for the implementation of
the infrastructure investments and the application safeguards instruments produced under this Project. The
City has some experiences with World Bank supported projects, such as the Surabaya Urban Development
Project (SUDP), in early 2000s, and participation in PNPM-Urban, among other activities. Several key city
officials already have the capacity and understanding to implement World Bank safeguards policies.
However, COS capacity to manage environmental and social safeguards will need to be updated and
tailored to the jssues that arise under the MRT investment. The types of capacity-building that will be
required for COS should be developed during Project preparation.

S. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are:

       Directorate of Transport, Bappenas is the grant recipient and will be responsible for Project
       implementation.
       The consultants that carry out the Feasibility Study, and
       The City Government of Surabaya, who are the primary beneficiaries of the Project.

Terms of Reference for the Feasibility Study and project preparation activities will stipulate the
requirements to produce and fully disclose two key safeguard outputs (LARAP and ESIA or AMDAL -
including PCR Management) that are designed to address potential environmental and social impacts,
including involuntary resettlement. The ToRs for the consultant will also include consultation processes
with the relevant stakeholders involved, and potential Project Affected Persons, that will need to be
undertaken during the preparation of these two safeguards instruments.

The City Government of Surabaya (COS) will work with the consultant of the Project in carrying out
public consultations during the preparation of AMDAL and LARAP and in the overall preparation process
of these two instruments. Implementation of these two instruments will be the responsibility of the COS.
The COS will ensure that the institutional arrangements and financing to implement these two instruments
will be in place, as planned.



    B. Disclosure Requirements Date

     Environmental Assessment/Audit/Mana2ement Plan/Other:
      Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          N/A
      Date of receipt by the Bank
      Date of "in-country" disclosure
      Date of submission to InfoShop
      For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
      Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
     Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
      Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          N/A
      Date of receipt by the Bank
      Date of "in-country" disclosure
      Date of submission to lnfoShop
     lndi~enous   Peoples Plan/Plannintz Framework:
      Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          N/A
      Date of receipt by the Bank
      Date of "in-country" disclosure
      Date of submission to Info Shop
     Pest Mana~ement Plan:
      Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          N/A
      Date of receipt by the Bank
      Date of "in-country" disclosure
      Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
 N/A

 C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is
finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including         Yes []        No [X]       NIA [ ].
EMP) report?                                                 This TA project will not require a
                                                             stand-alone ESIA and ESMP. Instead
                                                             this TA project will finance the
                                                             preparation of a stand-alone ESIA
                                                             which also includes PCR
                                                             Management Plan, with ESMP for a
                                                             future investment project.
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector     N/A
Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP            N/A
incorporated in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or    Yes [ ]      No [X]        N/A []
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or     The Project will take place in an
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does   urban setting where the the potential
the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the    degradation or conversion of natural
Bank?                                                        habitats is unlikely. Nonetheless,
                                                             OP/BP 4.04 has been triggered as a
                                                             precautionary measure to ensure that
                                                             as part of the ESIA adequately
                                                             assesses the potential for the future
                                                             proposed investment to impact
                                                             natural habitats.
OP 4.09 - Pest Mana2ement
Does the EA adequately address the pest management           Yes []       No []        N/A [X]
issues?
Is a separate PMP required?                                  Yes [ ]      No []        N/A [X]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a          N/A
safeguards specialist or Sector Manager? Are PMP
requirements included in project design? If yes, does the
project team include a Pest Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11- Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to             Yes [X]        No[]       N/A [ ].
cultural property?                                           The ESIA that will be prepared for
                                                             the future investment project will
                                                             include a PCR Management plan.
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate    Yes, as above.
the potential adverse impacts on physical cultural
resources?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes [ ]      No[]     N/A [X]
Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in
consultation with affected Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         N/A
safeguards or Sector Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the    N/A
design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
Social Development Unit?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes [ ]      No [X]    N/A[]
framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         N/A
safeguards or Sector Manager review and approve the
plan/policy framework/process framework?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes [ ]      No []    N/A [X]
issues and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to   N/A
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if     N/A
so, does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                       Yes [ ]      No []    N/A [X]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the               N/A
independent Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and
approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been              N/A
prepared and arrangements been made for public
awareness and training?
OP/BP 7.50- Pro.iects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes [ ]      No [ ]    N/A [X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the    N/A
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
and sent?
What are the reasons for the exception? Please explain:    N/A.
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                    N/A
OP/BP 7.60- Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the    Yes [ ]      No []    N/A [X]
international aspects of the project, including the
procedures to be followed, and the recommendations for
dealing with the issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer                  N/A
referred to in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to           Yes []       No []        N/A [X]
the World Bank's lnfoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a            N/A
public place in a form and language that are
understandable and accessible to project-aff~cted groups
and local NGOs?
All Safe2uard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [X]       No []        N/A []
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been              Yes. The Project includes costs for
included in the project cost?                                     preparing the safeguard instruments
                                                                  as part of the Feasibility Study and
                                                                  costs for capacity building on
                                                                  safeguards in the project preparation
                                                                  component.
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the                  Yes. The Directorate of Transport,
project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and           Bappenas will monitor and evaluate
measures related to safeguard policies?                           the consultant in implementing the
                                                                  TOR to ensure that the activities
                                                                  related to the assessment and
                                                                  preparation of safeguard instruments
                                                                  is sufficiently implemented.
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been                Yes.
agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
reflected in the project legal documents?


D. Approvals

 Signed and submitted by:                               Name                                Date
 Task Team Leader:                   Taimur Samad                                        3 February
                                                                                            2014
 Approved by:

                                    ~4~~-{
 Regional Safeguards
 Coordinator:                                                                        -~4~~.2.,, ).-4
   Comments:                                l                \,
 Sector Manager:                     Nathan M. Belete
   Comments:
