                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6474
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                            Project ID:    P143184
                            Project Name:      SUSTAINABLE PROD. IN AREAS PREVIOUSLY CONVERTED TO
                                               AGRICULTURAL USE (P143184)
                            Task Team          David Tuchschneider
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated   30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSAR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (78%), Public administration- Agriculture,
                                              fishing and forestry (17%), Forestry (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural policies
                                              and institutions (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      11.12           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.50
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                              10.62
                              Total                                                                                     11.12
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To promote the adoption of selected sustainable low carbon emission agricultural technologies by
                           mid-sized producers in the Cerrado. This will be achieved through a pilot training and technical
                           assistance program aimed at reducing the technological knowledge gap.

                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed operation is financed by a grant from the Forest Investment Program in the Strategic
                         Climate Fund Grant in the amount of USD 10.62 million. The project is part of the Brazil
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Investment Plan (BIP) and will be implemented by SENAR (National Service for Rural Training),
                         under a Cooperation Agreement with MAPA (Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food Supply),
                         and the technical support of EMBRAPA (Brazilian Enterprise for Agriculture and Livestock
                         Research).

                         The target population is about 12,000 producers with medium-sized farms (production area between
                         4 and 70 fiscal units ) and 160 field technicians who will provide technical assistance to farmers.
                         Medium-sized producers are targeted because: (i) medium-sized production units form the bulk of
                         total agricultural land use in the Cerrado; (ii) small farmers can access other programs promoting
                         sustainable agriculture and livestock, tailored to their realities, and with greater financial advantages
                         such as the National Program to Strengthen Family Farming (PRONAF) providing credit and
                         technical assistance and the Plan Brasil sem Miséria focusing on the poorest family farmers. Large
                         farmers can access the technological know-how without government assistance.

                         The Project has three components: (i) producer training; (ii) field technical assistance; and (iii)
                         project management, monitoring and evaluation. Component structure is related to the project's
                         experimental design, with components 1 and 2 generating two intervention groups (producers with
                         training; producers with training and technical assistance) as well as a control group. The Project will
                         focus on four ABC Plan technologies: (i) no-tillage farming systems; (ii) degraded pasture recovery;
                         (iii) crop-livestock-forestry integration (iLPF); and (iv) cultivated commercial forests. The Project
                         will be implemented over a four year period. The fourth year will focus on impact assessment.

                         Component 1: Producer training (USD 3.2 million – FIP 100%) –
                             a) Provision of support for the planning and preparation of dissemination events and training
                         courses in the Cerrado States, including, inter alia: (i) identification of demands, prioritized
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technologies and sub-regions in each of the Cerrado States; (ii) selection of master ABC consultants;
                         (iii) definition and preparation of training courses and production of printed and audiovisual course
                         materials; and (iv) selection and training of course instructors.
                             b) Carrying out of a communication and dissemination campaign to inform potential
                         stakeholders (farmers, farm technicians and rural institutions) about the scope and rules of the ABC
                         Plan and the Project through dissemination events and mass-media outlets.
                             c) Provision of training of rural producers and farm technicians in ABC Plan technologies and
                         farm management including courses on, inter alia: (i) no-tillage farming systems; (ii) recovery of
                         degraded pasture; (iii) crop-livestock-forestry integration; (iv) cultivated commercial forests; and (v)
                         farm management and formulation of project proposals for ABC funding.

                         Component 2: Field technical assistance (USD 5.2 million – FIP 100%) – Carrying out of pilot
                         technical assistance program to selected rural producers located in four of the Cerrado States ,
                         including, inter alia:
                            a) the selection and training of technical supervisors and field technicians for the provision of
                         technical assistance to rural producers on ABC Plan technologies;
                            b) the provision of technical assistance for the implementation of ABC Plan technologies to
                         selected farms; and
                            c) the establishment of Technological Reference Units (URTs) in selected farms, as a basis for
                         the dissemination of practical lessons learned in the adoption of ABC Plan technologies to Project


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         stakeholders.

                         Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (USD 1.7 million – FIP 1.2 million) –
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Provision of support for the technical and administrative management of the Project, as well as
                         supervision, auditing and monitoring and evaluation activities.

                         FIP Brazil Investment Plan (BIP):

                         The proposed project is part of Brazil’s Investment Plan (BIP) under FIP. BIP was approved by the
                         FIP Sub-Committee in May 2012. BIP aims at promoting sustainable land use and improving
                         management of the productive landscape in the Cerrado, the second largest biome in Brazil and
                         South America. BIP will contribute to reducing pressure on the remaining forests, reducing GHG
                         emissions and increasing CO2 sequestration. The FIP subcommittee agreed to a range of funding of
                         BIP for USD$50-70 million in FIP resources. BIP’s specific objectives are (1) improving
                         environmental management in areas previously anthropized and (2) producing and disseminating
                         environmental information at the biome scale. BIP comprises coordinated actions by three
                         Ministries: the Ministry of the Environment (MMA), the Ministry of Science, Technology &
                         Innovation (MCTI), and MAPA.

                         Each project in BIP will fund investments and activities supporting actions of the various
                         implementing agencies and their relationships with other entities. In addition to addressing
                         interagency coordination, BIP will also contribute to resolving operational, regulatory and
                         management challenges. The BIP strategy mainly targets the following FIP investment areas: (i)
                         investments outside the forest sector necessary to reduce the pressure on forests; and (ii) institutional
                         capacity, forest management and information. As a complementary measure, BIP also focuses on the
                         third FIP investment area by supporting mitigation actions related to forests, such as encouraging
                         forest recovery of Legal Reserves (RLs) and Permanent Preservation Areas (APPs) in landholdings.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Much of Brazil's agricultural growth has taken place in the Cerrado biome, the Brazilian savanna-
                         forest mosaic located in central Brazil, south and east of the Amazon region, covering almost one
                         quarter, or 2.04 million km2, of the country. The biome consists mostly of tropical savannas
                         woodland, grasslands and forests. It has been the stage for an expansion of agricultural production,
                         primarily through cattle ranching on natural and planted pastures since the 1940s, and, since the
                         1970s, through mechanized commercial production of soybean, maize and cotton. Agriculture
                         occupies around 22 million hectares in the Cerrado (11% of land area), and there are around 50
                         million heads of cattle, almost 33% of the national herd, on 54 million hectares of pasture (25% of
                         land area), of which approximately 40 to 80% are degraded to a greater or lesser extent.

                         Twenty two percent of Brazil’s population (43 million) lives in the Cerrado but only 16 percent of
                         the population resides in the rural areas. The Center-West region has the largest portion of the land
                         area occupied by rural properties (32% of the total) in Brazil and has the highest average area per
                         property of all farms in the country (397.2 ha).

                         There are also a large number of small and medium farms that use older production techniques and
                         do not necessarily have access to new technologies related with low carbon agriculture. The Cerrado
                         region now has a unique opportunity to develop new paradigms combining modern and sustainable
                         agriculture with the conservation of natural resources and the promotion of human well-being. Small


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         farms can ill afford the introduction of new technologies, but the project is expected to generate
                         positive co-benefits for traditional communities and small farmers as it will reduce (a) pressure upon
                         forest resources that are mostly preserved at indigenous lands and traditional community and (b)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contamination by agrochemicals of water resources in which the livelihood of these vulnerable
                         populations mostly rely.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                         Agnes Velloso (LCSEN)
                         Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The proposed Project consists essentially of an
                         BP 4.01                                              agricultural technology transfer project and thus,
                                                                              a Category B is proposed. The Project is expected
                                                                              to have a positive impact on the environment as it
                                                                              seeks to promote the reduction of the
                                                                              environmental impacts of agricultural activities
                                                                              mainly through capacity-building and rural
                                                                              extension activities. Notwithstanding these
                                                                              positive impacts, the proposed Project will be
                                                                              working in some sensitive biodiversity and dry
                                                                              forest areas and will promote certain agricultural
                                                                              land uses and commercial practices that could
                                                                              have environmental impacts.
                                                                              Based on the preliminary assessments undertaken
                                                                              and previous projects, potentially adverse impacts
                                                                              are expected to be small since all Project actions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              are intended to promote and consolidate the
                                                                              adoption of sustainable agricultural practices to
                                                                              reduce carbon emissions.
                                                                              The MAPA prepared an Environmental and
                                                                              Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                                                                              including social and environmental assessments,
                                                                              to provide guidance on potential issues that could
                                                                              arise during Project implementation. Potentially
                                                                              adverse social and environmental impacts are
                                                                              expected to be small, as they will be avoided or
                                                                              minimized through appropriate preventive and
                                                                              mitigation measures. The ESMF includes
                                                                              reference to all activities that could be supported
                                                                              by the project, especially those related to animal
                                                                              waste management and commercial forest
                                                                              plantations.
                                                                              This report also contains a detailed description of
                                                                              the potential environmental impacts of Project
                                                                              activities and supported production



                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                                                                     methodologies, particularly regarding natural
                                                                     habitats, forest resources and pest management,
                                                                     and identifies preventive/corrective measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     The ESMF addresses the distributive impacts of
                                                                     the project as well as gender-related issues. It
                                                                     includes an analysis of economic or social
                                                                     impacts that project activities might have on
                                                                     vulnerable groups, traditional communities or
                                                                     poor rural dwellers.
                                                                     The ESMF was submitted to and approved by the
                                                                     Bank, and consulted with key stakeholders before
                                                                     appraisal. The ESMF report has been disclosed
                                                                     and disseminated through MAPA and SENAR
                                                                     websites .
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Activities under the proposed Project should lead
                                                                     to positive impacts on natural habitats, such as
                                                                     their conservation and recovery in private
                                                                     properties. Thus, OP 4.04 is triggered and
                                                                     therefore all planned activities must follow World
                                                                     Bank policies, identifying monitoring and
                                                                     management activities in the ESMF to prevent or
                                                                     mitigate any possible negative impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           This policy is triggered given that the specific
                                                                     project sites have not been identified and some
                                                                     field sites may present issues related to the
                                                                     management of forest resources, especially in
                                                                     activities related to commercial forest plantations
                                                                     and integrated crop-livestock-forestry systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     This Project will contribute to the conservation of
                                                                     the Cerrado biome. It is expected to have a
                                                                     positive impact by promoting the restoration and/
                                                                     or preservation of Legal Reserves and Permanent
                                                                     Preservation Areas in private lands, in compliance
                                                                     with the Brazilian Forest Code.
                                                                     The ESMF considers the requirements of OB/BP
                                                                     4.36 whenever restoration and plantation
                                                                     activities are being planned, and includes
                                                                     screening criteria to ensure that project activities
                                                                     identify potential adverse impacts on the forest
                                                                     resource or on the social risks associated with any
                                                                     proposed changes to forest management,
                                                                     especially as it relates to small holders or other
                                                                     vulnerable groups.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           Although the agricultural technologies to be
                                                                     promoted by the proposed Project are focused on
                                                                     the recovery of degraded areas and pasture land;
                                                                     the implementation of low carbon production


                                                             Page 5 of 10
                                                                        systems such as cattle raising-forestry or
                                                                        cultivation-cattle raising-forestry integration
                                                                        systems; the implementation, maintenance and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        management of planted forests; and the
                                                                        appropriate disposal of debris and waste, among
                                                                        other practices that are more environmentally
                                                                        sustainable than conventional production
                                                                        practices, they may involve the use of agricultural
                                                                        chemicals. Furthermore, the project will train
                                                                        rural extension agents who will provide support to
                                                                        producers on the recognized agricultural
                                                                        technologies. Thus, this policy is triggered and
                                                                        the ESMF includes guidance on OP/BP 4.09
                                                                        requirements for field interventions and for
                                                                        leveraging these requirements through the
                                                                        extension agents trained under the project and
                                                                        includes screening procedures to identify any
                                                                        adverse risks, as well as measures to promote
                                                                        careful management and use of agricultural
                                                                        chemicals in all situations where appropriate
                                                                        under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           It is not expected that Project implementation
                         BP 4.11                                        activities would have any negative impact on
                                                                        archaeological or physical cultural resources, as
                                                                        all field activities will occur in private lands that
                                                                        were already converted to agriculture. This policy
                                                                        is not being triggered at this time.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The project will not interfere with Indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Peoples as its activities will focus on privately run
                                                                        farms.
                                                                        The Project should result on reduced emissions/
                                                                        improved carbon sequestration and should ease
                                                                        pressures for deforestation on the remaining
                                                                        forests. Thus and insofar as its activities reach
                                                                        farming areas surrounding indigenous lands,
                                                                        indigenous peoples may derive co-benefits related
                                                                        with the reduction of pressure for converting new
                                                                        native forest areas, the protection of headwaters
                                                                        and riparian zones, the improvement of the
                                                                        physical, chemical and biological conditions of
                                                                        the soil, the reduction of water and soil pollution,
                                                                        and the better conservation of natural resources
                                                                        on which their livelihoods hugely rely.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           Activities supported by the project will not
                         4.12                                           require land acquisition or imply on the creation
                                                                        of Protected Areas. Therefore, involuntary
                                                                        population displacement and/or negative impacts


                                                                Page 6 of 10
                                                                                on livelihoods due to land acquisition are not
                                                                                envisaged as a consequence of the project and OP
                                                                                4.12 is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                                                                not finance any dams nor will it rely on the
                                                                                operations of existing dams.
                            Projects on International           No              This policy is not triggered since the project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                not affect any international waterways as defined
                                                                                under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                            7.60                                                work in any disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                                policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Potentially adverse social and environmental impacts are expected to be small, as they can be
                              avoided or minimized through mitigation measures. Based on the preliminary assessments
                              undertaken, no significant negative impact is expected. Activities under the proposed project
                              should lead to mostly positive impacts on natural habitats and forests, such as their conservation
                              and recovery by promoting the restoration and/or preservation of legal reserves and permanent
                              preservation areas in private lands, in compliance with the Brazilian forest code. The agricultural
                              technologies to be promoted focus on technologies that are more environmentally sustainable than
                              conventional production practices. Furthermore, the project will train rural extension agents to
                              support producers in the low carbon agricultural technologies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              MAPA has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including
                              social and environmental assessments, to provide guidance on potential issues that could arise
                              during project implementation. The ESMF contains a detailed description of the potential
                              environmental and social impacts of project activities and supported production methodologies,
                              particularly regarding natural habitats, forest resources and pest management, and identifies
                              preventive/corrective measures. The ESMF includes screening procedures identifying any adverse
                              risks as well as measures to promote careful management and use of agricultural chemicals.
                              Furthermore, the project will train rural extension agents to support producers in the low carbon
                              agricultural technologies.
                              The ESMF was submitted to the Bank on December 9, 2013. The approved ESMF report was



                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           disclosed and disseminated through MAPA and SENAR websites and consulted with key
                           stakeholders.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Rural producers with medium-sized farms and field technicians are the main beneficiaries of the
                           project. Small farms may indirectly benefit from the pilot testing of new technologies. Indigenous
                           peoples and traditional communities may have indirect co-benefits as project activities may reach
                           farming areas surrounding their lands and territories and, consequently, may contribute (a) to
                           reduce pressures for deforestation on the remaining forests and/or for converting new native forest
                           areas on which the livelihood of these traditional populations mostly rely on and (b) to protect
                           headwaters and riparian zones and improve the physical, chemical and biological conditions of the
                           soil, reducing water and soil pollution.
                           The project forms part of the BIP, which has been widely and publicly submitted for the
                           consideration of diverse stakeholders through informational and consultation sessions. Up to now
                           representatives of the private sector, academia, NGOs, social movements and State environmental
                           agencies, as well as indigenous peoples and traditional communities have been consulted.
                           Project specific consultations have been held with key stakeholders (NGO, specialists from
                           Universities, research centers and civil society organizations in the eleven states) who have been
                           contacted by mail by SENAR and MAP. An interactive process of public consultation was carried
                           out by making the full version of the ESMF available on MAPA and SENAR websites for a period
                           of 28 days (December 2013/January 2014). Interested parties were able to access the report and to
                           submit their suggestions and critical comments. After this period of public consultations, the
                           feedback received was analyzed and properly answered, reported to the Bank and included as an
                           Annex of the ESMF. The new version of the ESMF was disclosed on MAPA and SENAR
                           websites and disclosed at the InfoShop on January 8, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     06-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                          13-Dec-2013
                           Comments: http://www.agricultura.gov.br/portal/page/portal/Internet-MAPA/pagina-inicial/
                                         desenvolvimento-sustentavel/plano-abc/consulta-public a
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the



                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or  EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?

                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: David Tuchschneider
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                     Date: 07-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
