                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR8248
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Egypt, Arab Republic of                      Project ID:           P080228
                            Project Name:       Health Insurance Systems Development Project (P080228)
                            Task Team           Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           26-Oct-2009                                  Estimated   21-Dec-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GHNDR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Compulsory health finance (93%), Public administration- Health (7%)
                            Theme:            Health system performance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                             No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         76.00              Total Bank Financing:         75.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               1.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 75.00
                              Total                                                                                                 76.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to establish a proven business model for health insurance
                           operations and management that will encompass formalized business
                           processes, a functioning operation and management information system; and the c
                           orresponding operational and management skills in three governorates of Egypt.


                                                                                  Page 1 of 4
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project Development Objective is to establish a proven business model for health insurance
                         operations and management that will encompass formalized business
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processes, a functioning operation and management information system; and the c
                         orresponding operational and management skills in three governorates of Egypt.
                          3. Project Description
                         The Government has requested that the project focus on improvement of the quality of healthcare in
                         publicly operated health facilities as a prerequisite for eligibility for entering into contractual
                         agreement with the soon-to-be-established social health insurance fund. Improving quality of care
                         will entail, first and foremost, independent accreditation of health facilities to meet recognized
                         service quality standards. The latter is also expected to lead to improved patient satisfaction, as well
                         as patient safety, including prevention and control of viral hepatitis, a major public health problem in
                         Egypt as a result of unhygienic and unsafe injection practices.

                         Component One: Family Healthcare Quality Improvement Program (US$70m). This component will
                         fund Quality Improvement and Maintenance Plans (QIMP) that support each participating health
                         center undertake a phased process of instituting quality improvements, and that culminates in
                         independently certified accreditation. Targeting 1,000 family health centers and family healthcare
                         units in ten governorates, the accreditation program is intended to bring the quality of care of these
                         facilities up to appropriate internationally recognized quality standards and to enhance system
                         responsiveness at the family health center/family healthcare unit level.
                         Component Two Implementation Support (US$5m). This component will finance the cost of
                         technical assistance, external financial audits, external independent quality audits and project
                         management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project, as restructured, is now directly pro-poor in its design as it will target the poorest
                         governorates in Egypt: Aswan, Qena, Luxor, Sohag, Assiut, Minia, Beni Suif, Giza, Sharkya, and
                         Beheira comprising the poorest 1000 villages (one health facility per village) as defined by
                         CAPMAS (the national statistical body of Egypt).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Banu Setlur (GENDR)
                         Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No




                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                NA
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                NA
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                NA
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                NA
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                NA
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            The project is classified C, and thus no safeguards instruments were prepared.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                      Page 3 of 4
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Alaa Mahmoud Hamed Abdel-
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                Date: 09-Oct-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
