                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1079
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                            Project ID:    P145055
                            Project Name:      Sustainable Agriculture Transformation Project (P145055)
                            Task Team          Christopher Paul Jackson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Nov-2014                        Estimated   18-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), SME Finance (30%),
                                              Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Public adminis tration- Financial
                                              Sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (50%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Other Private
                                              Sector Development (20%), Export development and competit iveness (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     351.00           Total Bank Financing:                 275.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         12.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               275.00
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                         64.00
                              Total                                                                                     351.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve farming practices and value chains in the targeted


                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         project areas, and promote institutional strengthening of relevant public agencies in effective support
                         to implementation of the Agricultural Restructuring Plan.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The strategic orientation of the vnSAT is to support the implementation of the Government's ARP. It
                         is deigned to combine assistance to policy and institutional reform that supports the reorientation of
                         the central line ministry (MARD) and associated public agencies as well as key private sector
                         stakeholders, and targeted support to two critical sectors where conditions are most suited to the
                         rapid implementation of the new approach embodied in the ARP. The combination of supported
                         policy and institutional reform and results in two key sectors of rice (in MKD) and coffee (in the
                         Central Highlands) aim to deliver development impacts for beneficiary farmers, and will demonstrate
                         the merits of this new orientation thereby building support for the continued and broader
                         implementation of the strategy. The rice and coffee sectors were selected because: (i) they are large
                         and project impacts would therefore be to scale and transformative; (ii) there are existing private
                         sector agribusiness keen to collaborate; and (iii) previous analytical work has already clearly
                         identified current unsustainable practices and the improved practices suitable for scale-up.

                         Alternative approaches were considered and rejected. A project that delivered only technical
                         assistance (TA) to MARD and key agencies would be unlikely to generate sufficient support amongst
                         sector practitioners (including private sector agribusinesses) and would lack the instruments to
                         change on-farm practices. Conversely, a project focused exclusively on support to farmers (and
                         agribusinesses) would deliver results for project beneficiaries but would likely remain an ‘island of
                         excellence’ within a public administration wedded to old practices and unable to address future
                         challenges.

                         VnSAT comprises the following four components: (A) Institutional Strengthening to Support
                         Agricultural Transformation; (B) Supporting Sustainable Rice-Based Systems; (C) Supporting
                         Sustainable Coffee Production and Rejuvenation; and (D) Project Management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Institutional Strengthening to Support Agricultural Transformation ($10.0 million, of
                         which $9.7 million IDA) aims to provide capacity building (CB) and organizational development
                         (OD) to MARD, selected provincial DARDs, other public sector agencies and value chain actors to
                         implement the new roles prescribed in the ARP. This component will support the transition of
                         MARD departments (including DARDs) from a ‘product organization’ to a ‘service organization’.
                         This component is anchored in the sectoral and organizational restructuring plans. Functional and
                         organizational analysis in the first year of the project will determine a set of CB and OD
                         requirements to be supported in subsequent years. This will include CB in a series of priority cross-
                         cutting agendas (green growth, project analysis, sector monitoring, budgeting and planning, etc.).
                         Subcomponent A1 provides this CB and OD to central level departments, based on their
                         departmental restructuring plans and the diagnostic functional analysis. This subcomponent aims to
                         support TA needs for priority reform agendas such as the Government’s program of equitization of
                         agriculture-sector SOEs and other policy areas. Subcomponent A2 provides essentially the same
                         diagnostic and remedial activities for project provinces (plus possibly additional provinces) and, as
                         such, focuses on the service delivery capabilities of the DARDs with regard to local farmer needs –
                         with a natural focus on rice (in the MKD) and coffee (in the Central Highlands). Subcomponent A3
                         will support a range of value chain actors and networks and PPPs. The rice and coffee sectors are to
                         be prioritized but others may be considered. This would include support to the national PPP
                         Secretariat established under the auspices of the World Economic Forum (WEF) and the newly
                         launched Vietnam Coffee Coordination Board (VCCB). It could include support to the related rice-


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         sector bodies such as the Vietnam Food Association (VFA).

                         Component B: Supporting Sustainable Rice-Based Systems ($224.1 million, of which $167.2 million
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IDA) would support activities in the eight MKD provinces of Kien Giang, An Giang, Hau Giang,
                         Tien Giang, Can Tho, Soc Trang, Dong Thap, and Long An. It will adopt a cluster approach, focused
                         on around 30 districts and around 200,000 small-holder rice farmers and approximately 15 private
                         sector agribusinesses. Subcomponent B1 aims to support improved on-farm practices of rice farmers
                         through provision of technical training and demonstration on the basis of establishment and capacity
                         building of farmer organizations (FO). Matching grants would be provided to FOs to support them in
                         (a) certified seed multiplication, (b) leverage their investments in collective harvesting and
                         processing equipment and postharvest facilities to reduce post-harvest losses and improve their
                         marketing position, and (b) improve selected collective infrastructure (i.e. feeder roads, connecting
                         electricity, pumps and irrigation, etc.) to maximize FO production system efficiency including crop
                         rotations and by-products recycling. Advanced FOs will be further assisted to link with
                         agribusinesses (AB) (whom are supported under B2) to improve further marketing aspects (i.e.
                         contract farming, products branding, etc.). Subcomponent B2 aims to support private sector
                         investments in upgrading rice processing technology and facilities for high value and quality rice
                         through provision of medium- and long-term loans via commercial banks on a commercial basis.
                         Selected ABs would directly source paddy from FOs (whom are supported under B1) to re-position
                         themselves into the quality and specialty rice market segments. Subcomponent B3 aims to support
                         technical departments and concerned agencies of MARD and DARDs in the project provinces to
                         improve their extension skills, capacity and quality, enhance capacity of foundation seed production
                         and certification, and monitor GHG emissions and measurements from the systems that will be
                         adopted with improved agronomic practices. A technical collaboration program between MARD and
                         the IRRI that were already initiated under ACP would be supported by the project to provide overall
                         technical support to MARD and project provinces. This would include research on nutritional aspects
                         of rice production.

                         Component C: Supporting Sustainable Coffee Production and Rejuvenation ($100.9 million, of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which $88.7 million IDA) would support the transformation of a substantial portion of Vietnam’s
                         coffee sector to sustainable practices. The project would focus in the five major robusta coffee-
                         producing provinces. The project would adopt a phased approach, with Lam Dong, Dak Lak and Dak
                         Nong provinces moving to full implementation immediately after project effectiveness. For Gia Lai
                         and Kom Tum, the project would focus initially on strengthening landscape planning with direct
                         investments at the farm level to follow. This reflects the different level of preparedness for the
                         project in the two clusters. This component would consist of three sub-components. Subcomponent
                         C1 would support sustainable production practices among targeted coffee farmers via farmer field
                         school training and the provision of matching grants for farmers to adopt one or another of the
                         existing irrigation water saving technologies. Subcomponent C2 would support coffee rejuvenation/
                         replanting by a sub-set of farmers participating in the farmer field schools. Support would be
                         provided to strengthen the existing system of plant nursery inspection/certification. Long-term
                         finance would be provided, via a line of credit (LoC) administered by commercial banks, to cost-
                         share coffee replanting investments, with this disbursement contingent on the application of critical
                         sustainable production practices. Subcomponent C3 would support pilots, at community or district
                         levels, to apply an integrated landscape management approach in coffee-based ecosystems. Support
                         would be provided for awareness raising and for participatory assessment and planning processes and
                         for selective community-level investments in landscape restoration.

                         Component D: Project Management ($13.0 million, of which $9.4 million IDA). This component

                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                         would provide equipment and incremental operating costs for project monitoring, financial
                         management, and procurement activities, support short and long-term technical assistance to the
                         project management team in selected areas, and support analysis and dissemination of findings
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related to the effectiveness and challenges associated with the different institutional and technical
                         models being applied or piloted under the project.

                         The project incorporates a Line of Credit (LoC) for on-lending through a wholesale bank to eligible
                         commercial banks and subsequently to rice export agribusiness in the MKD and farmers investing in
                         coffee rejuvenation in the Central Highlands. The key factors determining the appropriate
                         institutional arrangement for the management of the LoC regarding coffee replantation include: (a)
                         the lending product must be attractive to potential financial institutions – this requires that the pass-
                         on interest rate at which they will access the LoC is sufficient low to allow them to apply a margin to
                         cover cost, risk and acceptable profit; (b) the interest rate to be paid by the end-borrower should be
                         sufficiently affordable to farmer households based on the actual cash flow projection for the coffee
                         replantation during first several years when there will be no income; (c) the LoC is a response to
                         market failure by providing much needed medium and long term loans for coffee replantation and
                         agribusiness’ need to expand their capital investment on fixed asset, the LoC arrangement shall
                         create level playing field by encouraging participating from private sector players i.e. the commercial
                         banks to sustain the long term agriculture financing in Vietnam; (d) GoVN through SBV is launching
                         a subsidy loan scheme to support coffee replantation and rice export agribusiness, this project will
                         demonstrate a model which can create competition and support long term sustainability of mobilizing
                         local resources; and (e) the institutional arrangements need to provide efficient oversight of several
                         PFIs and the proper fiduciary management and safeguard arrangement at reasonable cost. The IDA
                         Credit would be made to the GoVN for on-lending to a wholesale institution who would be
                         responsible to accredit the interested PFIs based on the agreed accreditation criteria.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component A of the project focuses on strengthening the capacities of various public institutions to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design, implement, and monitor agricultural restructuring and sustainability initiatives. Most
                         activities under this component include technical assistance, policy studies, training, and study tours
                         at the central level, which aim to support the ministry and its technical departments in strengthening
                         their technical capacity and management for improved functionality. This component also supports
                         implementation of Components B and C, which is to improve sustainability of rice and coffee
                         sectors. With proper screening mechanisms incorporated in project design plus with close
                         implementation support of the Bank Task Team during project implementation, this component is
                         expected to yield positive environment and social impacts for Vietnam’s agriculture sector especially
                         in its transformation from the current volume target approach to sustainability, quality, and equality.

                         Component B (Supporting Sustainable Rice-Based Systems) will focus on 30 key rice districts in 8
                         provinces in the Mekong Delta, namely Kien Giang, An Giang, Hau Giang, Dong Thap, Can Tho,
                         Soc Trang, Tien Giang, and Long An. Agricultural land accounts for around 70% of the total land
                         area in these provinces. Fields are currently under highly intensive cultivation (2-3 crops per year),
                         with widespread and often excessive use of agro-chemicals (across the MKD over 500,00ha are now
                         triple-cropped). The successful pilots of good farming practices under the Agricultural
                         Competitiveness Project (ACP) will be scaled up under this project to promote reduced use of seed,
                         pesticides and fertilizers, better water management and reduced methane as a greenhouse gas over a
                         bigger scale at some 200,000 ha, involving more than 150,000 farming households. VnSAT supports
                         the application of “3 Gains,3 Reductions” (3G3R) or the “1 Must, 5 Reductions” (1M5R) for rice


                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                         farming in the MKD, which aims for the use of improved seeds (compared to traditional varieties)
                         and for the reduction in fertilizer and pesticide applications and more efficient water use. There will
                         be relatively minor impacts such as dust, noise, waste and wastewater generation during construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of small scale infrastructure of storages, driers and rehabilitation of irrigation canals, feeder roads,
                         etc. These impacts are temporary, localized and manageable. Overall, this component is expected to
                         yield positive impact on environmental and social aspects in the project area. There may be some
                         small scale land acquisition for upgrades of small scale public infrastructure. During project
                         preparation and implementation, the project would explore different options of technical design and
                         construction practices for infrastructure upgrades to avoid land acquisition and minimize socio-
                         environmental impacts.

                         Component C (Supporting Sustainable Coffee Production and Rejuvenation) will be implemented in
                         five key coffee provinces in the Central Highlands, namely Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Lam Dong, Kon
                         Tum and Gia Lai provinces. The Central Highlands area is the location of several environmentally
                         sensitive areas, including forests and national parks. However, since the project is focused
                         exclusively on the introduction of improved agricultural practices and/ or on the rejuvenation of
                         existing coffee farms, the project will not support the expansion of coffee in the areas that could
                         result in negative environmental impacts. Coffee farmers will be supported to deploy Good
                         Agricultural Practices (GAP) which will lower agro-chemical input use, improve water productivity
                         while maintaining (or increasing) on-farm profitability. All rejuvenation areas will be
                         environmentally screened to exclude all irreversible environmental impacts. In the existing coffee
                         areas, the project would support improved agricultural practices, aiming at reducing agro-chemicals
                         and water use.

                         Ethnic minority groups constitute a large proportion of the population in the Central Highlands.
                         Poverty rate in the CH is high compared to the MKD. The socio-economic situation is complex, with
                         indigenous EMs had been displaced historically by a large influx of migrants from northern parts of
                         Vietnam, including a large proportion of EMs from the northern mountainous areas. The project
                         would benefit from the social assessments prepared for the Central Highlands Poverty Reduction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project which was approved by Board last year and up it to incorporate them in project design to
                         target relevant vulnerable groups, both ethnic minorities and other vulnerable households (e.g.
                         female headed) to the extent that they are within the larger cohort of targeted beneficiaries.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Thu Thi Le Nguyen (GENDR)
                         Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project's overall socio-environmental impacts
                         BP 4.01                                              are expected to be positive as the objectives and
                                                                              activities promoting the reduction of chemicals
                                                                              and resource to be used in existing rice and coffee
                                                                              farming practices incorporated into components B
                                                                              and C. As project invests in some small-scale
                                                                              infrastructures such as storage facilities, dryer
                                                                              machines, small-scale irrigation canals, there will
                                                                              be relatively minor impacts such as dust, noise,
                                                                              waste and wastewater generation during


                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                                                                     construction phase. These impacts are small,
                                                                     localised, temporary and manageable through
                                                                     Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     implemented during the construction phase. Since
                                                                     there are also physical investments that will be
                                                                     identified during project appraisal, an
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (with EMP/ECOPs) for project direct
                                                                     financing and a separate ESMF for the line of
                                                                     credit portion have been prepared to guide the
                                                                     screening and mitigation of potential impacts
                                                                     from subprojects.

                                                                     For Component A and C, an analysis of potential
                                                                     environmental and social issues will be included
                                                                     in the TOR for policy and institutional studies and
                                                                     planning supports. The reports will also describe
                                                                     how the identified issues will be addressed either
                                                                     through existing safeguard instruments or
                                                                     provisions in proposed policies and planning.
                                                                     Other TA activities under Component B and C
                                                                     are expected to focus on sustainable farming
                                                                     practices, therefore unlikely cause negative
                                                                     impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No            This policy is not triggered. The project will
                                                                     provide support towards good farming practices
                                                                     in existing farm land and will not acquire new
                                                                     land for farm expansion. The project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     finance any activities that result in adverse
                                                                     impacts on environmentally sensitive areas such
                                                                     as protected areas, forests or special areas for
                                                                     biodiversity conservation. All activities will be
                                                                     screened through the project ESMF to exclude
                                                                     activities that have potential negative impact on
                                                                     existing natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            This policy is not triggered as the project
                                                                     envisions no investment in management of
                                                                     natural forests or plantations or involving
                                                                     conversion or degradation of critical forest areas.
                                                                     Activities to be financed under the project will be
                                                                     implemented in existing cultivated lands. The
                                                                     coffee rejuvenation planning and investment
                                                                     following landscape approach aims to identify
                                                                     appropriate sites for coffee plantation while
                                                                     restoring the landscape.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           The project does not finance the procurement of
                                                                     any chemical pesticides or herbicides. The project


                                                             Page 6 of 13
                                                                         is designed to promote the reduction in chemical
                                                                         pesticide use by enhancing sustainable farming
                                                                         practices. As national Integrated Pest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Management Programs has been being
                                                                         implemented by MARD and DARDs for many
                                                                         years in project provinces, these substitute a
                                                                         standalone Pest Management Plan for the project.
                                                                         The ESMF includes a detailed annex on the
                                                                         national Integrated Pest Management instead of a
                                                                         stand-alone IPM.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The siting of small infrastructure will avoid
                         BP 4.11                                         impacts on any existing known physical cultural
                                                                         resources. However, as subprojects may involve
                                                                         limited earth work, this policy is triggered as a
                                                                         precaution and a “chance finds” clause is included
                                                                         in ESMF/ECOP and construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           This policy is triggered due to the presence of
                                                                         ethnic minorities in the project area. Since
                                                                         location and detailed design of all project
                                                                         activities are not known at project preparation, an
                                                                         EMPF has been prepared. During
                                                                         implementation, where there is a presence of
                                                                         ethnic minorities (i.e. districts or communes), a
                                                                         quick social assessment will be carried out to
                                                                         identify specific impacts on ethnic minorities and
                                                                         other vulnerable groups. Consultations were
                                                                         conducted to (a) receive inputs/feedback of local
                                                                         beneficiaries to design of investment activities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         including addressing their concerns and
                                                                         recommendations; (b) ensure free prior
                                                                         consultations with ethnic minorities and provide
                                                                         them with culturally appropriate benefits; (c)
                                                                         address issues of concern by other stockholders;
                                                                         (d) identify specific actions to mitigate negative
                                                                         impacts. During project implementation, specific
                                                                         impacts and related actions for specific ethnic
                                                                         groups will be detailed in an appropriate EMDP
                                                                         and will be updated annually.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           This is triggered due to the need for land for
                         4.12                                            project activities. Since the exact location of
                                                                         small scale infrastructure schemes are not known
                                                                         at project preparation, the project has developed a
                                                                         RPF in case there is a need for private land
                                                                         acquisitions. During implementation, a
                                                                         Resettlement Plan will be prepared for each
                                                                         infrastructure scheme and reviewed by the Bank
                                                                         prior to implementation.


                                                                 Page 7 of 13
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               This policy is not triggered. No construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams or any activities dependent
                                                                                 on existing or future dams is envisioned in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 project.
                            Projects on International        No                  No sub-projects or activities will be implemented
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 in areas of international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project is not located in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified as an “Environment Category B” under Op/BP 4.01. The project’s overall
                              environmental and social impacts are assessed to be positive. The project aims to support rice and
                              coffee farmers to adopt improved farming practices to promote reduction in the use of chemical
                              fertilizer, agro-chemicals, water and GHG emissions from rice and coffee farming. Negative
                              impacts are assessed to be small, temporary, site-specific, and manageable and can be avoided or
                              minimized through proper design and application of mitigation measures

                             The key potential negative socio-environmental impacts include: (a) improper use and
                             management of agro-chemicals in agricultural production; (b) ineffective management and
                             improper treatment of agricultural wastes and by-products; and (c) civil works impacts (i.e.,
                             increased localized level of dust, noise, disturbance to traffic and community, safety risks, water
                             pollution risks) during the construction of new infrastructure or rehabilitation (i.e., construction of
                             rice storages, processing facilities, feeder roads, etc.). These impacts are assessed to be temporary
Public Disclosure Copy




                             and localized in nature and can be avoided or minimized by proper mitigation measures.

                             The project will not finance the procurement of agrochemicals, pesticides, and herbicides. In
                             contrast, the project is designed to promote the reduction in chemical and pesticide uses by
                             promoting sustainable farming practices on farm and farmer organization basis. The project will
                             follow existing MARD/IRRI’s IPM packages which were introduced to the MKD from
                             1997-2003, and the follow on programs of 3R3G from 2003-2009, and 1M5R from 2009-2014.
                             The project has included safeguards measures to ensure under no circumstances project
                             investments lead to forest loss.

                             Indigenous People (IP). There is significant presence of ethnic minority people in project area. In
                             Central Highland region (Lam Dong, Dak Lak, Gia Lai, Dak Nong, Kon Tum), the percentage of
                             ethnic minority people in population ranges from 23% (in Lam Dong) to 53% (in Kon Tum). It is
                             important to note that some of the EM groups have immigrated to the Central Highlands regions
                             from other areas of the country (primarily the north). This happened in the late ‘80’s and early
                             ‘90’s as part of an explicit Government policy to exploit the economic potentials of the region, and
                             more recently and spontaneously due to still relatively higher percentage of available land, better
                             agricultural conditions, and rapid economic growth providing employment opportunities
                             (primarily in the coffee industry). Findings of recent studies indicated a poor participation record
                             of community members, especially vulnerable groups (e.g. ethnic minority, women) in the


                                                                         Page 8 of 13
                           planning, implementation and monitoring of local socio-economic development. Beside low
                           education level and inherent psychological mindset, limited understanding of Vietnamese might
                           constitute another barrier to ensure the equitable access to project benefit. In the MKD region,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ethnic minority people accounts for 8.3% of the total population. The main ethnic minority groups
                           are Khmer (6.9%) and Hoa (1.1%). In this region, the ethnic minority people mainly concentrate in
                           Soc Trang and An Giang.

                           Involuntary Resettlement (IR). The land acquisition is required due to the construction/
                           rehabilitation of small agricultural infrastructures. However, the impact would be marginal and
                           would be managed through a fair compensation mechanism. In the current project design, specific
                           investments, site will be identified during the project implementation based on demand and
                           continuous consultation with local authority. It is worth to note that given the small impact on land
                           and the potential benefit of the agricultural infrastructure, local community may choose to donate
                           the land without receiving the proposed compensation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long term environmental impacts are assessed to be positive with the promotion of sustainable
                           farming practices in project areas with reduced and appropriate dose for agrochemicals, pesticides,
                           and herbicides and water. More expansive or intensive agricultural productivity in some areas
                           could result in potential indirect impacts such as water pollution from increased use of pesticides,
                           fertilizers or processing facilities. These will be addressed through the project’s support to more
                           environmentally and socially sustainable production. The project will enhance the sustainability
                           and profitability of rice and coffee-based smallholder production systems in the project focused
                           area, including ethnic minority people.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The potential impacts related to project activities are described in previous section. No other
                           negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental and social impacts due to future
Public Disclosure Copy




                           activities are anticipated in the project areas.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) prepared an ESMF, RPF and
                           EMDF during project preparation.

                           As details of sub-projects are not identified during project appraisal and following the project
                           approach of sequencing the infrastructure upgrading or construction following farmers’ adoption
                           of improved farming practices, the ESMF aims to guide the project in screening, assessing and
                           mitigating environmental and social impacts of project activities. An ESMF forms part of the
                           feasibility study in accordance with the country’s environmental regulations and the World Bank
                           OP/BP 4.01. The ESMF requires that activities financed under the Project would not create
                           adverse impacts on the local environment and local communities, and the residual and/or
                           unavoidable impacts will be adequately mitigated. The framework provides guidelines for: (a)
                           safeguard screening, including a negative list of sub-projects that would be excluded from the
                           menu of eligible sub-projects; (b) impacts assessment and preparation and implementation of
                           mitigation measures, including EMP for complex sub-projects or ECOP for simple, small scale
                           subprojects. The sub-project EMP or ECOP will be included in the bidding and contract
                           documents and will be monitored by supervision engineers; (c) preparation of the TOR to include


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                         the analysis of potential environmental and social issues and recommendations to address the
                         identified issues in the policy studies that are supported by the project; (d) safeguard
                         documentation preparation and clearance; (e) safeguard implementation, supervision, monitoring,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and reporting.

                         The project is designed to promote the reduction in chemical and pesticide uses by promoting
                         sustainable farming practices on farm and farmer organization basis. The project design
                         incorporates activities to improve sustainable farming practices and application of integrated pest
                         management (IPM) and good agricultural practices (GAPs) to mitigate environmental impact and
                         improve sustainable use and management of land. The project will follow existing MARD/IRRI’s
                         IPM packages which were introduced to the MKD from 1997-2003, and the follow on programs of
                         3R3G from 2003-2009, and 1M5R from 2009-2014.

                         At this stage as all specific sites at local levels including associated technical parameters are only
                         tentatively planned now and they are subject to changes during implementation. The project
                         investments are truly demand-driven, based on continuous consultation with local communities
                         and their participation is on a voluntary basis. When project implementation begins, implementing
                         agencies will verify and confirm again all the demands from local beneficiaries then include them
                         in their provincial annual work plans. The social impacts of project activities are expected to be
                         minors as during the preparation, implementing agencies have evaluated and excluded all
                         investment proposals that may cause large-scale (or irreversible) social and environment impacts.
                         In addition, a Social Assessment (SA) for the whole project is being prepared by MARD through a
                         review of the relevant SAs recently prepared for similar Bank-financed projects in the same
                         regions (i.e. the Central Highland Poverty Reduction Project and the Agriculture Competitiveness
                         Project).

                         The SA analysis will inform the overall social impact and provide the basis for identifying
                         mitigation measures and preparing Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Ethnic Minority
                         Planning Framework (EMPF) in accordance to Bank safeguard requirements. These frameworks
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be used to guide the preparation of safeguard instruments during the project implementation.
                         The EMPF set out guidelines to: (i) ensure that the EM people receive social and economic
                         benefits that are culturally appropriate; (ii) avoid potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minority
                         communities; and (iii) when such adverse impacts cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or
                         compensate for such effects. The RPF lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria,
                         entitlements, approval procedures, participation features and grievance procedures.

                         MARD and other project implementing agencies at the central and provincial levels have good
                         experiences have been successful in addressing environmental and social impacts in other WB-
                         funded projects. Nevertheless, the project will support capacity building of project implementing
                         agencies with regard to the application of ESMF, RPF, EMPF, EMP and ECOP for safeguards
                         management and compliance.

                         The wholesale bank for the LoC of the project, the Bank for Investment and Development of
                         Vietnam (BIDV), have prepared a separate ESMF, setting out the guidelines and procedures for
                         loans through PFIs to agribusinesses for upgrading rice processing technology and facilities and to
                         coffee smallholder farmers for coffee replanting investments following the application of
                         sustainable production practices. BIDV is responsible for safeguard aspects of the loans with
                         source from vnSAT. BIDV, serving as the wholesale bank for the Rural Finance 3 Project (closed
                         in 2013), have been successful in addressing environmental impacts on implementation of this

                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           project. The ESMF for LoC was built on the environmental instruments and lessons from the
                           Rural Finance 3 Project. The Framework provides guidance for (i) safeguard screening of each
                           loan sourced from vnSAT through a negative list of sub-projects that would be excluded from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           menu of eligible sub-projects, (ii) monitoring and reporting, and (iii) impacts assessment,
                           preparation and implementation of mitigation measures. The ESMF for LoC requires EMP is
                           prepared for complex subprojects, and ECOP for simple, small scale subprojects. It also identifies
                           the environmental requirements of Vietnam (i.e. EIA for complex subprojects and EPC for simple,
                           small scale subprojects). The subproject EMP or ECOP will be included in the contract document
                           and will be monitored by supervision engineers. BIDV has assigned the environmental
                           management team working on Rural Finance 3 Project to be responsible for safeguards
                           compliance of in line with the ESMF for LoC. Each PFI will appoint safeguard staff for loans
                           from vnSAT. Capacity building and training on safeguards for BIDV and PFIs safeguard staff are
                           specified and included in the project training activities. The ESMF for LoC will be approved by
                           BIDV as it is acceptable to the Bank and form part of BIDV lending manual.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           In addition to the MARD, DARDs, CPMU, PPMUs, PFIs, other key stakeholders are local
                           authorities, local communities, mass organizations, and project communities.
                           Public consultation and disclosure of ESMF, EMPF and RPF were carried out during project
                           preparation, especially during the week of October 27, 2014. Key participants included staff of
                           implementing agencies, representatives of local authorities and community members. Feedbacks
                           from all the consultations were taken into account in the preparation of the final documents and for
                           subprojects’ design.
                           Prior to project appraisal, all safeguard documents (ESMF, RPF, EMPF) have been disclosed in
                           Vietnamese at the Vietnam Development Information Center, and subproject areas in the project
                           provinces. They have also been disclosed in English at the Bank’s InfoShop in Washington DC.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        04-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                            03-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        04-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                            04-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        04-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Nov-2014


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          04-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          04-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Christopher Paul Jackson
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                Date: 26-Nov-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                           Date: 26-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 13 of 13
