INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1092
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Romania                     Project ID:  P148585
Project Name: Romania Secondary Education Project (P148585)
Task Team       Janssen Edelweiss Nunes T
Leader:
Estimated        15-Dec-2014                Estimated    16-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Secondary education (75%), Tertiary education (25%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (75%), Education for the knowledge economy (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     250.31             Total Bank Financing:   250.31
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
O
Borrower                                                                      0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       250.31
Total                                                                       250.31
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objectives are to improve the transition from upper secondary
into tertiary education and increase the retention in the first year of tertiary education in project-
supported education institutions.
3. Project Description
The proposed Project will be implemented over a period of six years, between 2016 and 2021, and
Page 1 of 7


﻿would be financed through an Investment Project Financing (IPF) by a loan of EUR 200 million.
This Project is structured in three components, with the first two designed to address the academic
and personal reasons for poor student performance in upper secondary as well as in the initial years
of tertiary education. The third component covers project management and monitoring and
O
evaluation (M&E).
Component 1- School-Based and Systemic Interventions: This component will finance supply-side
interventions and analysis of demand-side programs at the school and system levels to address the
academic and personal reasons that are the leading factors hindering Romanian students from
transitioning from high schools to tertiary education, including dropping out, declining to take the
Baccalaureate, or scoring a low mark on the Baccalaureate.
Sub-component 1.1 - School-Based Interventions: This sub-component would support the transition
of students from upper secondary into tertiary education using a decentralized approach involving
grants to high schools. Eligible high schools would be those that have either: (i) average
Baccalaureate passing rates below 90%; (ii) dropout rates greater than 3.5%; or (iii) an average upper
secondary completion rate below the national average of 80%. This would allow approximately 80%
of all high schools in the country to be eligible for a grant, excluding only the highest performing
high schools. The grants would support a menu of activities oriented primarily towards pedagogical
support aimed to reduce high school dropout, increase completion, and improve performance on the
Baccalaureate. Eligible activities would include, but would not be limited to:
*      Remedial classes, tutoring, counseling, vocational orientation, and personal development (at
least 50 percent of grant amount);
*      Extracurricular activities such as documentary trips/visits, internships, participation in
competitions, small prizes, and school networking activities, and outreach to families (up to 30
percent of the grant amount); and
*      Minor civil works for interior renovation of school buildings (e.g. laboratories) and purchase
of goods (up to 20 percent of the grant amount).
The grant allocation per high school would be calculated on the basis of a variable portion
determined by the number of students (per capita), and a fixed portion according to the
socioeconomic needs of students and their academic/pedagogical constraints. The needs dimension
would be determined using a school index that combines the following factors: existing poverty
index by municipality, type of high school, number of places reserved for Roma students, location of
high school (urban or rural), average Baccalaureate passing rate, dropout rate, Baccalaureate
a        participation among eligible students, and completion rate. In addition to the grants, this sub-
component would finance technical assistance for eligible high schools on the preparation of
proposals for the grants. With the facilitation of specialists, high schools will develop multi-year
school development plans, from which school improvement plans will derive. School improvement
plans will be assessed according to guidelines detailed in the High School Grants Manual. The
implementation arrangements for this sub-component will incorporate lessons learned from the
Romania Rural Education Project and the Reform of Higher Education and Research Project.
Sub-component 1.2 - Systemic Interventions: This sub-component would address the systemic
challenges faced by all high schools in improving education quality, to be addressed centrally by the
MoNE. Activities to be supported by this sub-component include: (i) revision of the upper secondary
education curriculum, which should be done considering specific needs of disadvantaged students
including Roma; (ii) training of teachers and school directors on implementing the revised
curriculum, on adapting the curriculum to the needs and abilities of different students (inclusive
education), student-centered teaching approaches, and on formative assessment; (iii) revising and
updating Grade 8 and Baccalaureate exam items and associated training; (iv) development and
implementation of an assessment for Grade 10 students, to be applied at the end of the compulsory
Page 2 of 7


﻿education cycle; (v) development of digital teaching and learning materials, in accordance with the
Government of Romania's e-digital Strategy; (vi) development and implementation of campaigns to
raise student and teacher motivation; and (vii) strengthening of MoNE's M&E capacity in the
utilization of Education Management Information System (EMIS) data to track upper secondary
education students and monitor their transition into tertiary education.
Sub-component 1.3 - Analysis of Demand-Side Programs to Inform Decisions: This sub-component
would finance an analysis of demand-side programs addressing the financial needs of disadvantaged
upper secondary students that are currently under implementation and, as needed, make
recommendations on how to make these programs more efficient and effective. The analysis would
review the target beneficiaries and mechanisms, subsidy amount, implementation arrangements, and
outcomes for recipients in terms of secondary school participation and completion. These studies
would be informed by, and conducted in alignment with, the Government's ongoing program to
harmonize its social assistance programs. These studies will be carried out during the project
implementation period and their findings and recommendations would be used to inform decisions
by MoNE about demand-side policy and programs, including the use of European Structural and
Investment Funds.
Component 2 - University-Level Interventions and Bridge Programs: The objective of this
component is to support the needs of students from disadvantaged groups who are at risk of dropping
out of universities in the initial years of study. This component would finance grants for public
faculties either serving significant numbers of these students or seeking to increase the enrollment of
these students. Faculties will apply for the grants in conjunction with their respective universities,
with proposals for developing sustainable programmatic responses to serving at-risk students. The
grant scheme would prioritize faculties teaching in fields of potential economic growth in Romania,
such as agriculture, engineering, science and medicine. The size of the grants for each faculty would
be determined by a weighted assessment of three factors: (i) number of enrolled at-risk students; (ii)
academic area of the faculty; and (iii) selection of bridge programs between high schools and
universities. This component would support the development of bridge programs, which would be
implemented by faculties under the above-mentioned grant scheme and would finance activities such
as: (i) tertiary-level campus-based summer courses for high school students; (ii) secondary school-
university-labor market partnerships; and (iii) the development of managed and coordinated
university campus-based tutoring programs for high school students. This component would also
finance the design and implementation of learning laboratories in universities benefiting from the
a        grant scheme, with the aim of increasing the supporting mechanisms that promote a greater
likelihood of achievement toward retaining at-risk students, by providing targeted skills development
and academic support services that are designed with the needs of these students in mind. Regarding
the financial needs of tertiary education students, technical assistance financed by project Component
3 would update existing studies on this subject, including one on the development of a student loan
scheme, and would propose recommendations for policy making. The activities that will be financed
out of this component are complementary to those of several operational programs to be financed by
European Structural and Investment Funds for the programming period 2014-2020.
Component 3 - Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation: This component would finance
day-to-day project management activities, M&E activities, project audits, as well as incremental
operational and staffing costs of the MoNE's Unit for Externally Financed Projects. M&E activities
would include an evaluation of the bridge initiatives (financed under Component 2) on different
groups of at-risk students, which would be novel and useful for policymaking.
Page 3 of 7


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project activities would be implemented across the country over approximately six years with
most activities to be completed during five years. High schools and tertiary education institutions
identified as beneficiaries of the grants components would implement their corresponding parts of
the Project under a decentralized approach, but with technical assistance of specialists supported by
the Project. The population targeted are disadvantaged students including those: from Roma
communities; from minorities; from low income families; living in rural areas; at risk of leaving
school early; and performing low in tests/exams including the Baccalaureate. No significant
environmental issues or impacts are envisaged. No social or cultural issues are envisaged.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)
Mihai Magheru (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   No           Under the Component 1 - School-Based and
BP 4.01                                     Systemic Interventions, the Project will support a
grant scheme for a menu of activities oriented
primarily towards pedagogical support aimed to
reduce high school dropout, increase completion,
and improve performance on the Baccalaureate.
Eligible activities would include, but would not
be limited to: (i) Remedial classes, tutoring,
counseling, vocational orientation, personal
development (at least 50 percent of grant
amount); (ii) Extracurricular activities such as
documentary trips/visits, internships, participation
in competitions, small prizes, and school
networking activities, and outreach to families (up
to 30 percent of the grant amount); and (iii) Minor
interior works for renovation/repairs of existing
schools' spaces and purchasing of equipment (up
to 20 percent of the grant amount).
Although minor civil works involving building
renovation may be financed, these will be interior
and small scale, and are expected to be positive
for the environment, since they will serve for
improved education conditions in the respective
schools. No relevant environmental impacts are
anticipated under the proposed project given the
small size of the investments, which will only
apply to existing buildings, and do not warrant
triggering OP 4.01 or preparation of an EMP.
However, as an added precaution, the PMU will
be expected to use an environmental and social
screening check-list for evaluation of grants to
Page 4 of 7


﻿screen out any potentially non-conforming
activities, and this will be included in the Project's
Operation Manual.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No          No new structures or works of significant size are
4.12                                        envisaged under the project, and therefore the
environmental or resettlement risks are expected
to be negligible.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
U         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed Project would support a grant scheme for eligible activities to be determined during
preparation, which could include small civil works, i.e. rehabilitations of high schools. Although
minor civil works involving building renovation may be financed, these would be interior and
small scale. These investments to be supported under the project are expected to be positive for the
environment, since they will serve for improved education conditions in the respective schools. No
relevant environmental impacts are anticipated under the proposed project given the small size of
the investments, which will only apply to existing buildings. No new structures or works of
significant size are envisaged under the project, and therefore the environmental or resettlement
risks are expected to be negligible. No safeguards are being triggered, and the environmental
category for the proposed project is C, with no Environmental Management Plan (EMP) necessary
to be prepared. However, as an added precaution, the PMU will be expected to use an
environmental and social screening check-list for evaluation of grants to screen out any potentially
non-conforming activities, and this will be included in the Project's Operation Manual.
The proposed Project is mostly targeted at socially disadvantaged students and, as such, its social
impact is expected to be positive. For the grants program under sub-component 1.1, the eligibility
criteria for selecting the beneficiary high schools focuses on educational outcomes, but the
underlying evidence indicates that vulnerable and disadvantaged groups are those usually expected
Page 5 of 7


﻿to have poorer educational outcomes. These criteria also allow for inclusion of a significant
number (approximately 80 percent) of high schools as eligible to benefit from the Project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N.A.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N.A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The environmental and social screening procedures will be applied to all submitted grant
applications that will include rehabilitation works or purchasing of laboratory equipment and
materials or consumables. As established, the first screening of all submitted such application is
the responsibility of the PMU, which has to review the compliance of the proposal with the
eligibility criteria. On the demand-side, each grant proposal must be submitted to PMU with a full
application package, including a completed environmental & social questionnaire. During the
whole duration of the project implementation, until the grant contracts are closed, the field
supervisors of the PMU will carry out periodic monitoring and evaluation of the environmental
performance of the school, to observe potential project's impact, and to recommend remedial
actions.
The MoNE would be the main implementing agency of the proposed Project, and has successfully
implemented World Bank-financed projects in the past and is prepared to play this role again. The
MoNE's Unit for Externally Financed Projects (UEFP) - actual PMU - has extensive experience
with Bank-financed projects, having implemented almost all of the previous operations in
Romania, as well as projects financed from other sources (e.g. European Investment Bank,
Council of Europe Development Bank, European Union Structural Funds). This unit has the
adequate capacity to carry out day-to-day project management activities including those related to
environmental and social protection.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
N.A.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N.A.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Page 6 of 7


﻿All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [   No        NA   X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ No       NA   X
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[      No[       NA[X]
o          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [    No[       NA[X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:     Name: Janssen Edelweiss Nunes T
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Keiko Inoue (PMGR)                   Date: 10-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


