                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR8326
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Russian Federation                           Project ID:           P093050
                            Project Name:       Registration Project (P093050)
                            Task Team           Malcolm D. Childress
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           24-Apr-2005                                  Estimated   13-Jun-2006
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSEN                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Sub-national government administration (56%), Law and justice (37%), General
                                                public administration sector (7%)
                            Theme:              Personal and property rights (29%), Land administration and management
                                                (29%), Administrative and civil service reform (14%), Legal i nstitutions for a
                                                market economy (14%), Municipal governance and institution building (14%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       101.50           Total Bank Financing:                                        50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              51.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 50.00
                              Total                                                                                                101.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objective is to simplify and improve procedures for registration of rights in


                                                                                  Page 1 of 6
                         immovable property and to improve the information flow fro                                      m the
                         registry to users so as to facilitate the development of real property mar
                         kets, improve the quality of services provided, and strengthen the linkages with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other organizations dealing with real property. These other organizations will
                         include the Federal Cadastre Agency, the Tax Authorities, municipal government,
                         and representatives of the private sector, such as notaries and real estate bro
                         kers.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objective is to simplify and improve procedures for registration of rights in
                         immovable property and to improve the information flow fro                                    m the
                         registry to users so as to facilitate the development of real property mar
                         kets, improve the quality of services provided, and strengthen the linkages with
                         other organizations dealing with real property. These other organizations will
                         include the Federal Cadastre Agency, the Tax Authorities, municipal government,
                         and representatives of the private sector, such as notaries and real estate bro
                         kers.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will be composed of four components: (1) Institutional Development of the Registration
                         Service; (2) Information and Communications Systems; (3) Impr
                         ovement of Professional Skills; and (4) Project Management.

                          The Project will run for 6 years (7 years with extension of Closing Date), and will be implemented
                         in 25 of the 77 Territorial Registration Offices of the Registration Service (converted into the
                         integrated Federal Service for Registration, Cadastre and Cartography, known as Rosreestr, in 2009).
                         This represents roughly one-third coverage of the country as a whole. Implementation of a unified
                         registration information system, included in the Information and Communications Systems
                         Component, will be split into three phases: (1) the pilot phase, covering 4 regions; (2) the first roll-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         out phase of 10 additional regions; and (3) the second roll-out phase of an additional 11 regions. It is
                         expected that 5 years will be required to complete these three phases, keeping in mind the need to
                         develop and test the unified registration software and to incorporate lessons from the pilot phase into
                         the subsequent phases. Implementation of the other elements of t he Project is not tied to this
                         phasing. In addition to the 25 Offices, some more FRS Offices will be upgraded with new
                         mechanical archive shelves, which should improve the efficiency of storage systems by at least 25
                         per cent. In addition to these upgrades, the modern automated systems will be installed in 5 larger
                         regional archives of the FRS. Since the existing facilities are not fit for instal lation of such
                         automated equipment, these buildings will be remodeled based on international standards.

                          An important criterion for the Registration Service (now Rosreestr) in selecting participating regions
                         will be the relative strengths and weaknesses of each of the Territorial Registration services.
                         Selection of regions will need to be coordinated, however, with selection of regions for participation
                         in the Cadastre Development Project. While complete overlap of regions participating in both
                         projects is not anticipated, a sufficient degree of overlap will be necessary. An additional criterion
                         for selection of regions could be the commitment of government administration in a given Subject of
                         the Federation (SOF) to support the needed institutional and policy changes foreseen under the
                         Project.

                         Some elements of the Project will have impact beyond the 25 participating regions. This includes


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         the legal and regulatory reform, training programs, development of service standards, and various
                         elements of the improved availability of information. In addition, limited work on modernizing the
                         archive systems will be carried out in all of the remaining 52 regions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As of April, 2014 the project is being restructured to extend the Closing Date by nine months in
                         order to complete a set of procurements which have been delayed, and in order to cancel $17.8
                         million which are no longer viewed as necessary for the implementation of the project by Rosreestr.
                         The restructuring will incur no changes on the environmental or social safeguards due diligence for
                         the project as no new or modified activities are planned under the restructuring.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented mainly in 25 regions of the Russian Federation and at the Federal
                         level. The Project will mainly finance consultant services and training, goods (primarily ICT
                         hardware and software), and operational costs of the PIU.

                          Minor works will be carried out under Component 1. First, internal repairs will be done in most of
                         the municipal registration offices which plan to install modern mechanical archive systems. These
                         would be very minor repairs, involving redesign of internal floor space, construction of counters,
                         painting, etc. and will be done by regional offices even before the effectiveness of the Project.

                          Second, the Component 1 will pilot the concept of uniform large archive storage centers in five
                         locations. Under the project, five centers will be designed and equipped in selected existing facilities.
                         Since the facilities, as they exist, are not fit for installation of such automated equipment, these
                         buildings will be remodeled based on international standards. Thus, minor internal works in selected
                         five facilities are expected to be co-funded by the Project and would include installation of elevators
                         for delivery of documents within the buildings; compact portable document storage stands;
                         mechanical archiving systems, fans, air conditioners, telecommunication channels, etc. For these
                         works, and Environmental Management Plan has been prepared by the Borrower, accepted by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank, and di       sclosed both by the Bank and the Borrower.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No




                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                As mentioned, the only safeguard issue under the Project are minor internal works in five of the
                              existing storage facilities of the Registration Service under Component 1 for installation of
                              uniform large archive storage that would include installation of elevators for delivery of
                              documents within the buildings; compact portable document storage stands; mechanical archiving
                              systems, fans, air conditioners, telecommunication channels, etc.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                None.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                In order to minimize the adverse impact of the proposed works under the Project, it was agreed
                              with the Borrower that only the existing facilities would be considered for installation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              subject storage capacity to avoid any construction of new facilities. In addition, it has been agreed
                              that one of the selection criteria for selecting the ultimate five locations would be the engineering
                              condition of the building in order to again minimize the amount and scope of works. Thus, works
                              in five locations would be limited to mainly internal remodeling.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                The Borrower has prepared an Environmental Management Plan for proposed works in
                              consultation with its regional offices, and with the Environmental Authority of
                              Russian Federation (RosTekhNadzor) which also approved the EMP. The Borrower has disclosed
                              the EMP on official websites of Ministry of Justice and Registration Service. It has also agreed on
                              inclusion of the EMP in the future bidding documents and on the compliance supervision and
                              monitoring arrangements with its regional offices. The Borrower (originally represented by the
                              Project Implementing Agency, Federal Registration Service, FRS, now Rosreestr) has
                              demonstrated sufficient capacity in developing and supervising the EMP.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                The EMP was discussed with the regional offices of the FRS, the Federal Service for
                              Environmental, Technological and Nuclear Control (as evidenced by the letter
                              from this agency), the regional and municipal administrations in Omsk, Samara, Saratov, Tula,
                              Kaliningrad, Krasnodar, Rostov-on-Don (their endorsement of the EMP is confirmed by formal

                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           approval of the reconstruction activities), local environmental experts and NGOs in the above
                           cities. The EMP will be made available to the public by the World Bank through the InfoShop and
                           by the FRS and the Ministry of Justice through their Web sites and publications. It will also be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           available at the World Bank Moscow office.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03-Apr-2006
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    02-May-2006
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Malcolm D. Childress
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Esma Kreso (RSA)                             Date: 10-Apr-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)                            Date: 10-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
