INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC7263
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Sep-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Gabon                      Project ID:   P146152
Project Name:   Gabon Skills Development Project (P146152)
Task Team       Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Dec-2014                Estimated     28-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO7                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Vocational training (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                          100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
23.    The objective of the proposed project is to improve and expand technical and vocational
training in key growth sectors and increase youth employability.
24.    The main beneficiaries of the proposed project will be youth of 15-30 years of age, of which
at least 30 percent will be female. The first component of the project will target young people
enrolled in technical and vocational schools and aims at offering youth quality training programs in
key growth sectors. These sectors offer new prospects for growth, have a strong potential for job


﻿creation and need skilled workforce. The second component will focus on young graduates and youth
who left the education system with or with no professional qualifications in order to enhance youth
employability. The improvement of youth employability will be achieved through targeted programs
aimed at enhancing their professional skills and facilitating their insertion in the labor market.
0
25.    Concerning women participation, the project will set up all necessary steps to reach the
minimum of 30% of female that will benefit from the project. In this regard, information campaigns,
especially for women, will be developed and launched, in particular through women organizations,
NGOs and civil society. The project suggests setting up information initiatives towards rural and
remote communities in order to scale up female participation to the project, especially concerning
delocalized training schemes in rural areas and entrepreneurship programs for women.
C. Project Description
28.    Analytical Underpinnings of Project Design. The project design integrates best practices
from relevant IDA projects in the region. These include youth employment and skills projects in
Egypt, Yemen, Burkina Faso, Sierra Leone, Kenya, Rwanda and Liberia as well as private sector
projects in post-conflict environments, such as South Sudan. It also incorporates lessons learned from
on-going or recently closed IDA operations in CMte d'Ivoire, such as the Post-Conflict Assistance
Project and the Young Entrepreneurs and Urban Job Creation Project, and in Senegal with the
Tertiary Education Governance and Financing for Results Project. The project design also draws
lessons from other IBRD projects, such as the Education and Training Sector Improvement Program
in Namibia and the forthcoming Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project.
29.    The project will consist of the following three components: (i) training provision extension
in Technical and Vocational Training and skills development in key growth sectors, (ii) developing
employability, improving the integration of young people into labor markets and promoting
entrepreneurship in partnership with the private sector, and (iii) strengthening institutional capacity
and project management.
0
B.     Project Design
Component 1: Training Provision Extension in Technical and Vocational Training and skills
development in key growth sectors (approximately US$65 million)
30.    The component aims at helping the Government in expanding the provision of technical and
professional education and professional training in key growth sectors that promote jobs creation.
This objective can be achieved through the creation of new technical and vocational institutions, and
possibly the extension or rehabilitation of existing ones. These institutions would address the needs
of key growth sectors in accordance with the Government's Strategic Plan for an Emerging Gabon,
the conclusions of the National Employment Forum of October 2013, the PSGE education sector
plan and the Loi portant orientation g6n6rale de lI'tducation, de la Formation et de la Recherche
adopted of 2011.
Sub-Component 1.1: Training Provision Extension and Skills Development in key growth sectors
(US$30 million)
31.    The project aims at expanding training provision through the creation of two new technical
and vocational institutions in the following two priority areas:


﻿-      Construction and public works: The creation of a sectoral training institution in the trades of
building and public works and related trade groups such as masonry, coating, soldering, steel
construction, reinforcement and shuttering, sanitary plumbing, topography and measurement,
elevators construction and electricity.
 -    Information and communication technology-related activities: The creation of a sectoral
training institution in the trade of digital technology and related to digital programming and
development, project design and management, infrastructures and networks, industrial computing
services...
32.    The selection of the sites where these new schools are to be built would take into account an
existing and sufficiently developed and dense economic environment, making it possible to promote
partnerships with the private productive sector and develop dual training schemes.
33.    These new schools would consist of both technical and vocational education and training.
This approach would minimize operating costs as well as optimize the use of teaching space and
equipment installed.
34.    The direct beneficiaries would be youth of school age and who meet the required pre-
requisites. The scheduled facilities would accommodate 1500 youths in technical and professional
education and vocational training. This number could reach 2250 if a work/training scheme (up to 50
percent) would be introduced in these schools. The employees working in firms in the specific
sectors concerned could also receive ongoing training in these establishments. The expected capacity
in these schools would be 300 employees following ongoing training courses per year.
35.    The project would finance construction works and the equipment of two new establishments,
that include class rooms, workshops, laboratories, a living environment (school canteens and
boarding houses) and staff housing, as well as the equipment of the laboratories, technical platforms,
living environment and the provision of curricula and learning materials.
o
36.    The project would support teachers and trainers training in the various agreed disciplines as
well as management personnel of these schools. The project would provide the technical assistance
requested and necessary to support the proposed reforms aimed at implementing a training system,
a       which is demand-driven, and focuses on the partnership with the private sector, work/training
schemes and performance-based contracts. Trainers training would be carried out within the
framework of conventions and partnerships with specialized structures at the international level.
37.    The implementation of this sub-component will be entrusted to the Ministry in charge of
Technical and Professional education and the Ministry in charge of Professional Training with the
assistance of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) that will be responsible for fiduciary management.
Sub-Component 1.2: General upgrading of existing Technical and Professional Education and
Vocational training establishments (US$35 million)
38.    The diagnosis of Technical and Professional Education and Vocational Training schemes,
that consist of 20 institutions, shows many weaknesses, concerning in particular obsolete and aging
equipment, inadequate training programs and human resources responsible for training and
shortcomings associated with the management of training establishments as it does not involve the


﻿private sector.
39.    This sub-component aims at the restructuring and general upgrading of educational
institutions and training structures. The project would support these schools in the following areas:
O
equipment, trainers training, and curricula upgrading. The running of these new establishments
would be based on the principles of autonomy, autonomous management of training institutions
shared with the private sector and performance-based contracts. The public-private partnership (PPP)
process initiated by the Gabonese authorities that involves the private sector would be necessary to
implement these activities and would serve as the bedrock for the running of these new institutions.
40.    This support will be made on a competitive basis open to all technical and vocational
training institutions. For that purpose, operating and procedure manuals and development project
preparation guides will be developed and made available to all the institutions. Training sessions will
also be carried out. A public-private joint committee will be established in order to carry out
evaluations of selected development projects and approve the projects that meet the required criteria.
After this process has been finalized, contracts will be signed with the selected establishments and
the project will support the selected activities.
Component 2: Employability Development, Youth Integration and Entrepreneurship Promotion
(approximately US$20 million)
41.    The objective of this component is to facilitate the integration of young people into the labor
market, improve employability by providing youth with better skills levels and promote
entrepreneurship in partnership with the private sector. The project would promote non-formal
training programs and professional integration schemes for dropouts and out of school youth,
improve school-to-work transition programs for young graduates and help develop entrepreneurship.
The Insertion and Reinsertion Fund (Fonds d'Aide d l'Insertion et d la R6insertion Professionnelle,
FIR) was created in 1993. Its mission is to support the insertion and reinsertion of young people in
the labor market. A new format of this mechanism will be adopted by the ONE and the FIR will
undertake all the activities of this component.
42.    This component would include the following activities: (i) dual apprenticeship schemes and
delocalized training and insertion programs for dropouts and out of school youth for rural and
o       agricultural professional activities, (ii) professional internships to facilitate labor market integration
for young graduates and on-request training, and (iii) entrepreneurship development and support a
new generation of micro-entrepreneurs.
Sub-component 2.1: Development of a training scheme through apprenticeship
43.    Article 48 of the Loi portant orientation g6n6rale de 1'tducation, de la Formation et de la
Recherche adopted in 2011 introduced apprenticeship training that could be taught by professionals
and craftsmen in school workshops or in centers alternating practical training and theory. The
apprenticeship scheme would enable the integration of more drop-outs and out of school youth,
whose number is high in Gabon, into training programs adapted to their level of qualifications. This
would combine theory, practice and a better knowledge of companies. It would constitute the only
alternative for out of school youth to gain access to training programs. The apprenticeship scheme
would target dropouts and out of school youth. Youth who are enrolled in first grade of primary
school (Cours Primaire 1, CP 1) do not complete the school year. 77 percent do not make it beyond
the primary level and 92 percent beyond the secondary level.


﻿44.    This sub-component would consist of two activities: (i) dual apprenticeship schemes for
urban jobs that would consist of complementary theoretical training (25 percent of the total period).
Its length should be modulated and meet the profession's requirements (6 to 24 months), and (ii)
O
apprenticeships-training-professional insertion organized in a fully immersive working environment
in areas where training structures are non-existent, especially in rural and agricultural professional
activities. The length of this scheme will be limited to a maximum of 12 months.
45.    This sub-component would also help young people into the job market through the creation
of micro-projects. Young apprentices would receive training courses on entrepreneurship during the
apprenticeship period to prepare them to become micro-entrepreneurs and specific support through
the provision of tool kits and to strengthen their interaction with microcredit institutions.
46.    The development of dual apprenticeship-training-professional insertion would require to
scale up the capacities of the ONE and adopt specific operating and procedure manuals. Besides, the
ONE should, in order to perform its activities, strengthen its territorial network, increase the number
of employment counselors and better prepare them for their respective missions. The project would
provide the technical assistance necessary to support the implementation of this scheme and support
employment and apprenticeship counselors training.
47.    This sub-component targets out of school youth aged between 16 and 35 years with a very
limited level of instruction (primary education completed or incomplete). The project would support
dual apprenticeship schemes in urban professional activities and training-professional insertion for a
total of 3000 youth during the project. At least 30 percent of all participants will be female.
48.    The project would provide to the participants subsistence and transportation stipends in an
amount of 40 000 FCFA and accident at work insurance. The project would also finance the costs of
complementary, mentoring and coaching training, tool kits for 3000 urban and rural apprentices, as
well as the costs related to skills upgrading of apprentice instructors and equipment. The activities
related to entrepreneurship development will be organized under sub-component 2.4, while the
activities related to strengthening the institutional capacities of the ONE and organizing awareness
and communication campaigns will be undertaken under sub-component 2.3. The project would also
support the costs related to the prospection of apprenticeship offers, guidance and intermediation,
a       work placement, follow-up and monitoring.
49.    The ONE would implement this sub-component as the office already has appropriate
experience in implementing similar programs. The ONE is a public structure in charge of
implementing the FIR in partnership with the National Agency for Professional Training (Agence
Nationale de la Formation et Perfectionnement Professionels, ANFPP) and other public or private
training operators that deliver complementary training modules. Youth that will be placed in training-
professional insertion in rural areas will receive specific mentoring from technicians recruited for this
purpose.
50.    The ONE would set up a central unit dedicated to the management of the program and
designate a focal point in the deconcentrated agencies. The project would provide the technical
assistance necessary to support the implementation of the program.
Sub-component 2.2: Employment adaptation program


﻿51.    Each year large numbers of young graduates from high education institutions and technical
and vocational schools are on the labor market but fail to find a job. The main challenges that the
education system faces is the disconnect between training programs and the labor market. The World
O
Bank policy note on growth and employment of November 2012 stresses that more than 80 percent
of graduates from technical and vocational education and training institutions are not hired in sectors
they have been trained for, while only one in three young graduates find a job.
52.    In 1993 Gabon created a fund to facilitate the insertion of young graduates and the
professional reintegration of laid off employees into the labor market (Fonds d'Aide d l'Insertion et d
la R6insertion Professionnelle, FIR). This fund aims at financing training internships for young
graduates and workers made redundant from public and private enterprises. The ONE helps young
graduates to better integrate the labor market through three-month or six-month internships and
provides scholarships equivalent to half the minimum salary to the beneficiaries. This scheme faces
huge challenges, due to limited budgetary resources, an ineffective targeting mechanism as well as
the lack of follow-up and of efficient monitoring tools. The National Employment Forum of October
2013 suggested putting in place appropriate incentives for employers in order to facilitate the
recruitment of youth after their internship period.
53.    The project would support the implementation of this sub-component in placing 2500 youth
in internships in enterprises and the following activities: (i) change the internship duration to a one-
year period, (ii) youth must exclusively complete their internship placement in firms in the private
sector, (iii) give preference to the internship placement of young graduates from technical and
vocational education, (iv) support the ONE in better monitoring youth during and after their
internship period and providing coordinated information, guidance, intermediation and counseling
services for youth, and (v) putting in place appropriate incentives to facilitate the internship
placement and recruitment of youth after their internship period. These incentives could include tax
exemptions and deductions in respect of social charges. The on-request training scheme (tailor-made
training courses) would meet the needs of small enterprises and sectors of activity for skilled labor
through the organization of short-term training aimed at youth who are looking for jobs.
54.    This sub-component would target 2500 youth up to the age of 30, who are graduates from
higher education institutions and technical and vocational schools, of which at least 40 percent will
a      be women. More than 5000 young graduates would receive guidance, intermediation and counseling
services from the ONE. This sub-component would also target about 1000 unemployed youth aged
between 16 and 30 years, of which at least 75 percent would be hired by the firms that are part of the
program.
55.    This sub-component would finance internship stipends in the amount of 40 000 FCFA for
2500 young graduates, accident at work insurance, medical examinations and the costs linked to the
organization of on-request training activities. The project would provide the technical assistance
necessary to support the conception and implementation of operational procedures for the on-request
training scheme, awareness-raising activities and the implementation of the training program with the
possibility to grant living stipends to the participants. The reinforcement of ONE operational
capacities, technical assistance and impact evaluation assessment will be undertaken under
component 3.
56.    The ONE will undertake all the activities under this sub-component. A unit for the schemes
management would be created within the ONE. The unit would receive the required technical


﻿assistance. The main characteristics of the implementation of procedures of these schemes will be
detailed in Annex 2.
O
Sub-component 2.3: Entrepreneurship Promotion
57.    The other objective of this component is to foster entrepreneurial spirit among young people
and to offer them support in the process of setting up businesses. This would enable the emergence of
a new generation of micro-entrepreneurs. This scheme would target young people living in urban and
rural areas, youths in or out of school, apprentices and young people having completed their
apprenticeship as well as those with a diploma in high education or in technical and vocational
education and training. It would include the following activities: (i) launching campaigns to promote
entrepreneurship, (ii) organizing training and coaching sessions to support the preparation of
business plans adapted to the needs of the targeted population and supporting the interaction with
financing institutions, (iii) training trainers on entrepreneurship, (iv) introducing training courses on
entrepreneurship in training institutions, and (v) organizing business plan competitions.
Component 3: Institutional Capacity Support and Project Implementation (approximately US$10
million)
Sub-component 3.1: Project Implementation and monitoring/evaluation
58.    The project would support the effective implementation of the project by the Ministry of
Economy and Prospective and the other enforcement agencies in setting up, under the responsibility
of the minister's office, a project coordination unit (PCU) as well as a Steering Committee involving
the private sector. The PCU main task consists of ensuring the coordination, monitoring and
evaluation of the project as well as implementing the information and communication strategy. This
sub-component would finance the staff involved in the project implementation. The PCU will include
the following core staff: Project Coordinator; procurement specialist(s); FM specialists; internal
auditor; M&E specialist; social and environmental specialist; IT specialist; consultants from different
areas of expertise; and any additional administrative support as necessary. The project would also
finance the acquisition of the equipment needed to the general implementation of the project. The
a project would provide technical assistance and finance impact evaluation assessment and monitoring-
evaluation studies.
Sub-component 3.2: Institutional Capacity Support
59.    This sub-component aims at strengthening the institutional capacities of the Ministry of
Economy and Prospective, enforcement agencies and operational structures. It consists of two parts:
3.2.1: Employability Development, Youth Integration and Entrepreneurship Promotion
60.    This part includes the following activities:
(i) Strengthen ONE operational capacities: improving territorial and target populations coverage
through the reinforcement of existing agencies and support the ONE in its project to create new
agencies. In this regard, the project would support staff training, equipment provision and technical


﻿assistance as deemed necessary. The project would support the ONE in the setting up of new
mechanisms: elaborating operating and procedure manuals, staff training, technical assistance,
communication campaign.
(ii)   Support the General Direction of Human Resources (Direction G6n6rale des Ressources
O
)       Humaines), also called General Direction for Employment (Direction G6n6rale de l'Emploi) in the
following activities: designing, implementing and assessing public policies, implementing the
recommendations of the National Employment Forum of October 2013, staff training and technical
assistance.
(iii)   Support the National Observatory on Employment and Training (Observatoire National de
l'Emploi et de la Formation, ONEF) in the following activities: designing its organizational
framework, developing a strategy and multi-annual operational plan of activities, implementing the
identified activities, equipment provision, staff training.
3.2.2: Training Provision Extension in Technical and Vocational Training
61.    The project would support the conduct of studies of feasibility, design, dimensioning and
costing that would precede the creation of these new technical and vocational institutions. These
studies would enable the project to identify the areas of training and specialties, qualification and
skills levels, training flows and capacities, the needs for trainers and management personnel, the
needs for technical and pedagogical training programs, the pedagogical organization of the centers,
the physical organization of centers and facilities (class rooms, workshops, laboratories,
documentation centers, administration, living environment with school canteens and boarding
houses), equipment requirements, planning for the project implementation and investment costs
(estimated costs for construction, equipment and elaboration of new training programs for trainers.
62.    The project would also provide technical assistance for the conception of a new operating
model for these centers, based on the principles of autonomy, autonomous management of these
centers shared with the private sector, partnership and alternance. The project would also contribute
to the training the management personnel of the central structures involved in the implementation of
the activities as described in component 1 of the proposed project.
63.    US$5 million will be unallocated.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
*       analysis (if known)
This project will target existing vocational schools in order to rehabilitate and upgrade them and to
build additional facilities in training centers
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The republic of Gabon is more and more familiar with the Bank's Safeguard Policies based on
experience with other Bank-funded projects across different sectors. However, the ministry in charge
of education which will be responsible of the project implementation is not familiar with World
Bank safeguards policies. Then, The capacity of the said ministry to address safeguard issues need to
be further strengthened.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes          The OP/BP 4.01 policy is triggered due to the civil
0P/l3P 4.01                               works associated with rehabilitation and
construction / extension of new Technical and
Vocational training institutions. Since the exact
locations and numbers of institutions to be
rehabilitated or built are not known, the relevant
safeguard instrument to be prepared is an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF). This document will be reviewed, consulted
upon, disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior
to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No            This policy is not triggered as there will be no
potential impact on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           This policy is not triggered as there will be no forest-
related activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           There will no use of pesticides or health related
concerns with respect to vector management.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          As civil work activities under the Project will involve
OP/BP 4.11                                excavations within the construction of new
infrastructures, the probability to discover graves,
vestiges, etc is not negligible. Hence the triggering of
the policy. However, no specific safeguard
instrument is required. The ESMF that will be
prepared in compliance with the policy OP/PB 4.12
will provide guidance in case of such discoveries.
 Indigenous Peoples 0P/lP   No           This policy is not triggered, as no project's activities
4.10                                     are planned to be implemented in areas where
Indigenous Peoples are present.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The project will not involve land take, but for due
BP 4.12                                   diligence, the borrower is in the process of preparing
a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that will
also have to be reviewed, consulted upon, disclosed
in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This policy is not triggered, as there will be no dam
construction or rehabilitation of dams that will
necessitate dam safety status report.
Projects on International    No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Mar-2014
B.
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The team expect that the specific document will be done prior to Appraisal
O
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards  Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)           Date: 25-Sep-2014
Advisor:
Sector Manager:      Name: Meskerem Mulatu (SM)                  Date: 13-Nov-2015


