                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5626
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Burundi                           Project ID:    P133610
                            Project Name:     BI-Jiji and Mulembwe Hydropower (P133610)
                            Task Team         Kyran O'Sullivan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         24-Feb-2014                       Estimated   17-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTG1                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Hydropower (80%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         270.40                 Total Bank Financing:      100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       16.80
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             100.00
                              African Development Bank                                                                 22.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                   36.60
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                              95.00
                              Total                                                                                   270.40
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase the supply of clean and low cost hydropower
                           electricity to Burundi's national grid.


                                                                     Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project comprises three components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Hydropower Facilities and Electricity Services

                         This component will finance the construction of the Jiji and Mulembwe hydropower facilities, the
                         substations, the transmission line connecting the facilities to Bujumbura and to Bururi and the
                         electricity distribution network in the vicinity of the project. The two hydropower plants will be 5
                         kilometers apart on the Jiji and Mulembwe rivers. Jiji is a tributary of the Mulembwe and the
                         Mulembwe discharges into Lake Tanganyika. Both plants will be run-of-river with a small 80,000
                         cubic meters reservoir at Jiji and a small reservoir of 40,000 cubic meters at normal water level at
                         Mulembwe. The total duration of the construction is estimated at 42 months.

                         Component A1: Jiji hydropower scheme. This component comprises all excavation/earth works,
                         tunneling and concrete for the power plant structures, including the Jiji dam and ungated spillway,
                         intake works and water conveyance system, surface powerhouse, access roads and construction of
                         site facilities such as operator's village common to the Jiji and Mulembwe schemes (offices and
                         housing), mechanical and electrical works including supply, installation, testing and commissioning
                         of hydro-mechanical equipment, turbine-generator sets and auxiliaries, switchyard and substation;
                         and power complex control.

                         Component A2: Mulembwe hydropower scheme. This component comprises all excavation/earth
                         works, tunneling and concrete for the power plant structures, including the Mulembwe dam and
                         ungated spillway, intake works and water conveyance system, surface powerhouse, access roads to
                         Mulembwe works, mechanical and electrical works including supply, installation, testing and
                         commissioning of hydro-mechanical equipment, turbine-generator sets and auxiliaries; and power
                         complex control.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A3: Substations. This component concerns the construction of four substations and the
                         extension of three existing substations as follows: (i) construction of a 110kV substation at Jiji power
                         plant site; (ii) construction of a 110kV substation at Mulembwe power plant site; (iii) construction of
                         a 110/30 kV substation at Horezo; (iv) construction of a 110/30/10 kV substation at Kabezi; (v)
                         extension of the existing RN1 110/30/10 kV substation in Bujumbura; (vi) extension of the existing
                         Bujumbura Sud 30/10 kV substation; and (vii) extension of the existing Itaba 30/10 kV substation.

                         Component A4: Transmission Lines. This component will consist of construction of associated
                         110kV transmission lines of a total length of about 107.2 km that will connect the two new
                         substations located at Jiji and Mulembwe power plant sites, through the Horezo and Kabezi
                         substations, to the RN1 substation that supplies the national grid at Bujumbura. This component will
                         also include the construction of 30kV lines of about 25.4 km to connect the Horezo 110/30kV
                         substation to the Itaba 30/10kV substation and to connect the Kabezi 110/30/10kV substation to the
                         Bujumbura Sud 30/10kV substation.

                         Component A5: Electricity Supply to Communities. This component will construction of
                         construction 30kV distribution lines of about 18 kilometers and the installation of low voltage lines
                         of about 19 kilometers and the connection of public facilities, socio-economic infrastructures and
                         households to the distribution network in the vicinity of the hydropower schemes. Public facilities
                         will include: schools, health centers, municipal offices, court houses, police stations, and military


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         posts. Socio-economic infrastructures are mainly coffee factories, carpentry workshops, churches,
                         shops, and markets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A6: Social and Environmental Impacts mitigation. This component will finance
                         implementation of mitigation measures in the Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)
                         and in the Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the hydropower plants and the transmission line.

                         Component B: Technical Assistance for Physical Infrastructure

                         Component B1: Owner's Engineer, Panel for Dam Safety and Panel for Supervision of ESMPs and
                         RAPs Implementation. This component will finance:

                         (a)     An Owner's Engineer to assist the REGIDESO PIU with: (i) overall project management and
                         supervision of the procurement, design, construction, and interface management of the construction
                         contracts; and (ii) coordination of the implementation of the ESMPs and RAPs.

                         (b)    Environmental and Social Advisory Panel (two specialists) for supervision of ESMPs and
                         RAPs implementation.

                         (c)      Panel for Dam Safety. Three specialists (dam safety expert, a geologist and geo-technician)
                         will review the design of the Jiji dam and if the option of a dam at Jiji is retained, a dam safety panel
                         consisting of a dam safety expert, a geologist and geo-technician will be formed for the duration of
                         construction and commissioning of the dam.

                         Component B2: Feasibility Studies for new investments. This component will finance feasibility
                         studies for investments in generation, transmission and distribution. These may include assessment of
                         the potential for geothermal generation in Burundi, and the preparation of investment in distribution
                         to increase access to electricity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B3: Technical Support to the PIU. This component will finance international consultants
                         that are experts in hydrology, hydropower generation, civil works, transmission and other disciplines
                         in the PIU and to advise the management of REGIDESO on technical matters during project
                         implementation.

                         Component B4: Operation of the PIU. This component will finance the operation of the PIU during
                         the five years of project implementation.

                         Component C: Power Sector Reform and Institutional Development.

                         This component will support the implementation of sector. It will include three main sub-
                         components:

                         Component C1: Technical assistance to support the sustainability of REGIDESO. This component
                         will include implementation of organizational changes in REGIDESO (based on an organizational
                         study that was carried out in 2013 by external consultants). It will also include activities to improve
                         commercial performance of REGIDESO, including the development of a modern management
                         information system covering financial reporting, billing and client account management and
                         activities to strengthen the functions of procurement, operations monitoring and maintenance
                         scheduling.

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         Component C2: Technical assistance for the power sector Regulator: This component will finance
                         international expertise to support setting up the regulator, train staff and prepare procedures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C3: Implementation of Government plan for the preparation of Public Private
                         Partnerships (PPPs) in the power sector: this component will finance international expertise in
                         support of implementation of a framework for future PPPs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The selection of Jiji and Mulembwe sites for development are the result of a screening analysis of the
                         10 most propitious sites in Burundi. Jiji and Mulembwe ranked highest after pre-feasibility studies
                         were conducted of a shortlist of 4 sites that resulted from the screening.

                         The sites are in the province of Bururi (South West of Burundi) approximately 12 kilometers from
                         the town of the same name and the two sites are approximately 5 kilometers distance in the
                         municipalities of Songa and Buyengero.

                         An estimated area of 10 hectares is presumed to be affected. The altitude of the area varies from
                         1,100 to 1,550 meters. The forest cover of the area is dominated by eucalyptus trees. The biodiversity
                         of the area has yet to yield evidence of protected or endangered species. The fauna of the Jiji and
                         Mulembwe rivers shows moderate diversity; two types of fish have been identified. The rapids of the
                         river do not seem to favor the evolution of a diverse fauna.

                         The designs prepared at the feasibility stage are for run-of-river hydropower schemes with a 13.5
                         meter high dam and a reservoir of 80,000 cubic meters at Jiji and 12.5 meter high dam and reservoir
                         of 40,000 cubic meters under normal water levels at Mulembwe. Geophysical investigation carried
                         out as part of the feasibility studies found that soil conditions are composed of silt, clays and sands
                         with bedrock at a depth of 5 meters on average at Mulembwe that confirm that the soil and rock
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conditions are favorable for construction of hydropower facilities. Geophysical investigations at Jiji
                         are ongoing in February 2014. The investigations carried out to date at Jiji indicate that bedrock
                         (gneiss) plunges deeply (30 meters and more) between the left bank and right bank of the river. The
                         investigations indicate that the foundation of a Jiji dam may be complex and difficult to prepare. For
                         this reason OP 4.37 has been triggered. If the option of a dam is retained after the site investigations
                         are complete, the excavation depth is likely to increase and the height of the dam would thus
                         increase. If the site investigations determine that a dam at Jiji should be replaced by a simple weir,
                         there would be only minor consequences for the design of the facilities and the energy production
                         would be unaffected. However without the small reservoir at Jiji there would not be the possibility of
                         daily regulation of energy production.

                         Average annual discharge at the Mulembwe site is 5.9 cubic meter per second and Jiji site is 5.8
                         cubic meters per second.

                         Penstock channels both of 750 meters length will be excavated through granite.

                         The number of project affected households identified in the project’s three RAPs is 936 (383 for
                         Mulembwe; 341 for Jiji and 212 for the transmission line); that translates to about 6,200 persons
                         (3,253 females and 2947 males). The RAPs conclude that no households will be relocated outside the
                         area. Households which are expected to lose their houses (Mulembwe 4 households, Jiji 18


                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         households, and the transmission line 199 households, total 221 households), will accommodate their
                         new houses on the same plots. The final numbers of transmission line affected households are
                         expected to be reduced, after detailed design by the contractor; who is responsible for preparing the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         final design and is expected to modify the alignment in order to avoid involuntary resettlement. The
                         alignment of access roads and choice of quarries, dump site and workers camps will be determined
                         when design is finalized by the contractor.

                         The population density of the area is estimated at 250 inhabitants per square kilometer; a figure that
                         is lower than the national average of 320 inhabitants per square kilometer. Indigenous People
                         (Batwa) do not constitute part of the population of the area. The average household size is six
                         persons per household. Average income is USD 2 to 3 per day. Agriculture is the main source of
                         income. Land deeds are informal/traditional, leasing land is a recurrent arrangement. Predominant
                         crops include: bananas, cassava, sweat potatoes, beans and coffee as cash crops. While women
                         provide for consumable crops, men cash in on coffee. Household expenditures are dominated by
                         energy (purchase of fuel wood); costs are estimated to be about 30% of household incomes.

                         The Mulembwe river is located in the Songa commune, Bururi Province and takes its sources in the
                         Congo Mountains. The Jiji River is a tributary of Mulembwe. These rivers then flow into
                         Tanganyika Lake.

                         The hydropower sites are mainly agricultural land and some eucalyptus plantations. The ESIA
                         suggests that irreversible environmental impacts will be limited to the flooding of 3.5 hectares.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
                         Paul-Jean Feno (AFTN1)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The Jiji and Mulembwe project will have
                         BP 4.01                                              important environmental impacts, as a result of
                                                                              the construction of the dams, power plants, the
                                                                              two channels, the reservoirs and the transmission
                                                                              line. The two power plants will be run-of-river
                                                                              hydropower stations. Three independent ESIAs
                                                                              and an ESMF have been prepared by the
                                                                              Borrower.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              The terrain near the civil works largely consists of
                                                                              cultivated and populated land, with little or no
                                                                              natural habitats. The ESIAs include measures to
                                                                              prevent further degradation of the land.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              The project does not involve forests or forestry.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No              N/A

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes             OP 4.04 Physical Cultural Property is triggered,
                         BP 4.11                                              not only to concur with OP 4.01 but also to
                                                                              address potential cultural heritage issues related


                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                                                                           to graves or sacred natural assets along the
                                                                           transmission line.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No            There are no indigenous Peoples in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           Project operations will induce land acquisition for
                            4.12                                           the power plants, the two channels, at the dam
                                                                           sites and for the transmission line. Resettlement
                                                                           action plans have been prepared for the dam sites
                                                                           and for the transmission line.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes           The Project had triggered OP 4.37 Safety of
                                                                           Dams. The dams are between 10 and 15 meters in
                                                                           height. The policy is triggered on account of the
                                                                           Jiji foundations being possibly complex and/or
                                                                           difficult to prepare. If the option of a dam is
                                                                           retained at Jiji after site investigations are
                                                                           completed, the excavation depth of the Jiji dam is
                                                                           likely to increase and therefore the height of the
                                                                           dam would increase but the normal water level
                                                                           would remain unchanged. In accordance with the
                                                                           policy, REGIDESO will hire an independent dam
                                                                           safety review panel (three specialists: geologist,
                                                                           geo technician and dam specialist) to review and
                                                                           advise on the design of the structure. If the option
                                                                           of dam is retained the Panel will remain in place
                                                                           throughout the construction phase.

                                                                           A Plan for construction supervision and quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           assurance and a Preliminary Operation and
                                                                           Maintenance Plan has been prepared in
                                                                           accordance with the policy.
                            Projects on International        Yes           Article 4 of the 2003 Convention on the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           Sustainable Management of Lake Tanganyika
                                                                           requires Burundi to keep "the other Contracting
                                                                           States informed of planned and on-going
                                                                           activities that have or are likely to have an
                                                                           adverse impact on the Lake and its Basin". The
                                                                           Lake and its basin are broadly defined to include
                                                                           tributaries and sub-tributaries.

                                                                           Riparian notification letters have been sent to the
                                                                           riparian states (Democratic Republic of Congo,
                                                                           Tanzania and Zambia) with copy to the Executive
                                                                           Secretary of the Lake Tanganyika Authority.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                   Page 6 of 13
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The project is named “Jiji & Mulembwe Hydropower project”, which comprises three
                           infrastructure components: the Mulembwe hydroelectric project on the River Mulembwe, the Jiji
                           project on the River Jiji, a tributary of the Mulembwe, and electricity transmission and distribution
                           network investments. The project includes five sections of transmission lines of 107.2 kilometers
                           total length with new or expanded substations. The 110/30 kV transmission lines cross most of
                           Burundi through 4 natural regions, (i) the Imbo plain, (ii) the Mumirwa, (iii) the Mugamba, and
                           (iv) the Bututsi, conveying the energy produced to various consumption centers.

                           The Jiji and Mulembwe Hydropower project could cause directly or indirectly impacts by
                           activities at the main work sites, including: the dam site, camps and quarries; the power plants; the
                           transmission lines; access roads; the relocation of local population and agricultural land
                           acquisition on the reservoir sites and on the pipeline. The project’s impacts on the environment are
                           generally modest, with the most significant related to land use. While the scope of the impacts at
                           each of the construction sites will vary, the impacts of construction activities on the physical
                           environment are concentrated at these sites, and depend on contractor practices. The population
                           density of the area is estimated at 250 inhabitants per square kilometer; it is lower than the national
                           average of 320 inhabitants per square kilometer. Critical economic activities in the area are
                           agriculture (practiced by almost all households), with the following predominant crops: bananas,
                           cassava, sweat potatoes, beans and coffee as cash crops.

                           Activities supported by the proposed operation are expected to have adverse environmental and
                           social impacts; therefore, the following Safeguards policies are triggered: OP 4.01 (Environmental
                           Assessment); OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural); OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement); OP 4.37 (Safety of
                           Dams) and OP 7.50 (International Waterways).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Jiji and Mulembwe Hydropower project could cause directly or indirectly impacts by
                           activities at the main work sites, including: the dam site, camps and quarries; the power plants; the
                           transmission lines; access roads; the relocation of local population and agricultural land
                           acquisition on the reservoir sites and on the pipeline. The project’s impacts on the environment are
                           generally modest, with the most significant related to land use. A census has been conducted in the
                           area of potential impacts of the projects. Identified cumulative impacts include:
                           •        Involuntary resettlement of the populations directly affected by the dam, the plant, the
                           line, and the access roads;
                           •        Increase in social conflicts and increased STD/AIDS transmission risks; and
                           •        Improved livelihood of local populations, opening of new markets, industrial
                           development.

                           Mitigating measures have been included in the ESMPs to mitigate these cumulative impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Jiji & Mulembwe Hydropower project has been subject to a series of analyses of alternatives in
                           line with OP/BP 4.01. The two sites, Jiji and Mulembwe, were selected following a comparative
                           analysis of potential small hydropower sites. From ten identified sites, a screening reduced the

                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                          number to four and then two (Jiji and Mulembwe) based on topography, hydrology, anticipated
                          ground conditions and anticipated social and environmental impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A detailed analysis of alternatives is included in the project’s ESIAs. The main advantages of
                           constructing Jiji and Mulembwe Hydropower project are: (i) increased guaranteed generation
                           capacity of existing hydropower (ii) reduced the use of expensive thermal generation; (iii) the
                           retained sites of Jiji and Mulembwe are not the most sensitive sites in terms of environmental
                           impacts and (iv) possibility for electrification of neighboring towns and villages of the dam site.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           REGIDESO has prepared three separate Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments (ESIAs)
                           with their respective Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMPs) and three separate
                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs). These safeguard instruments concern respectively the
                           Mulembwe hydroelectric project on the River Mulembwe, the Jiji project on the River Jiji, a
                           tributary of the Mulembwe, and the network of 110/30 kV transmission lines conveying the energy
                           produced to various consumption centers. Two safeguard frameworks - Environmental and Social
                           Management Frameworks (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) - have been
                           prepared for the 30kV and low voltage distribution lines whose layout has not yet been identified.

                          The results of the three ESIAs have showed that:

                          (i)      There is very little plant biodiversity in the project area, with almost all the land being
                          cultivated or temporarily fallow. Ligneous flora consisting of bushes and shrubs is to be found
                          mainly along natural watercourses. There is no forest formation, with trees often being isolated
                          and consisting mainly of oil palms and eucalyptus planted to produce firewood. Terrestrial animal
                          biodiversity is extremely poor owing to heavy human pressure and the fact that almost all rural
                          land is cultivated. The project will have no significant impact on forest resources, as they do not
                          exist in the project area. Only isolated trees or shrubs and bushes will be affected. In particular,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          this involves seasonal burning of dried crop residues, which is a major limiting factor for the
                          development of terrestrial fauna. Aquatic fauna in the river around the sites is also poor, being
                          limited to a few species of small fish that are common to other rivers in the country and the lake.
                          No migrating species was observed in these scientific catches or reported by local residents. The
                          villagers do not fish in the river other than occasionally during floods. All fish eaten in the project
                          area come from Lake Tanganyika. Impacts during the operational stage will be very limited. There
                          will be no impact on the river’s hydrology downstream of the power plant. Only the 1,500 meter
                          section of river situated between the dam and the power plant would be liable to dry out during the
                          driest periods of the year. Ensuring an environmental flow of 0.4 cubic meters per second
                          supplemented by permanent flows from springs along the river (estimated at about 0.5 cubic
                          meters per second) will avoid such drying-out. The expected impact on the fish population is also
                          limited owing to the very low biodiversity observed and the absence of migrating species.
                          However, the existence of a small reservoir could help contribute to the development of a larger
                          fish population as positive impacts of the project to the local population.

                          (ii)    No site of any cultural (i.e. historical, archaeological or religious) value was identified
                          within the project area or in the immediate vicinity. However, graves and other cultural sites may
                          be located near or within the RoW of the transmission line.

                          (iii)    In spite of the small reservoir involved, the results of the detailed study (using a


                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                         mathematical model) on the risk of a dam failure has showed that considering the maximum
                         admissible level at the power plant is 1,094.5 meters there is a risk of damage to the dams. There
                         are no public or private buildings in the valley bottom between the dam and the confluence with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Jiji that could be affected by the wave. Further downstream, the river bed is sufficiently deep
                         for the wave not to escape. No significant flooding is anticipated in the downstream areas.

                         (iv)     As the Jiji project is to be developed on a tributary of the Mulembwe, an analysis of the
                         cumulative effects of the two projects was performed. The assessment has concluded that the two
                         projects will lead to positive impacts of improved livelihoods and quality of life of populations
                         living in the area, economic growth at the regional and national level and minor impacts into the
                         rivers (both projects are of the run-of-the-river type and have very limited storage capacities
                         (30,000 cubic meters under normal water conditions for Mulembwe and 80,000 cubic meters for
                         Jiji). They will have no impact on the hydrology of the Mulembwe downstream of the confluence
                         with the Jiji; the rivers are poor in fish diversity or migrating species therefore, these two projects
                         could not have any impacts on fish resources in the lower course of the Mulembwe. The
                         simultaneous implementation of the two projects could have a negative impact on farming activity
                         in the area due to the recruitment of villagers, which would reduce the area of land being farmed
                         during the construction period. In these cases, preventive measures con nected with the
                         recruitment rules and procedures will be adopted. Families in the operators’ villages will become
                         potential new customers for fresh food products (fruit and vegetables, small livestock) bought
                         locally which will be a positive impact of the project for farmers.

                         (v)     While the scope of the impacts at each of the construction sites will vary, the impacts of
                         construction activities on the physical environment are concentrated at these sites, and depend on
                         contractor practices. The indirect impacts of construction at the different sites are cumulative for
                         the populations living in the project areas and their vicinity. The impacts of construction activities
                         have been grouped into three categories: (i) general environmental, social and safety impacts of
                         construction activities, (ii) direct impacts on populations, (iii) indirect and induced impacts on
                         populations. Mitigation measures with regard to the construction, as described in the ESMP and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         RAPs, are similar for the same type of impacts at all sites (including social impacts). These
                         measures should be integrated into bidding documents and contracts by the specification of
                         environmental and social clauses.

                         (vi)     The contractors for project construction (Design, Supply and Installation contractor) have
                         the contractual obligation for traffic, waste, labor force, environmental monitoring, health and
                         safety, and hazardous materials management. This includes mitigation and management measures
                         to deal with social and health consequences of migrant workers coming into the communities, e.g.
                         risks of development of STI (Sexually Transmissible Infections) and of AIDS, and safety issues
                         from construction traffic. Environmental and social clauses satisfactory to IDA should be included
                         in the bidding documents and contracts for infrastructure investments as legal obligations for
                         contractors.

                         (vii)    The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) for each infrastructure
                         (Mulembwe hydropower facilities, Jiji hydropower facilities and transmission lines) includes
                         sufficient and coherent action programs adapted to the pre-construction, construction and
                         operating stages.

                         (viii) The estimated total budget for implementation of the environmental mitigation measures
                         and the compensation measures for resettlement of affected persons in the project has been

                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                         estimated to be US$ 14.3 million. Financing these costs will be a government contribution to the
                         project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The proposed operation is not expected to pose a risk of
                         damaging cultural property. Nevertheless, proposed subprojects will be reviewed for their
                         potential impact on cultural property and clear procedures will be required and included in ESIA/
                         ESMP standard bidding documents for the identification and protection of cultural property from
                         damage and theft as well as the proper treatment of discovered artifacts. While not damaging
                         cultural property, subproject preparation may later identify and include assistance for preservation
                         of historic or archeological sites. If these opportunities occur, cultural property management plans
                         would be prepared for the pertinent subprojects. The ESMP includes measures to manage cultural
                         resources.

                         Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) is triggered for the proposed project. The involuntary
                         resettlement of the populations directly affected by the dam, the plant, the line, and the access
                         roads is described in the respective RAPs along with their mitigating measures. Some additional
                         mitigation measures are included in the ESMP.

                         Operational Policy 4.37 Safety of Dams is triggered on account of the Jiji foundations being
                         possibly complex and/or difficult to prepare. If the option of a dam at Jiji is retained after site
                         geophysical investigation are completed, the excavation depth is like to increase and the dam
                         height would then increase. If the option of a dam at Jiji is retained, the safety issues posed by the
                         Jiji dam and its impacts on the proposed project as well as an extensive review of all detailed
                         technical matters will be undertaken by a dam safety panel to be recruited by REGIDESO. This
                         panel will provide advice on the finalization of technical aspects of dams within the bidding
                         documents and continue to assist REGIDESO through the construction, initial filling, and start-up
                         of the dam, including any design or operational precautions to ensure that the project is consistent
                         with Bank safeguard policies. REGIDESO will appoint the independent dam safety panel before
                         launching bidding documents of dam civil works with terms of reference and staffing acceptable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to the World Bank. The dam safety panel should conduct a review of the project site, seismic
                         design requirements, evaluation of flood risks and their incorporation in the design, the general
                         arrangement of the site, the location of the main structures, and all technical aspects before and
                         during construction. The results of the ESIA fro Jiji has confirmed that there would be no
                         downstream hazards in the case of dam failure based on dam failure / flooding analysis and
                         downstream topographic /land use survey. The river bed is sufficiently deep downstream for the
                         wave, which would be low, not to escape. No significant flooding is anticipated in the areas
                         downstream. Therefore, preparation of Emergency Preparedness (EPP) is deemed to be not
                         necessary. A Plan for Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance and a Preliminary
                         Operation and Maintenance Plan have been prepared in compliance with the requirements of OP
                         4.37. The Bank has reviewed these and found them to be acceptable. (

                         The Operational Policy (OP 7.50) Projects on International Waterways is triggered. At the request
                         of the Government, the Bank has notified Burundi's riparian neighbors (Tanzania, Zambia,
                         Democratic Republic of Congo, and Lake Tanganyika Authority) in compliance with the policy.
                         Riparian notices were sent on January 28, 2014 to the Democratic Republic of Congo, Republic of
                         Zambia and Republic of Tanzania. Zambia responded on 24 February 2014. The deadline of
                         February 28, 2014 for response having passed, the requirement is deemed to have been met.

                         The implementation arrangements for the ESMP are fully integrated in the overall implementation

                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           arrangements of the project. REGIDESO is the ultimate responsible for the project’s compliance
                           with Burundi legislation and World Bank safeguards guidelines. An environmental and social
                           management unit will be created at REGIDESO’s project implementation unit. This unit will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mandated to ensure the implementation of project environmental and social mitigation measures.
                           This unit will be composed by two safeguard experts (one environmental specialist and one social
                           scientist) who will be recruited in accordance with terms of reference acceptable by the Bank. At
                           the beginning, this safeguard unit will be supported by a senior international consultant full time
                           with confirmed experience in both environmental and social safeguards.

                           The Environmental and Social Advisory Panel is an independent entity that will provide advice
                           and recommendations on all environmental and social aspects of the project. This Panel will be
                           recruited before implementation of the RAPs with terms of reference acceptable to the Bank and
                           the Panel will be in place for the duration of implementation of the ESMPs.

                           A Dam Safety Review Panel will be recruited with terms of reference acceptable by the Bank to
                           conduct independent review of the design of the Jiji dam and to ensure independent monitoring of
                           dam construction if the option of a dam at Jiji is retained. This panel will be composed of three
                           experts: geologist, a geotechnical, and dam civil works expert.

                           The ESMPs and RAPs includes conflict an overall grievance mechanism, a communication
                           program, as well as conflict prevention measures, including the mediation and resolution of
                           conflicts. The grievance mechanism provides affordable and accessible procedures for third-party
                           settlement of disputes arising from resettlement.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Extensive public consultations on the ESIAs and Resettlement program have been done since 2010
                           during the preparation of feasibility studies. Many local and national consultations have been
                           conducted during the socio-economic surveys carried out in 2010-2011. The key stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                           were consulted on all safeguards documents, including the ESMPs and the various RAPs. The
                           three ESIAs with the ESMF have been approved by the Bank on December 01, 2013 and have
                           obtained an environmental compliance certificate No. 728/2013 on December 09, 2013 delivered
                           by the Ministry of water, environmental and urban, Republic of Burundi. They have been
                           disclosed in the country since December 15, 2013 in the Public Centers, at the REGIDESO web
                           site and in the Infoshop on December 17, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        27-Feb-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burundi                                                            13-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        13-Nov-2013


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burundi                                                          12-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Kyran O'Sullivan
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 10-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Lucio Monari (SM)                              Date: 10-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
