                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7964
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                            Project ID:    P148048
                            Project Name:      Third Secondary and Local Roads Project (P148048)
                            Task Team          Joseph Melitauri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          26-Mar-2014                        Estimated   17-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSTR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (98%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (2%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (25%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (25%), Regional integration (25%), Infrastructure serv ices for private sector
                                              development (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      93.75           Total Bank Financing:                  75.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   18.75
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      75.00
                              Total                                                                                      93.75
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to reduce road user costs on project roads and
                           improve the sustainability of the secondary and local road asset management.



                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Third Secondary and Local Roads Project (SLRP-III) would consist of three
                         components totaling US$93.75 million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Secondary and Local Roads (US$ 90.19 million of
                         which US$ 72.15 million is IBRD loan).

                         Sub-component 1.1: Rehabilitation and improvement works of secondary and local roads (US$ 80.65
                         million of which US$ 64.52 million is IBRD loan).
                         This sub-component will finance rehabilitation and improvement works of secondary and local
                         roads, totaling 200 km (53 km of local roads and 147 km of secondary roads including 15 km of
                         Gurjaani-Bakurtsikhe bypass). About half the selected local roads for rehabilitation are located in
                         Imereti region; the bypass is located in Kakheti region. Road safety audits will be embedded in the
                         design process from the beginning and recommendations of the road safety audits will be
                         implemented as an integral part of the entire rehabilitation works contracts.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Consultancy services for supervision and design (US$ 9.54 million of which US
                         $ 7.63 million is IBRD loan).
                         Designs for about 90 km of road sections have been or are being prepared under SLRP-II and
                         Kakheti Regional Roads Improvement Project (KRRIP). This sub-component will finance detailed
                         designs of the remaining project work program (for about 110 km) under Third SLRP and other new
                         road projects, and supervision of civil works. Land acquisition, if any, will be financed from the
                         government budget.

                         Component 2: Capacity building and strengthening in local and secondary roads management (US$
                         1.36 million of which US$ 1.09 million is IBRD loan).

                         Sub-component 2.1: Local roads management (US$ 0.56 million of which is US$ 0.45 million is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IBRD loan).
                         This sub-component will provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Regional Development and
                         Infrastructure (MRDI) and selected municipalities in (i) building the technical and management
                         capacity of MRDI’s Regional Development Division and municipalities in local roads management,
                         and preparing annual programs based on the Guidelines for Local Roads Planning and Management
                         developed under SLRP-I and (ii) the carrying out of a study to determine feasibility of pilot micro-
                         enterprises for routine maintenance of local roads in Georgia’s context. If the study confirms the
                         feasibility of micro-enterprises in Georgia, financing of further steps (e.g., preparation of manuals,
                         development of trainings, delivery of trainings and creation of micro-enterprises) will be discussed
                         and identified jointly with the MRDI and Ministry of Finance during the mid-term review. Routine
                         maintenance works through micro-enterprises would be financed from the municipalities’ budget.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Secondary roads management and project implementation support (US$ 0.80
                         million of which is US$ 0.64 million is IBRD loan).
                         This sub-component will contribute to further strengthening of the RD’s capacity in secondary roads
                         management through trainings and study tours on innovative management practices and
                         technologies. In addition, it will provide for the institutional support to the Roads Department (RD),
                         Foreign Projects Unit (FPU) and Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Center (TRRC) for hiring
                         consultants and a project manager for project implementation, audit, monitoring and evaluation of
                         project progress towards the achievement of the PDO and delivery of project outcomes.


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         Component 3: Road Safety Technical Assistance (US$ 2.20 million of which US$ 1.76 million is
                         IBRD loan).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will use a safe systems approach (i.e., engineering, education, enforcement and
                         emergency services) and will finance a “Safe Village” program on and along three local roads in
                         Imereti Region which are to be rehabilitated under Third SLRP. This component will finance
                         implementation of (i) additional road safety engineering measures (e.g., sidewalks, pedestrian
                         crossing, installation of speed bumps, barriers, blinking traffic lights near schools and other public
                         places) outside the scope of rehabilitation or improvement works, (ii) education and publicity
                         campaigns targeting residents living along these three local roads and other road users, (iii) technical
                         assistance (e.g., equipment and/or training) to police to monitor and enforce safety rules on these
                         local roads, and (iv) technical assistance (e.g., equipment and/or training) to emergency services
                         operating to timely and effectively respond to road accidents and reduce the risk of fatalities on these
                         local roads. In case of savings during the implementation of Safe Village program in Imereti region ,
                         additional engineering measures may be suggested and implemented in another project region.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         SLRP III will be implemented country-wide and will cover the selected road sections.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Vera Dugandzic (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is not expected to have significant
                          BP 4.01                                              impact on the environment and is classified as
                                                                               Environmental Category B. All planned physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               works are limited to rehabilitation of the existing
                                                                               alignments. Overall long term social and
                                                                               environmental impacts will be positive, while
                                                                               negative impacts will be of minor scope and
                                                                               duration, and typical for any secondary/local road
                                                                               rehabilitation activity.

                                                                               The only higher risk activity is upgrading of the
                                                                               Gurjaani-Bakurtsikhe bypass road connecting two
                                                                               rural settlements in Kakheti region, East Georgia.
                                                                               Construction of this 15 km road had been initiated
                                                                               decades ago, the corridor had been cleared, and
                                                                               the road base preparation commenced, but later
                                                                               the site got abandoned. Over the years it became
                                                                               an informal waste dump site for household and
                                                                               construction waste, including discarded roofing
                                                                               sheets containing asbestos. While no other
                                                                               hazardous material has been identified as yet,
                                                                               further investigation of waste composition will be
                                                                               required. While the national legislation


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                                                                    establishes procedures for handling asbestos-
                                                                    containing waste, the country lacks proper
                                                                    infrastructure for hazardous waste disposal. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Roads Department will work with Ministry of
                                                                    Environment and Natural Resources Protection,
                                                                    and with local authorities to identify an
                                                                    acceptable solution for collecting and disposing
                                                                    off the waste dumped along the Gurjaani-
                                                                    Bakurtsikhe bypass alignment, with particular
                                                                    attention to suitable disposition of the asbestos
                                                                    and any other hazardous material that may be
                                                                    encountered. Because the risk associated with the
                                                                    described investment as well as the measures for
                                                                    its mitigation are known upfront and are not of
                                                                    large scale, and because all other considered
                                                                    investments will have minimal negative impacts
                                                                    on the natural and social environment, the project
                                                                    remains to be classified as Environmental
                                                                    Category B.

                                                                    An Environmental and Social Management
                                                                    Framework (ESMF), currently used for the
                                                                    ongoing SLRP II, was updated for the purposes of
                                                                    Third SLRP. ESMF provides an overview of the
                                                                    expected environmental and social issues related
                                                                    to the project implementation and will offer
                                                                    comprehensive guidance on the site-specific
                                                                    environmental management planning to be carried
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    out by the client using consultant services for all
                                                                    sections of roads to be proposed for the project
                                                                    intervention on a rolling basis. The use of an
                                                                    EMP Checklist for Small Scale Road
                                                                    Construction or Rehabilitation is proposed to
                                                                    facilitate site-specific environmental management
                                                                    planning under the project, with the exception of
                                                                    a higher risk Gurjaani-Bakurtsikhe bypass sub-
                                                                    project.

                                                                    ESMF was disclosed and opened for public
                                                                    feedback prior to the project appraisal, while site-
                                                                    specific EMPs will be subjected to the similar
                                                                    procedures and get finalized based on the
                                                                    received public feedback prior to commencement
                                                                    of works in each individual road section.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No




                                                            Page 4 of 9
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The Policy is triggered largely as a precautionary
                         4.12                                            measure as the project will not finance any new
                                                                         road construction and the civil works will be
                                                                         performed within the existing right-of-way. No
                                                                         physical displacement of occupants or restriction
                                                                         of access to resources or income streams is
                                                                         expected. However, minor land acquisition may
                                                                         take place to provide adequate sidewalks and
                                                                         drainage, if required.

                                                                         Potential land acquisition and resettlement may
                                                                         occur along the 15km long road of Gurjaani-
                                                                         Bakurtsikhe bypass as the route was laid decades
                                                                         ago and abandoned afterwards.

                                                                         As a guiding resettlement instrument, a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) used for
                                                                         the ongoing SLRP-II was updated, approved by
                                                                         the Bank, and disclosed in-country on March 28,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         2014. The document was finalized after a public
                                                                         consultation meeting, re-disclosed in-country, and
                                                                         published through the InfoShop.

                                                                         Preparation and development of a site-specific
                                                                         Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the Gurjaani-
                                                                         Bakurtsikhe bypass will be done in parallel with
                                                                         the preparation of the final detailed design and
                                                                         feasibility study for the bypass in order to: (i)
                                                                         limit the adverse impact on affected households;
                                                                         (ii) confirm appropriate compensation
                                                                         entitlements; and (iii) identify vulnerable persons.
                                                                         Its implementation will be linked with
                                                                         corresponding civil works procurement
                                                                         milestones to ensure that compensation and
                                                                         assistance is delivered to project affected people
                                                                         prior to taking over of their land and other assets
                                                                         lost to the project activities.




                                                                 Page 5 of 9
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              SLRP-III will finance the rehabilitation of several priority sections of the existing roads. Works to
                              be undertaken in various locations will be similar in terms of applied technologies and scope.
                              Their potential environmental risks and measures required for mitigation of these risks are also
                              mostly common for the target sections of roads and are well known upfront. An Environmental
                              and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed to provide guiding principles for
                              environmental management. A checklist for developing site-specific EMPs for small scale road
                              construction or rehabilitation will be used as a simplified tool applicable to individual investments.
                              Only one road included into Third SLRP work program stands out due to relatively higher
                              environmental and social risks associated with its reconstruction. This road is a bypass connecting
                              village Bakurtsikhe to the town of Gurjaani, and is located in the Kakheti region and its corridor is
                              polluted with household waste dumps that have accumulated over the years. The ongoing Kakheti
                              Regional Roads Improvement Project proceeds are used to undertake an Environmental and Social
                              Impact Assessment (ESIA) of this road. The ESIA report will provide detailed information on the
                              volume and composition of waste and gives guidance on its safe disposal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              All other works to be supported by Third SLRP are low risk activities to be undertaken on the
                              existing roads in the current right-of-way, without tangible widening or re-routing of the
                              carriageways. Most of these roads pass through significantly transformed landscapes, away from
                              important habitats and biodiversity hotspots. Potential environmental issues associated with
                              rehabilitation of these roads are expected to be minor and typical for small-scale rehabilitation
                              works on roads, mainly comprising: construction waste management, sourcing of natural
                              construction materials (soil/gravel/sand), running of small asphalt/concrete plants, and
                              maintaining/servicing construction machinery.

                              The potential social impact that road works may entail in terms of resettlement is considered to be
                              acceptably low to moderate, as the project will not finance new road construction and the civil
                              works will be performed within the existing right-of-way. However, minor land acquisition may
                              take place to provide adequate sidewalks and drainage for rehabilitation works. No physical
                              displacement of occupants or restriction of access to resources or income streams is expected. An
                              informal land use along the route of Gurjaani-Bakurtsikhe bypass is quite likely, as it was laid
                              decades ago and abandoned afterwards.

                              As a guiding resettlement instrument, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed
                              based on the existing RPF currently in use for the purposes of SLRP-II. Site-specific Resettlement
                              Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared, as required, according to RPF. A RAP for Gurjaani-


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           Bakurtsikhe bypass will be worked out in parallel with the feasibility study and the final detailed
                           design for Gurjaani-Bakurtsikhe bypass. Its preparation and implementation will be linked with
                           corresponding civil works procurement milestones to ensure that compensation and assistance is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           delivered to project affected people prior to taking over of their land and other assets lost to the
                           project activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected to have positive long term social impacts while being neutral to the natural
                           environment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower updated an ESMF and RPF used for on ongoing SLRP-II for the purposes of Third
                           SLRP. These documents provide detailed guidance for preparing site-specific safeguard
                           documents, disclosing them, discussing with project affected people, and monitoring their
                           implementation.

                          The RD is responsible for due application of environmental and social safeguards. Due
                          environmental diligence of the RD will include assuring: (i) presence of satisfactory site-specific
                          EMPs for all sections of roads under rehabilitation; (ii) presence of the required permits for waste
                          disposal, quarrying and borrowing, operation of asphalt/concrete plants, etc., as applicable; (iii)
                          proper application of mitigation measures provided in the site-specific EMPs in the course of
                          works and upon their completion; and (iv) observance of occupational safety rules as well as
                          safety of traffic and pedestrian movement in and around work sites. For meeting such standards,
                          RD will exercise quality control of EMPs, guarantee their inclusion in the bidding documents and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          incorporation into the works contracts, and maintain efficient mechanism of field environmental
                          monitoring of works.

                           Environmental performance under the ongoing SLRP-II is satisfactory. The RD has a specialized
                           Resettlement and Environment Unit, with well-defined duties and responsibilities of staff
                           members who are adequately skilled. Quality of the monthly environmental supervision reports
                           generated under SLRP-II has considerably improved over the years of its implementation. Alike
                           the arrangements for SLRP-II, technical supervision of Third SLRP may be contracted out by the
                           RD. However, maintaining of adequate in-house capacity for safeguards’ management would be
                           essential for ensuring quality control of the supervision consultant’s work and for taking relevant
                           and timely action on the issues reported by the consultant.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           As the Project will improve around 200 km of regional and local road sections benefiting some
                           100,000 local residents, key beneficiaries include road users, local businesses, and local
                           municipalities. Central government bodies - especially the MRDI and its RD are the key
                           stakeholders of the project.

                          RD disclosed the draft ESMF and RPF in Georgian and English languages, and held a public
                          consultation meeting with relevant stakeholders. These documents were finalized, and re-disclosed


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           in-country and through the InfoShop. Site-specific ESIA reports, EMPs, and RAPs, as required,
                           will undergo similar procedures once the designs are prepared for rehabilitation of individual
                           roads. EMPs will be included into tender documents and will be attached to works contracts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           RAPs, as required, will be implemented prior to commencement of works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                          14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: Draft ESMF was first disclosed on the RD's website on March 31, 2014. A public
                                         consultation meeting was held on April 11, 2014 and the finalized ESMF was re-
                                         disclosed on April 14, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                          14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: Draft RPF was disclosed on the RD's website on March 28, 2014. A public
                                         consulation meeting was held on April 11, 2014 and the finalized RPF was re-
                                         disclosed on April 14, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Joseph Melitauri
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Jacques Bure (SM)                           Date: 18-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
