INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC6530
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P148523
Project Name:   CN-Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conservation Project (P 148523)
Task Team       Yan F. Zhang
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Apr-2015                Estimated     24-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(50%)
Theme(s):       Cultural Heritage (60%), Other urban development (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     150.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                        50.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                          150.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
To assist Jingzhou municipality in conserving its cultural heritage and ecological environment to
promote tourism and enhance the quality of life of residents in the perimeters around the Historic
City.
C. Project Description
The project would tentatively comprise of four components as follows:


﻿Component 1: Cultural Heritage Conservation and Tourism Promotion. This component is intended
to conserve Jingzhou's physical and intangible cultural heritage assets intended to also foster tourism
development. It comprises of five subcomponents: (i) Conservation of the a segment of the City Wall
O
U       which has been damaged by years of neglect, weather and invasive vegetation; the project will
introduce a more systematized approach to the conservation and restoration of all the unique features
of the wall segment; (ii) Conservation of the Confucius Temple, possibly establishment of an
archaeological excavation site within the temple complex and an exhibition center for educating the
public about Confucius; (iii) upgrading of the Jingzhou Museum, including the renovation, redesign
of the exhibition schemes, procurement of special equipment in the three treasure halls. (iv) Support
to tourism development by constructing three tourist information centers (outside the east, south, and
west gate areas, including landscaping and signage and visitor's navigation systems; as well as
training local residents to participate in the tourism related business and intangible cultural heritage
activities; and (v) Technical assistance for tourism development (e.g., historic town management
plan, guidelines for public participation in cultural heritage conservation and tourism development,
tourism management plan, official tourism website and a digital cultural heritage management
system, etc.).
Component 2: Improving the Water Environment of the Historic This component aims to
systematically improve the water ecosystem in the moat, lakes and ponds through the following
activities: (i) completing the already in-place set of interceptor sewers around the Historic Town plus
some internal interconnectivity to the interceptors, (ii) dredging the moat and lakes to restore their
hydraulic characteristics and aquatic health, (iii) a diversion of fresh water into the moat and lakes
from the newly commissioned Yangze - Han Rivers Canal, and (iv) augmentation of the existing
wetlands within West Lake, North Lake, and a few other smaller water bodies in the north of the
Historic Town.
Component 3: Improving Accessibility of the Historic Town. This component comprised of five
subcomponents: (i) Road rehabilitation and improvement, including internal ring road rehabilitation,
external ring road rehabilitation and construction (including one new bridge), old town gate traffic
management, moat bridges upgrading, junction improvements, and traffic organization optimization;
(ii) NMT improvement, including bicycle network improvement, public bicycle sharing system,
pedestrian sidewalk improvements, and pedestrian grade-separation crossing; (iii) Parking facilities,
a       namely the construction of three parking lots together with three tourist centers, including 600 car
parking spaces and bus parking spaces; (iv) Tourist bus system to connect the information centers at
the gates with the tourism attractions inside the old town, including the procurement of 20 clean
energy buses; and (v) Traffic guidance signage, including statistic signage and dynamic signage.
Component 4: Project Management and Institutional Capability Building. The component aims to
strengthen the institutional capacity of implementing units. It supports (i) consulting services for
project management, monitoring and supervision; (ii) office equipment; (iii) training for project
management and strengthening institution capacity, possibly including a project management and
monitoring information system for the PMO; and (iv) independent monitoring for the implementation
of environmental and social safeguards.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Jingzhou is one of the municipalities in the Hubei Province of China, with history of more than 2600
years. Total population is about 6.3 million in which about 1.56 million in urban areas. It is densely


﻿covered by a network of waterways, as well as lakes. Jingzhou is located on the middle reaches of
Yangzi River (Chang Jiang) in the Jianghan Plain. To its east -- downstream -- lies Wuhan, the
provincial capital; to its west -- upstream -- Yichang Municipality, the Three Gorges dam is located.
Jingmen City, another city in Hubei, lies to the north; and to its south are Yueyang and Changde, two
O
U       municipalities in Hunan province.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
This is the first freestanding Bank funded project in Jingzhou. The municipality government pays
a      special importance to the project. The PMO has been established and includes social and
environmental safeguards specialists who are overseeing the preparation of safeguards instruments.
Moreover, consulting teams for project feasibility study, environmental and social assessments have
been hired. The EIA is being carried out by, Hubei Research Academy of Environmental Sciences
(HRAES), an EA Class A Certificate holding Institute. It has been contracted to prepare the
environmental safeguards documents that are requested by national and Bank policies and
regulations. HRAES has prepared Category A EA reports for several Bank financed projects and
have a solid knowledge of the Bank's policies and requirements. The social impact assessment is
being carried out by Wuhan University Center of Engineering Resettlement Research which has
extensive experience preparing social assessments and resettlement action plans under Bank projects.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Chongwu Sun (GENDR)
Zhefu Liu (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Based on the project proposal and preliminary
OP/BP 4.01                               screening and scoping during project identification,
this policy is triggered, mainly because of the
activities under the component 1, 2 and 3.
The project aims to have significant benefits in terms
of providing improved water environment, transport
services and tourism promotion in Jingzhou historic
town. Investments under Component 1. 2 and 3
would include civil works for water, drainage,
transport facilities, etc., which may bring negative
environmental and social impacts during
construction and operation. Potential negative
environmental and social impacts would mainly
occur in the construction phase, and they would
include soil erosion, noise, dust, traffic interruption
and shipping and disposal of construction waste, etc.
The following environmental safeguards instruments
are proposed: An environmental impact assessment
(EIA) and a standalone environmental management
plan (EMP) will be prepared to cover the entire


﻿project. Social impact should be designed as part of
the EIA.
During EIA preparation, in addition to above
mentioned negative impacts in construction phase,
other potential impacts should also be carefully
assessed and adequate attention should be paid,
including proper hauling and disposal of dredged
materials from moat and waterway restoration,
sludge from wastewater treatment; impacts of
ancillary facilities (e.g., disposal site for the dredged
materials; wastewater treatment plant that will treat
intercepted wastewater from the project, etc.) and
associated activities. The EIA should also carefully
assess induced impacts such as adequacy of waste
management facilities and services, crime rates and
other social issues related to the influx of tourists in
the area and increases in land and rental prices.
It was noted that sustainable water quality
improvement in the moat and surrounding water
bodies would benefit from water diversion of fresh
water from the newly commissioned Yangze - Han
Rivers Canal, which was a national project to divert
water from Yangze River to Han River and Jingzhou
Municipality took a very small share from it, mainly
for water supply, irrigation and economic
development in the whole municipality, through
existing river system to distribute water. During the
EIA preparation, a due diligence will be carried out.
During the preparation of the proposed instruments,
WBG's Environmental, Health and Safety Guideline
will be an important reference.
Public consultation and information disclosure will
be conducted following OP4.01 requirements during
EIA preparation. At least two rounds of public
consultation will be carried out with potentially
affected persons and other relevant stakeholders
through various methods, e.g., questionnaire surveys,
interviews and public meetings as needed. The full
draft EIA will be disclosed locally.
Category A is assigned to the project for a full
environmental and social assessment for the
proposed investment. In addition, a due diligence


﻿will be conducted, as part of EIA, for the associated
facilities and investment program. The EIA will also
assess the potential induced impacts, if any,
concerning population target of the historic town.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           Based on the information provided, there are no
significant natural habitats located in the proposed
project areas. However, since the project components
are located in various water bodies, this policy is
triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           Based on current information, the proposed project
components are not located in forest areas.
Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           The proposed project will not procure pesticides nor
will it result in the increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          One of the key objectives of the project is to protect
OP/BP 4.11                                the cultural heritage and the policy is triggered
because Component 1 addresses crucial issues to
preserve valuable cultural heritage in the city. In the
EA process, related information will be checked and
assessed, and an appropriate mitigation and
management plan will be proposed as part of the EA.
In the process, the Culture authority will participate
and provide all required information and the
guidance. In addition, there will be a physical
cultural resources management plan to be prepared in
project preparation, in which Chance Find
Procedures to properly handle and report chance
finds during construction should be included, as well
as in the EMP. The TT has included a PCR
specialist in the team.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           The Task Team visited the urban communities that
4.10                                      would be affected by the activities of the proposed
project to determine whether or not the IP policy
needs to be triggered. The team concluded that the
project area is predominantly Han Chinese and there
are no ethnic minority groups as defined by OP4. 10
such as Manchu and Mongolian communities present
in, or have collective attachment to the project area.
Bank OP 4.10 policy is not triggered and IPDP was
not requested.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         It was estimated about 200 urban families would be
BP 4.12                                   affected by demolition of their housing or businesses
under the different components of the project. An
experienced social safeguards consulting team has
been contracted by the PMO to conduct the
resettlement impact survey of the entire project area


﻿following the project identification mission. An
initial report was presented to the Bank in May 2014
and is currently being revised. A Resettlement
Action Plan will be reviewed by the Bank prior to the
project pre-appraisal.
Jingzhou Municipality's Master Plan (2011-2020)
has suggested to control the population size of the
Historic Town to be within 60,000, which represents
an outflow of around 60,000 people by 2020. This
reduction of population, if implemented by
involuntary relocation, may represent significant
risks to the success of the Project. Based on
information provided by the institute in charge of the
social assessment, the urban planning and
development department of the Municipal
Government, the PMO, as well as review of the
Master Plan (2011-2020) and the subsequent
Detailed Regulatory Plan of Jingzhou Municipality,
the team found out that, overall, the Municipal
Government has no plans to involuntarily relocate its
resident in order to "de-densify" the city. In fact,
they intend to realize the population target by three
approaches: (i) to move out some schools and
hospitals in hopes that residents will be attracted to
apartment buildings around the new school and
hospital sites outside of the Historic Town. To date,
the Municipality only started relocating a high school
and a hospital, which cater to students and patients
from the entire region; (ii) to move local government
offices outside the historic town. However such plan
has been stalled due to the new National Directives
in July 2013 to stop new construction of government
buildings for five years; and (iii) to relocate some
residents to new residential areas outside the historic
town, as part of its "shanty town transformation"
program. So far, none of the project sites are
associated with such a program. Moreover, there has
been no substantial financing available for achieving
such population target. In short, despite the target
reduction of population size of the Historic Town, its
implementation has been extremely slow.
The task team will define the boundaries of the
project and, if necessary, put in place proper
mitigation measures and communications strategy
based on further due diligence through the social


﻿assessment and dialog with the client.
The assessment of potential induced impacts, if any,
concerning population dynamics of the historic town
through the implementation of involuntary
depopulation activities or more dynamic population
movements and changes to the housing market, will
be carried out in detail during project preparation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           None
Projects on International   No           None
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        None
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-Jan-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguards assessments have been launched after the Identification mission in April 2014.
Safeguards-related studies should be completed by January 8. 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yan F. Zhang
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                     Date: 07-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                  Date: 07-Jan-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


