INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8772
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         India                      Project ID:   P150394
Project Name:    MP Higher Education Reforms Project (P150394)
Task Team        Tobias Linden,Sangeeta Goyal
Leader(s):
Estimated        06-Apr-2015                Estimated      16-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Tertiary education (100%)
Theme(s):        Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     430.00             Total Bank Financing:   300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              130.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     300.00
Total                                                           430.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve quality of and equity in education
outcomes for students in higher education, and to increase the effectiveness of the higher education
system in Madhya Pradesh.
C. Project Description
1. The project design is based on analytical work conducted by the World Bank, in support of the
GoMP. The project would seek a comprehensive reform of the higher education system in the State,


﻿around four areas: (i) innovation and quality improvement; (ii) governance reforms; (iii) more
effective use of public funding; and, (iv) increasing equity and access. Additionally, the project will
support sound project management and monitoring and evaluation structures for project
implementation.
0
2. The original project proposal sent by the GoMP to the Government of India (DEA) proposed a
World Bank Credit of US$500 million; the proposal contained a large number of activities across
multiple stakeholders and institutions. However, the Credit amount ceiling approved by DEA is US
$300 million (which would be 70% of total project costs). Therefore, given this reduction in the
financing envelop, discussions with the Government during project preparation need to address
which activities can be included; the task team has already flagged to the GoMP that major civil
works is likely not an area of the Bank's greatest value added.
3. It is proposed that the project use either a Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) or a P4R
approach, as this would focus the operation on the outcomes to be achieved and promote piloting of
different combinations of activities to achieve specific goals. Both the Department of Higher
Education and the Department of Institutional Finance has agreed to this approach.
4. The project will have 2 components, as follows:
(a)    Enhancing Quality and Equity (Bank support - $290 mill; Total component cost - $415 mill.)
Key areas of support under each area include:
i.     Innovation and quality improvement: pedagogical and other training for faculty; grants to
support institutional development plans to prioritize investments; new fields of study/curricula with
better employment prospects; and mechanisms for tracking of graduates.
ii.    Governance reforms: establishment of independent State Higher Education Council and
governing bodies for institutions; support for reform of examination system; streamlining of the
affiliation system; new rules of internal decision-making and financial management to support
institutional autonomy
iii.   More effective use of public funding: new funding formula for state budget resources for
both teaching and research; targeted scale-up of successful programs; and incentives for institutions
to increase private resources
iv.    Increasing equity: institutional incentives to increase enrollment of girls/disadvantaged
a       groups; development of technology based distance learning; and girls hostels.
(b) Technical Assistance to DHE (Bank support - $10 mill.; Total component cost -$15 mill.)
15. Under this component, technical assistance will be provided to the implementing agency and the
DHE in areas in project management, monitoring and evaluation, and in the establishment of robust
project information systems.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Madhya Pradesh, statewide. Specific locations will be identified after competitive selection of
institutions. Around -- educational institutions are expected to participate from 50 districts.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Borrower has some experience in implementation of Bank's Safeguard Policies through Technical
Engineering/ Education Quality Improvement Project and will have people dedicated to do so at the
state level. Ensuring adequate capacity will be part of project design and implementation.


﻿F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (GENDR)
Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment      Yes          The project will support only minor repairs and
OP/BP 4.01                                 refurbishments of the existing infrastructure. An
Environment Assessment will be undertaken and
based on findings from this exercise, an Environment
Management Plan/Framework will be prepared to
guide/improve the management of environment,
health and safety aspects on the campuses of Higher
Education institutions supported/covered under the
project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       No
Physical Cultural Resources   No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          The policy is triggered given the project is state-wide
4.10                                       and the available data indicating that the enrolment
of students belonging to Scheduled Castes (SCs) and
Scheduled Tribes (STs) is well below their share of
the population. A Social Assessment (SA) has been
commissioned and based on the findings, the project
will develop a tribal development plan (TDP) and
equity guidelines to ensure that students from tribal
and other disadvantaged groups who enter the
participating higher education institutions are
provided with equitable benefits.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
(a) OP/ BP 4.10 is triggered under the project. A Social Assessment (SA) has been commissioned
and based on the findings, the project will develop a tribal development plan (TDP) and equity
guidelines to ensure that students from tribal and other disadvantaged groups who enter the
participating higher education institutions are provided with equitable benefits.
(b) OP/ BP 4.01 is triggered under the project. An Environment Assessment will be undertaken
and based on findings from this exercise, an Environment Management Plan/Framework will be
prepared to guide/improve the management of environment, health and safety aspects on the
campuses of HE institutions supported/covered under the project.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Tobias Linden,Sangeeta Goyal
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name:                                         Date:
Practice Manager/     Name:                                         Date:
Manager:


