                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6057
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Malawi                             Project ID:    P133620
                            Project Name:     Malawi Fourth Social Action Fund (MASAF IV): Strengthening Safety Nets
                                              Systems (P133620)
                            Task Team         Maniza B. Naqvi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       18-Oct-2013                          Estimated   19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTSE                                 Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (30%), Primary education (10%), Other social service s (5%), Agro-industry,
                                              marketing, and trade (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       107.00           Total Bank Financing:  57.00
                            Financing Gap:             50.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                32.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  25.00
                              Total                                                                                      57.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective of the proposed project is to strengthen Malawi’s social safety


                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         net delivery systems and coordination across programs.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Current Project Development Objectives
                         The Project Development Objective of the proposed project is to strengthen Malawi’s social safety
                         net delivery systems and coordination across programs to reduce vulnerability.

                         Project Description
                         The proposed MASAF IV would be implemented using an Investment Project Financing (IPF) for a
                         period of 4 years starting in January 2014. The project is expected to be financed by an IDA credit of
                         US$50.00 million. Specifically, the project is a second generation safety net which would improve
                         key safety net programs; and support the building blocks for a coordinated and systematic approach
                         to safety nets. It would complement MASAF III and would innovate by improving the Social Cash
                         Transfers Program, Public Works program through MASAF and COMSIP and the capacities of
                         implementing agencies and ministries to support the key building blocks of a safety net system.
                         Integrated and Coordinated Social Safety Nets Program: The goal of the new social safety nets
                         Program, to be supervised and coordinated through MASAF under the LDF-TST mechanism would
                         be to reduce vulnerability and extreme poverty and improve livelihoods, resilience and quality-of-life
                         for the poor. The Program would focus on safeguarding people and the environment, on which their
                         livelihood depends, through linkages between agriculture, food security, water, irrigation, social
                         welfare, vulnerability, poverty, children and gender issues. The program would be designed on the
                         basis of the following principles: (i) Fair and transparent client selection (ii) Timely, predictable
                         transfers (iii) Gender Equity (iv) Participatory planning and (v) Environment protection. The
                         Program approach would be an area and watershed management and development for building food
                         security, livelihoods, and resilience against natural disasters through community identified and
                         managed PWs, livelihood programs and social cash transfers.

                         Institutional Arrangements for the new social safety nets program clarify the roles, responsibilities
                         and coordination arrangements of implementers, and ensure that targeting mechanisms are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coordinated and harmonized. Several key Ministries would play a role in overseeing the coordination
                         and harmonization process: the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economic Planning and
                         Development, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Environment and Climate
                         Change and Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Welfare. The goal is to delivery timely and cost
                         effective programs through fostering cooperation and coordination with development partners and
                         institutions focused on rural poverty reduction
                         A.       PROGRAM COMPONENTS:

                         The proposed three components are:
                         (1) Productive safety nets which would focus on three safety net programs: (a) cash transfers through
                         labor on productive community driven public works which build productive community assets; (b)
                         social cash transfers for those who are most vulnerable and labor constrained including the elderly,
                         disabled and sick; and (c) livelihood and skill development interventions for poor households.
                         (2) Systems and capacity building to finance technical assistance, training, staff and equipment for
                         improving targeting through the SCT and LDF; a unified registry system and databases for
                         monitoring and evaluation.
                         (3) Project management for supervision an coordination of MASAF IV which would focus entirely
                         on the Community Driven Public Works.

                         The objective of implementing these components is to contribute to the GoM’s National Social


                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                         Policy goals of:
                         •       supporting the most vulnerable and poorest households with
                         •       appropriate and easily accessible, timely cash transfers and support through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       socially accountable, harmonized and coordinated set of programs which are
                         •       flexible and able to respond to vulnerability and crisis.

                         Component I: Productive Safety Nets: This component would focus on three safety net programs: (a)
                         cash transfers through labor on productive community driven public works which build productive
                         community assets; (b) social cash transfers for those who are most vulnerable and labor constrained
                         including the elderly, disabled and sick; and (c) livelihood and skill development interventions for
                         poor households.

                         Productive Community Driven Public Works would finance cash transfers for public works and
                         multiple community driven assets through investments in productive public works. Community
                         driven productive public works would create assets in the same communities for multiple years
                         designed to increase impact on household level incomes and food security and reduce households’
                         exposure to risks associated with climate change and other disasters. The design would follow and
                         area development watershed management approach. Communities priorities include those related to
                         water supply and irrigation, bridges, storage facilities for maize and other grains, maize mills, oil
                         mills, afforestation, nurseries for seedling cultivation, soil and water conservation through check
                         dams for gully transformation, solar stoves, fish ponds, solar panels, mobile bicycle ambulances, and
                         health posts.

                         Livelihoods and skills development would finance grants for increasing household level incomes and
                         assets savings and investments in livelihood opportunities through Community Savings and
                         Investment Promotion groups. The grants would promote investments which would increase incomes
                         and assets of households and reduce risks of food insecurity and promote better nutrition and health.
                         Such grants would fund, for example, grain storage facilities, grain mills, livestock and crop
                         diversification etc. and catering of food for school meals through kitchen gardens. The sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component would also finance training in nutrition, health and enterprises. During implementation
                         potential for offering risk insurance against crop failure, to members will be explored. The
                         Cooperative Society Act 1998t , under the Ministry of Industry and Trade, requires cooperatives to
                         have an office as a meeting place. This is a burden on the COMSIP groups whose savings would be
                         better used to improve their productive assets and livelihoods. COMSIP is now seeking a waiver to
                         delay this requirement so that members of cooperatives can use their savings for productive
                         livelihoods.

                         Social Cash Transfers: This sub component would finance support for capacity building, technical
                         assistance and cash transfers to strengthen the existing system which is targeted to the poorest and
                         most vulnerable labor constrained households. The SCT currently functions in 8 districts. The sub
                         component would finance cash transfers to another two districts and cover 21,000 ultra-poor labor
                         constrained households in the two districts of Dedza and Nkhata Bay. The SCT program is expected
                         to be in all districts by 2015. The SCT provides an opportunity to reach the most vulnerable
                         Malawians through a Program which uses, proxy means targeting through the use of poverty
                         scorecard survey and community verification techniques. It delivery of transfers include E-transfers.
                         The Social Cash Transfers Program is financed by KfW, Irish Aid, EU and UNICEF.
                         Component II: Systems and Capacity Building. This component would finance investments in
                         strengthening systems and capacity building to finance technical assistance, training, staff and
                         equipment for improving targeting through the SCT and MASAF-LDF; a unified registry system and

                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                         databases for monitoring and evaluation. It would finance technical assistance, training, staff and
                         equipment for improving targeting through the SCT and MASAF-LDF; a beneficiary registry system
                         and databases for monitoring and evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) Targeting: This sub-component would finance investments in technical assistance and capacity
                         building to strengthen and refine the unified registry systems and targeting mechanisms for SCT and
                         for MASAF-LDF. The proposed project would take an area development approach and would test,
                         scale up and strengthen an existing mix or a hybrid of targeting in struments. GoM plans to establish
                         a Unified Registry System of all citizens in Malawi using a proxy means targeting formula and is
                         moving forward with the creation of a National ID Card. There are also plans for linking citizen
                         wealth ranking through a dedicated serial number to the National ID Card. However, this will take
                         time and will probably not be implemented within the preparation time frame for the proposed
                         MASAF IV. Nevertheless, these developments could over time, during implementation, be
                         incorporated into the new SP Program for the purposes of client targeting and delivery of services.

                         (ii) Unified Registries and MIS: This subcomponent will finance investments in a unified registry
                         data base for all beneficiaries of social safety net programs that could be used for a number of cash
                         transfers and service delivery programs targeted to the vulnerable. This subcomponent would
                         strengthen and build on the SCT registry of the extreme poor as well as the beneficiary lists covered
                         under the MASAF IV public works. The list would be refined on the basis of poverty criteria.

                         (iii) Monitoring and Evaluation: This subcomponent will finance investments in the MIS system for
                         SCT and for MASAF. Under MASAF IV, community based participatory planning, monitoring and
                         the maintaining and updating of databases would be strengthened for the MASAF and for the Social
                         Cash Transfers programs.

                         (iv) Training of Staff: This subcomponent would finance the training of community extension
                         workers and other District Council staff who would participate in the delivery of safety nets under
                         MASAF IV. Districts as well as the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Welfare expressed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needs related to strengthening extension workers capacity through training in community
                         development and mobility challenges that limit regular travel to villages for supervision and
                         monitoring.

                         (v) Social Accountability (SA): This sub component would finance the refining, strengthening and
                         implementation of social accountability mechanisms. It would support developing the capacity of a
                         local research institution to implement SA tools.

                         (vi) Increasing Environmentally Friendly Initiatives: This sub component would finance piloting and
                         introducing environment friendly technologies into communities and it would strengthen the capacity
                         of the line Ministries to undertake and implement such initiatives. Malawi faces countrywide
                         challenges related to environmental degradation.

                         Component III: Project Management. The LDF-TST mechanism has evolved over the years from
                         implementing MASAF I which was focused on community development and participatory
                         approaches to safety nets to having become the GoM’s key supervisory and coordinating capacity for
                         carrying out several windows of financing for infrastructure programs. For example, school, block
                         and teachers’ staff house construction under the multi-donor financed Education Sector Wide
                         Approach Program (ESWAP). The LDF-TST has a capable staff that is professional and
                         knowledgeable. However, additional capacity development and training in community and watershed

                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                         management approaches and building linkages with all development practitioners in these areas in
                         the country would need to be supported. The window under the LDF-TST mechanism, which is
                         meant for MASAF will supervise and coordinate the World Bank-financed MASAF IV and would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         focus entirely on the new community driven Safety Nets Program.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         MASAF IV to be implemented countrywide will include activities (to be determined during project
                         implementation) that are demanded by the community but do not have significantly adverse
                         environmental and social impacts. Some examples of sub projects may include those related to water
                         supply and irrigation, bridges, storage facilities for maize and other grains, maize mills, oil mills,
                         afforestation, nurseries for seedling development, soil and water conservation activities, solar stoves,
                         solar panels, mobile bicycle ambulances, and health posts. Productive Community Driven Public
                         Works activities will be carried out in rural communities across Malawi’s three regions (Northern,
                         Central and Southern), selected on specific criteria to be outlined in the MASAF IV Program
                         Implementation Manual. COMSIP investments are based on specific criteria outlined in the COMSIP
                         Guidelines. Component 3 of MASAF IV proposes investments in the Malawi Social Cash Transfer
                         (SCT) Program. It is currently implemented in 8 districts including: Mchinji, Mangochi, Machinga,
                         Salima, Chitipa, Phalombe, Likoma and Balak. MASAF IV would see the expansion of the Program
                         to two additional districts: Dedza and Nkhata Bay.
                         The activities expected to be supported under the program will be those that improve the
                         management of natural resources and prevent land degradation through afforestation and appropriate
                         biophysical soil and water conservation activities such as hill side terracing, soil and stone bunds,
                         micro basins, gully control and treatment structures, tree planting, area closures etc. Other activities
                         may include; improved agricultural land productivities through technologies that promote soil
                         fertility and conserve soil moisture (agro forestry, forage development, compost making, etc.);
                         promoting access to existing water sources and also promoting rain water conservation and
                         harvesting technologies; improving market infrastructure through construction of rural farm to
                         market roads, bridges and community level grain and food storage facilities; improving access to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         drinking and irrigation water through development of springs shallow wells, and water ponds;
                         increasing availability of fodder through vegetative fencing and multi-purpose nurseries; and
                         improving school and health facilities through repairing and constructing classroom and health
                         facilities. Certain sub-projects are not eligible under the public works, such as sub-projects that
                         degrade the environment and subprojects which are a significant burden to and deplete the
                         communities existing resources.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)
                         Laura Campbell (AFTSE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Some project activities involving construction,
                          BP 4.01                                             however small, are likely to have adverse
                                                                              environmental impacts (such as loss of
                                                                              vegetation, soil erosion, siltation, pesticides
                                                                              poisoning, traffic accidents, dust, water run-off,
                                                                              etc.). Borrower has updated the parent-project


                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                                                                         ESMF to make it consistent for activities
                                                                         proposed under the MASAF IV project. It also
                                                                         defines environment and social due diligence
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         requirements for each sub-project activities based
                                                                         on its size, scale, location and significance of
                                                                         environment and social impacts, and accordingly
                                                                         prepare, consult upon, and disclose an
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                         (ESMP). Each sub project involving new
                                                                         construction and/or rehabilitation activities such
                                                                         as small-scale irrigation schemes, water supply
                                                                         and sanitation, feeder roads and bridges etc. will
                                                                         be pre-screened for environmental and social
                                                                         risks. This will lead to preparation, consultation
                                                                         about, and disclosure of site specific ESMP based
                                                                         on site specific consultation with communities
                                                                         and site characteristics. The ESMF has been
                                                                         prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in-
                                                                         country and at the InfoShop before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              Subprojects affecting natural habitats will be
                                                                         systematically excluded.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             The policy is triggered due to the likely forest
                                                                         harvesting and reforestation activities involving
                                                                         woodlots and nurseries under MASAF IV. ESMF
                                                                         includes procedures to ensure adequate
                                                                         consultation with local people and mitigation of
                                                                         any of project activities during project
                                                                         implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             This policy is triggered because MASAF IV
                                                                         support for agricultural sub-projects is likely to
                                                                         indirectly increase the use of agro-chemicals.
                                                                         Even at a small scale, the risks associated with
                                                                         Pesticides will require to be managed to minimize
                                                                         the potential social, environmental, health and
                                                                         safety risks involved. The parent-project’s Pest
                                                                         Management Plan (PMP) has been updated to
                                                                         support MASAF IV activities. The project will
                                                                         also be informed by the Pest Management Plan
                                                                         prepared for the Malawi Agriculture project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Since the foreseen subprojects activities (to be
                         BP 4.11                                         defined with the Communities during
                                                                         implementation) will involve civil works that
                                                                         could encounter physical cultural resources, the
                                                                         policy is triggered and “chance-finds? procedures
                                                                         have been included in the updatedESMF from the




                                                                 Page 6 of 12
                                                                                parent project to help adequately address any
                                                                                potential impacts on the PCR.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No                There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                area, thus the policy is not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes               The proposed project foreseen activities will
                            4.12                                                involve civil works that could require acquisition
                                                                                of land that could lead to loss of property/shelter,
                                                                                livelihoods and goods or assets with possible
                                                                                need for physical resettlement of project affected
                                                                                persons-PAP (individuals/households). The
                                                                                Borrower has updated the parent-project RPF to
                                                                                factor in MASAF IV. The RPF has made
                                                                                provision for the preparation of, consultation
                                                                                about, and disclosure of site specific resettlement
                                                                                Action Plans (RAPs) for any subproject activities
                                                                                that complies with the core requirements of the
                                                                                policy. The RPF has been prepared, consulted
                                                                                upon, and disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                                                InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                MASAF IV will not fund any subprojects
                                                                                involving the construction or use of dams.
                            Projects on International        No                   National or international water resources are not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                affected by future subprojects.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The policy is not triggered because there are no
                            7.60                                                disputed land areas in Malawi.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The first MASAF project was assessed as an environmental and social category B that requires
                              partial Environmental Assessment, due to the likely impacts of the foreseen subproject activities
                              such as the rehabilitation of roads and construction of social infrastructure. The MASAF IV is
                              expected to support similar sub-projects as parent MASAF project. In addition, there may be
                              increased agricultural production as a result of an increased focus on watershed management
                              activities. The original project triggered three safeguards policies (OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
                              Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management) and OP/BP 4.12(Involuntary Resettlement). OP/BP
                              4.36 was triggered for the MASAF III AF in 2012 after recognizing that some communities had
                              begun to establish community woodlots (managing nurseries, planting the seedlings and then
                              harvesting the wood as income generating activities, construction material and cooking fuel), in an
                              areas that was considered relatively large in scale. The updated ESMF factors in OP/BP 4.36
                              principles and prerogatives. Likewise, OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) is being
                              triggered for the first time during MASAF IV. The updated ESMF has also included a chance
                              finds procedure to adequately mitigate any likely impacts in that regards. Finally, experience from
                              the original MASAF project and participatory consultations with Government of Malawi during
                              Pre-Appraisal has revealed that the following policies -- Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, Safety of


                                                                        Page 7 of 12
                         Dams OP/BP 4.37, and Projects in International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 -- do not need to be
                         triggered.
                         Environmental and social impacts are expected to be similar to those mentioned in the previous
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project as activities are within the same scope and development objective. It is recognized that if
                         not properly designed and implemented following good practice, activities involving civil works
                         could potentially have negative social and environmental impacts.
                         While the exact type and location of subprojects will be chosen by communities, certainly during
                         project implementation, possible subprojects include: soil and water conservation activities;
                         forestry and agro-forestry; rehabilitation and maintenance of rural feeder roads and market access
                         roads; drainage improvements; construction and rehabilitation of reservoirs and connections, small
                         scale irrigation schemes; bridges, storage facilities for grains, nursery for seedling cultivation,
                         small fish ponds, health posts, school blocks. Though all of the foreseen MASAF IV subprojects
                         are expected to yield more positive impacts, they could potentially have negative impacts on the
                         biophysical and social impacts, such as soil erosion, informal land uses leading to either
                         displacement of and/or restricted access to PAPs, downstream water users disrupted, increasing
                         social tensions, especially between farmers and herders over land use and/or livelihoods resources
                         devastation, local inexperience to manage, etc. Following environmental and social risk screening,
                         a site specific ESMP will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed for each type of investment,
                         as soon as each subproject and its location is identified.
                         Social impacts are expected to be positive with project activities gradually leading to an improved
                         quality of life for the most vulnerable Malawians. The Program will support Productive
                         Community Driven Public Works, which may require acquisition of land or have an impact on
                         assets (even temporarily), including economic and natural resources. The Program recognizes that
                         land scarcity is intensifying in Malawi and it is likely that there will be more resistance to land loss
                         in the near future. The Borrower has therefore updated the parent-project RPF to protect against
                         community land donation, which can be the result of coercion from the community upon selected
                         individuals. The RPF also allows for monitoring mechanisms to be put in place to ensure that no
                         person is worse off as a result of Program activities. The RPF for MASAF IV was strengthened to
                         include a community-level grievance redress mechanism. The RPF also sets out a clear budget for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         compensation. RAPs will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed as necessary during project
                         implementation. The ESMF screening process, which is mandatory for all subprojects, assesses
                         and minimizes potential impacts such as increased pressures on human settlement, disturbance to
                         religious sites, increased social tensions over asset allocation, etc. Subprojects presenting
                         considerable social risks will be placed on a negative list and disallowed.

                         The GoM updated the ESMF, PMP and RPF instruments in a participatory manner with various
                         stakeholders. The updated instruments will be cleared by the World Bank to guide the
                         implementation of social and environmental considerations, including gender and vulnerable
                         groups, and compliance with the triggered safeguards policies requirements for MASAF IV. The
                         safeguards documents have been disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop prior to
                         Appraisal. They have been updated and expanded to ensure that:
                         •       The specifics of MASAF IV including Productive Community Driven Public Works,
                         Social Cash Transfers and Livelihoods and Skills Development are captured;
                         •       Lessons learned from MASAF III and findings and recommendations of the 2012
                         Environmental and Social Safeguards Audit are incorporated;
                         •       Templates are practical and easy to use;
                         •       Clearer guidance to ensure that subprojects involving having the potential of loss of assets
                         or access to assets or causing social and environmental degradation and other subproject ineligible
                         under MASAF IV, are eliminated by the screening procedure;

                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           •        A chance finds procedure for the newly triggered safeguards policy OP/BP 4.11 Physical
                           Cultural Resources is included;
                           •        Each potential problem has a mitigating measure (subproject specific);
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •        A stronger subproject level grievance redress mechanism, rooted on the local culture, is
                           established; and
                           •        There is an adequate capacity building plan and budget in place for implementation of
                           MASAF IV activities environmental and social mitigations measures.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             No significant indirect and/or long-term impacts associated with the project are expected.
                           However, the Project recognizes that Malawi faces countrywide challenges related to social and
                           environmental degradation. MASAF IV will therefore scale up the use of Soil Stabilized Bricks
                           for building construction, as an alternative to baked bricks, a practice, which is degrading the
                           environment. Subprojects presenting considerable environmental and or social risk will be placed
                           on a negative list and disallowed.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             MASAF IV will take a more systematic approach to safeguards implementation with an emphasis
                           on screening of all subprojects. MASAF IV will treat mitigating measures as part of subproject
                           design to improve safeguards implementation and monitoring. Cascaded training to the
                           community level will also anchor safeguards implementation as not just part of subproject
                           planning but as an ongoing process. Key indicators will also be reported on in the M&E system.

                          MASAF IV will focus on Productive Community Driven Public Works, Social Cash Transfers and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Skills and Livelihoods and Skills Development; with much more focused emphasis on safeguards
                          capacity building, especially ensuring that communities have a good understanding of how and
                          when to do screening in addition to development and implementation of mitigating measures,
                          reporting and monitoring.
                          Staff at Central and District levels will participate in training courses for MASAF IV Public
                          Works, which includes ESMF and RPF training. These trainings will be subject to an ongoing
                          program of upgrading by LDF in cooperation with the Ministry of Environment and Climate
                          Change and Ministry of Lands and Housing. Training will be provided by teams drawn from both
                          of these Ministries in addition to LDF. To this end, both Ministries and LDF should also develop
                          their capacity on environmental and social safeguards to be able to provide quality training and
                          sufficient backstopping to districts. LDF should also ensure that it employs one social specialist
                          and one environmental specialist (MSc in soil science, forestry or other related fields) to form a
                          Safeguards Team/Unit in LDF that will closely follow up and enforce safeguards implementation
                          during MASAF IV (working closely with capacity building team at LDF in addition to Ministry of
                          Environment and Climate Change and Ministry of Lands and Housing).
                          LDF should collaborate with the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change and the Ministry of
                          Lands and Housing to ensure that training is provided to District Councils, which should then be
                          cascaded to AECs. This represents a shift to building capacity to implement safeguards at the
                          community level during MASAF IV implementation.



                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           The application of the ESMF is vital to ensure that the subprojects are environmentally and
                           socially sustainable and that inappropriate subprojects/activities are eliminated. An important
                           aspect of ESMF monitoring is the question of follow up on the ground to ensure that mitigating
Public Disclosure Copy




                           measures are implemented and that ineligible subprojects are eliminated. This requires a more
                           comprehensive approach than merely sampling and is best covered in a regular M&E system. The
                           Ministry of Environment and Climate Change began to undertake quarterly monitoring on
                           safeguards implementation in 2012. This arrangement should be continued during MASAF IV.
                           Annual reviews should also examine the participatory planning process and feed back information
                           to the M&E system. Moving forward, LDF will coordinate more closely with Ministry of
                           Environment and Climate Change, and Ministry of Lands and Housing on all aspects of safeguards
                           implementation including training, screening and monitoring of mitigating measures.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders are the targeted beneficiary communities in all areas of Malawi, the
                           Government of Malawi (Central and District), notably the Ministry of Environment and Climate
                           Change and the Ministry of Lands and Housing, the LDF-TST, civil society organizations and
                           international development partners, like the World Bank. Consultation and disclosure of
                           safeguards instruments and related documents was conducted as an integral part of the
                           development of the updated ESMF, PMP and RPF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     30-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  22-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Malawi                                                          21-Oct-2013
                           Comments: Environmental and Social Management Framework disclosed in the Nation
                                         newspaper on October 21, 2013. Confirmation received from MASAF ED's office
                                         October 21, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     30-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  22-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Malawi                                                          21-Oct-2013
                           Comments: RPF disclosed in the Nation newspaper on October 21, 2013. Confirmation received
                                         from MASAF ED's office on October 21, 2013. PMP and Cover letter disclosed on
                                         October 22, 2013.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     30-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  22-Oct-2013




                                                                  Page 10 of 12
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Malawi                                                           22-Oct-2013
                           Comments: PMP-Cover letter disclosed on October 22, 2013. Confirmation received from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         MASAF on October 22, 2013.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Maniza B. Naqvi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 22-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz (SM)                   Date: 22-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
