                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR12136
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Dec-2014, 09-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                                      Project ID:           P094055
                            Project Name:      VN-Local Development Investment (LDIFP) (P094055)
                            Task Team          Cuong Duc Dang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          27-Mar-2009                                  Estimated   02-Jul-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                                        Lending     Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Public administration- Financial Sector (100%)
                            Theme:             Municipal finance (34%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (33%),
                                               Urban Economic Development (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       280.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      190.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                         190.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                                                    70.00
                              Total                                                                                               280.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Local Development Investment Fund Project (LDIFP) aims to improve effectiveness of LDIFs
                           in leveraging private sector financing for municipal infrastructure                        ,


                                                                                Page 1 of 10
                         and to strengthen LDIFs# financial, technical, and social and environmental sa
                         feguards management capability, consistent with operational framework as instruc
                         ted and mandated by the Project Manual.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Local Development Investment Fund Project (LDIFP) aims to improve effectiveness of LDIFs
                         in leveraging private sector financing for municipal infrastructure                        ,
                         and to strengthen LDIFs# financial, technical, and social and environmental sa
                         feguards management capability, consistent with operational framework as instruc
                         ted and mandated by the Project Manual.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project consists of an Investment Capital component and a Project Management Support
                         component for the Project Management Unit of the Ministry of Finance.

                         A Qualification process, approved by MOF, will be conducted annually to determine which LDIFs
                         will beeligible for funding. The qualification criteria are to ensure the financial, operational, and
                         institutional soundness of LDIFs before they can use ODA funds to invest in subprojects. The
                         assessment of institutional capacity vis-à-vis safeguards included criteria to ensure that the qualified
                         LDIFs had adequate staff with safeguards management skills, and adequate institutional experience
                         involving projects that required management of safeguards related risks. The LDIFs that have
                         qualified for Year-1 funding are:
                         -        Ho Chi Minh City Investment Fund for Urban Development (HIFU)
                         -        Hanoi City Development Investment Fund (HANIF)
                         -        Dong Nai Development Investment Fund (DNIF)
                         -        Binh Duong Development Investment Fund (BDIF)
                         -        Tien Giang Development Investment Fund (TGIF)

                         The following funds are currently qualified:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -       Bac Lieu Development Investment Fund
                         -       Binh Dinh Development Investment Fund
                         -       Binh Duong Development Investment Fund
                         -       Can Tho Development Investment Fund
                         -       Da Nang Development Investment Fund
                         -       Dong Nai Development Investment Fund
                         -       Ha Noi Development Investment Fund
                         -       Ha Tinh Development Investment Fund
                         -       HFIC (previously known as Ho Chi Minh Development Investment Fund - HIFU)
                         -       Khanh Hoa Development Investment Fund
                         -       Lam Dong Development Investment Fund
                         -       Lao Cai Development Investment Fund
                         -       Long An Development Investment Fund
                         -       Ninh Binh Development Investment Fund
                         -       Quang Nam Development Investment Fund
                         -       Thai Binh Development Investment Fund
                         -       Vinh Long Development Investment Fund

                         The annual qualification exercise will also identify that other LDIFs can be qualified if they improve
                         their performance, and similarly, currently qualified LDIFs can be disqualified if they are unable to


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         perform according to the qualification criteria.
                         Component 1: Investment Capital (IDA US$ 185 million): A line of credit is provided to the Ministry
                         of Finance for its Program Management Unit to manage and on-lend to LDIFs for investment in cost-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recovery-oriented municipal infrastructure investments in partnership with the private sector. The
                         Project Manual contains Guidelines on Project Preparation and Appraisal, Safeguards, Monitoring,
                         Capital Mobilization, Private Sector Participation, and Corporate Governance. The capital will be
                         used to invest in municipal infrastructure, including in urban transportation, housing, public health,
                         water, electricity, education, and municipal infrastructure associated with industrial zones.

                         Component 2: Project Management Support (IDA US$ 5 million): The PMU of the MOF is the
                         agency responsible for monitoring, regulating, and supervising the LDIFs and the performance of
                         LDIFP overall. The PMU receives support in the development of its regulatory and institutional
                         capacity in the areas of: establishment, capacity building, and operational support of the PMU
                         organization; monitoring and qualification of LDIFs; monitoring of LDIFs’ safeguards compliance;
                         analysis of LDIF investment in sub-projects; development of information systems; and auditing of
                         PMU and LDIFs.

                         Rationale of the Project Restructuring
                         The proposed restructuring is to trigger the Operational Policy (OP) 7.50 – Projects on International
                         Waterways to the Project investments as the Project comprises of subproject(s) that involve the use
                         of international waterways. These types of subprojects were not considered in the original project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is nationwide and fund operations and investments in sub-projects will cover the
                         provinces in which LDIFs operate. It is likely that most of the sub-projects will be located in urban
                         areas, by private sector, so involuntary resettlement and ethnic minority issues would likely not
                         occur, or the level of impact would likely be insignificant.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Hoa Thi Mong Pham (GSURR)
                         Phuong Thi Thanh Tran (EASVS)
                         Thuy Cam Duong (GENDR)
                         Tuan Anh Le (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment         Yes
                          OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36               No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09          No
                          Physical Cultural Resources      No
                          OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP         No
                          4.10
                                                           Yes



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/
                            BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        Yes            The policy is triggered as the Project comprises of
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            subproject(s) that involve the use of international
                                                                            waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                            BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment):
                              The Project is classified as Category FI. The complexity of sub-projects evaluated for investment
                              is varied. All subprojects will need to pass initial review and screening against the GOV and WB
                              exclusion lists. Project categorization to meet GOV environmental regulations and WB
                              environmental safeguards will be determined for each subproject based on known and potential
                              environmental impacts. The LDIFP is expected to have mostly positive environmental and public
                              health imp acts contributing to improvement of the cities' infrastructure, safe water supply, solid
                              waste management, efficient and safer transport systems, health care and on-site sanitation
                              services. Screening mechanisms as specified in the ESMF will be applied to investment pipeline
                              sub-projects in determining the applicability of other safeguard policies. Potential adverse impacts
                              could arise through: (a) temporary pollution (dust, noise, vibration, surface run-off), excavation
                              work, and disturbances to local transport, waterways or drainage systems, that could occur during
                              construction; (b) wastewater discharge and disposal of sludge from the waste treatment plants; (c)
                              disposal of dredged/excavated material; and (d) transportation and disposal of solid waste in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              landfill sites.

                             OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement):
                             LDIFP will mostly have positive impacts on the society through improving infrastructure and
                             living environment for the respective cities/provinces and their citizens. All sub-projects approved
                             up until 2014 have no land acquisition issues except for some minor temporary land impact during
                             the construction of subprojects. So far all subprojects submitted for screening did not require land
                             acquisition. These subprojects have already had the land (required for the subproject purpose)
                             before. As such, the screening of these subprojects include conducting social due diligence of the
                             subprojects to ensure there are no pending issues prior to commencing subproject appraisal. If
                             there is any, recommendations are made by the Bank and monitoring is done by PMU’s
                             consultants to ensure the issues are completely solved. Safeguards monitoring consultants are also
                             engaged by PMU to conduct bi-annual monitoring of both social and environmental safeguards –
                             during subproject implementation and operation.

                             In terms of land acquisition impact, there were only a few subprojects requiring temporary land
                             acquisition for installation of water pipes. In such cases, disclosure of RPF requirements (on
                             temporary land acquisition) was undertaken and construction was implemented in a way that could
                             avoid/minimize the temporary land acquisition impact. Social monitoring is also exercised by
                             PMU’s consultants – on a bi-annual basis, to ensure the temporary land acquisition impact is


                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                         addressed in accordance with the RPF.

                         In terms of local capacity, since the mid-term review of the project, the capacity of the PMU's
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultant has been enhanced, in both social due diligence and safeguards monitoring, given
                         improved information and experience exchange between the Bank's task team and PMU’s
                         consultant. This has shortened remarkably the time duration for subproject screening and
                         appraisal, contributing to improving the overall project progress.

                         In terms of ethnic minority peoples, so far, the project did not experience any subprojects where
                         ethnic minority peoples were affected, or present in the subproject area. Most of the subprojects
                         submitted so far are located in urban, or semi-urban areas.

                         OP7.50 (Projects on International Waterway)

                         The project is restructured to trigger a new safeguard policy, i.e. the policy of Project on
                         International Waterway OP.BP 7.50. At appraisal, the Project did not expect LDIFs to invest in
                         sub-projects that would trigger OP/BP 7.50. Binh Duong LDIF has now requested a sub-loan of
                         about US$8.5 million for the construction of a Water Treatment Plant (WTP), namely Thu Dau
                         Mot Water Supply Sub-project, to an existing scheme. In Binh Duong province, there is already an
                         existing water treatment plant (namely Di An WTP) which has a capacity of 90,000 cubic meters
                         per day. Under the proposed sub-project, a new unit would be built next to the existing WTP,
                         within the area boundary of the Di An WTP with the additional capacity of 45,000 cubic meters
                         per day. The new unit will be operated by the same staff who are operating the existing Di An
                         WTP. The new unit will also provide water into the exi sting distribution system.

                         The subproject's main objective is to meet the clean water demand for local people and industrial
                         production in Binh Duong province. The Bank's financing through Binh Duong LDIF would
                         strengthen the local peoples’ capabilities for social and environmental safeguards management.
                         Construction began in February 2014 and is expected to finish by December 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The raw water intake of the proposed WTP is located 56 km upstream of the confluence of the
                         national Dong Nai river and the international Saigon river. At the water intake area, the river flow
                         varies from 200 m3/s to 1000 m3/s depending on whether it is dry or rainy season. The proposed
                         WTP will take water from the national Dong Nai river which is a tributary of an international
                         Saigon river. Therefore the OP 7.50 is triggered in accordance with paragraph 1(b) of the OP/BP
                         7.50.

                         An Environmental Assessment for the proposed subproject was carried out by the investor and
                         approved by the local authority by 31 May 2011(Document No 27/GXN-UBND). According to
                         the assessment, the subproject will bring positive impacts in improving the living conditions of the
                         local people as it supplies the demand for clean water usage. On the other hand, the subproject will
                         cause negative impacts during the construction and operation of the WTP. The environmental
                         impacts during the construction of the WTP are localized, moderate and short-term including dust,
                         noise, vibration, solid waste, waste water, subsidence risk, traffic disturbance and labor safety. The
                         main environmental concerns during the operation are long term an d moderate i.e. generation of
                         operational and domestic wastewater, solid waste, sludge occurred from the operation of the WTP;
                         an d the operational risk due to the leakage of chlorine. The Environmental Assessment adequately
                         identified and addressed potential negative impacts. It is informed that there is a considerable
                         distance from the origination of Saigon river to the confluence with Dong Nai river, and also from

                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                           the confluence to the plant's raw water intake (225 km and 56 km respectively). Furthermore, the
                           flow of the new WTP (0.52 m3/s) is very small compared to that of Dong Nai river (varies from
                           200 m3/s to 1000 m3/s). The proposed subproject involves the construction of an additional WTP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to an existing scheme. Based on results of the Environmental Assessment carried out and
                           information provided, the exception under 7 (a) of OP 7.50 applies to the Project as the impact of
                           the construction of the new WTP to the ongoing scheme will: (i) not adversely change the quality
                           or quantity of water flows to the riparians; and (ii) not be adversely affected by the other riparians’
                           possible water use.

                           The exception to the notification requirement has been cleared by the Bank's legal department and
                           confirmed by Bank management through a Memo dated November 21, 2014.

                           Since then, an environmental and social due diligence on the subproject, which involve safeguard
                           documents review and field visit, has been carried out by the PMU’s safeguard consultants, and
                           the Bank’s safeguard specialists. The due diligence concluded that the sub-project was consistent
                           with applicable Bank safeguards policies.

                           For social safeguards, due diligence was conducted for the sub-project (i.e., WTP). However, this
                           did not cover the installation of underground pipeline, which was still ongoing when the due
                           diligence for the WTP was conducted. The results of the due diligence indicated that the WTP
                           does not require any permanent land acquisitions. There might be some very minor and localized
                           temporary land impact related to the installation of underground pipelines within the right of way
                           managed by local government. It was agreed with the PMU that Binh Duong LDIF will make sure
                           that in case such temporary land impacts occur during the pipeline installation, such temporary
                           impacts are compensated for as per the Project’s Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). As
                           agreed, the due diligence for this pipeline installation will be done by PMU’s independent
                           monitoring consultant to confirm if there is any temporary impact that has occurred during the
                           installation, and if measures were taken to meet the Bank’s requirements in accordance with the
                           RPF. Based on the independent monitoring results, the Bank will make an assessment and require
Public Disclosure Copy




                           necessary actions from Binh Duong LDIF, if needed.

                           For environmental safeguards, the due diligence confirmed that impacts during construction are
                           consistent with the impacts predicted in the EA, which are mainly construction-related (dust,
                           noise, traffic, waste generation, occupational safety, vibration, etc.). The due diligence confirmed
                           that these impacts were adequately managed following the sub-project’s Environmental
                           Management Plan, which is consistent with Bank policy requirements. The longer term
                           environmental concerns during operation of the WTP that were not covered in the due diligence,
                           since the sub-project was not yet operational at the time of due diligence, include the generation of
                           operational and domestic wastewater, solid waste, sludge produced from the operation of the
                           WTP, and the operational risk due to the leakage of chlorine. These operational impacts will be
                           monitored by an Independent Monitoring Consultant, the PMU and the Bank during supervision
                           missions.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Overall, the LDIFP Project will help address urban and infrastructure development, current
                           environmental sanitation problems, and is expected to have a positive impact on existing
                           environmental and social conditions. Adverse potential indirect and long-term impacts could arise
                           through improper operations of the constructed facilities.


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Alternative analysis is required as part of full EIAs to be prepared only for high-risk subprojects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Detailed Guidelines on Environmental Safeguards, acceptable to the Bank, has been included in
                           the Project Manual's Safeguards Guidelines and approved by the MOF and other agencies. The
                           Manual is being used by LDIF staff in carrying out environmental safeguard (ES) work to meet
                           the requirements of GOV and the Bank for the sub-projects that would be financed by the line of
                           credit provided to LDIFs through the Project.

                           The Safeguards Guidelines of the Project Manual include a process, including environmental
                           screening, preparation of EIA or Register for Meeting Environmental Safeguard (RMES) per the
                           GOV regulations and Bank environmental safeguard policies, due diligence assessment of EIA
                           reports, or RMES (if already available), followed by a risk management plan of sub-projects that
                           pass the screenings and Government environmental approval, and institutional arrangements for
                           EA works. As identified from the environmental screening, EA work for sub-projects with high
                           environmental risk (Bank's A-category) will be subject to Bank's prior review.

                           The Safeguards requirements included in the Project Manual will apply only to sub-projects
                           financed with the IDA credit. These Safeguards requirements will apply to all sub-projects
                           financed with the IDA credit, regardless of whether they were identified by the LDIFs or proposed
                           by the private sector. The first sub-project prepared by each qualified LDIF (regardless of the year
                           in which sub-project is prepared) will require prior review and approval by the Bank.

                           The Safeguards Guidelines of the Project Manual apply to the preparation of all other sub-projects
                           which the LDIFs expect to finance through the line of credit provided under the Project. The PMU
                           and LDIFs shall implement and work with the Bank team and the consultants to be hired as part of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 2 of the Project to continuously improve the Safeguards Guidelines of the Project
                           Manual.

                           Social safeguards: The Project Manual guides LDIFs and their investment partners in minimizing
                           and mitigating the impacts to the people and environment. A Resettlement Policy Framework,
                           satisfactory to the Bank, for the project has been adopted by the PMU and LDIFs. The guidelines
                           are applied to preparation of all proposed sub-projects that LDIFs finance through the line of credit
                           provided under the Project.

                           Assessment of institutional capacity to implement Safeguards Guidelines: Qualified LDIFs have
                           deployed staff responsible for ensuring that subprojects comply with the Bank's safeguards
                           requirements. In order to strengthen the funds' capacity to implement Bank safeguards
                           requirements, MOF hired consultants, under a TOR satisfactory to the Bank, to conduct
                           independent monitoring of LDIF and subprojects for environmental compliance with WB
                           requirements, as part of Project Management Support under LDIFP. These consultants monitor the
                           implementation of EMP, RMES, or RMP in each subproject, and prepare semi-annual
                           environmental compliance progress reports submitted to MOF and IDA. The consultants also
                           provide advice to the LDIFs and borrowers in internal supervision and reporting on the
                           implementation of mitigation measures as specified in the EMPs or RMPs. In addition, WB
                           specialists provide safeguards training on an ongoing basis to Qualified LDIFs.


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                          By December 2014, the Ministry of Finance signed loan agreements and disbursement to 62
                          infrastructure investment sub-projects in 14 LDIFs. During the implementation of LDIFP, close
Public Disclosure Copy




                          safeguard reviewing and monitoring have been conducted by the local funds, the PMU and the
                          Bank in accordance to the Safeguard Guidelines. The capacity of the LDIFs in environmental
                          management has been strengthened through safeguards training and technical support provided by
                          the Bank safeguard staff and the PMU during supervision missions. Independent Environmental
                          Monitoring Consultants (IEMC) have been mobilized by the PMU. The IEMCs have supported the
                          PMU in reviewing subproject safeguard documents, provided safeguards training and technical
                          support for LDIFs, and conducted bi-annual safeguard monitoring for subprojects under
                          construction and operation.

                          In the first few years of project implementation, delays in safeguard review were observed because
                          the appraising process involved various stakeholders including local authority, local funds, and
                          PMU staff who were not familiarized with the Bank's safeguard requirements. The Bank task team
                          proactively provided guidance and training for the qualified LDIFs and PMU’s consultants, and
                          agreed with them on the simultaneous review approach for complex sub-projects to accelerate the
                          appraisal process. Since the mid-term review of the project, the capacity of the PMU’s consultant
                          and the LDIFs have been much enhanced, in both social due diligence and safeguards monitoring.
                          This has shortened remarkably the time required for subproject screening and appraisal, and
                          helped improving the overall project progress.

                          Although IEMC has continuously provided trainings for participating LDIFs on safeguard
                          implementation, it was also indicated that LDIFs reporting on environmental monitoring was
                          sporadic. The PMU proactively followed up by issuance of formal letters requesting LDIFs to
                          carry out this requirement. It was noted from environmental monitoring report submitted in May
                          2014 that all LDIFs submitted the environmental monitoring reports as required.

                          Monitoring reports of the IEMC shows overall safeguard compliance in subproject
Public Disclosure Copy




                          implementation. The overall safeguard compliance has been rated as satisfactory during the last 03
                          ISRs. In addition to all the requirements as specified in safeguard documents legally bound to
                          subproject sub-loans, the task team keeps advising the PMU to include disbursement conditions,
                          where appropriate, linked to completion of environmental construction work. For example, the last
                          5 % of a sub-loan for a hospital construction in Nha Trang city could only be disbursed upon the
                          LDIF's receipt of satisfactory testing result from the hospital wastewater treatment plant. The
                          implementation of all environmental disbursement conditions will be subject to periodical
                          monitoring report carried out by IEMC's consultant.

                           For the construction of Thu Dau Mot Water Supply Sub-project, which causes the restructuring of
                           the project because of triggering OP 7.50, due diligence has been done PMU’s safeguard
                           consultants, and the Bank’s safeguard specialists. The due diligence concluded that
                           implementation of environment and social measures in the said sub-project during construction is
                           consistent with applicable Bank safeguards policies. See section II.A.1 for the details and follow
                           up actions needed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The Safeguards Guidelines of the Project Manual specify when and how various safeguards
                           documents need to be disclosed, as well as when and how public consultation has to take place for


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                           each subproject. If subprojects are found to be high risk to environment, public consultation per
                           Bank's requirements (OP 4.01) is conducted in addition to the consultation as required by the
                           Government regulations, for which consultation with the local (commune/ward level) authority
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and the Fatherland Front is sufficient.

                           Specifically, a consultation mechanism has been developed in the RPF to be applied during RP
                           preparation and implementation to ensure the needs and wishes of all related stakeholders be
                           reflected. The RPs will detail the plan for consultation, including the procedures, methodologies,
                           and subjects of consultation and information disclosure. The RP will also describe the grievance
                           redress mechanism                                      with the steps and procedures for grievance
                           filing as well as the responsible institutions and timeframe for receiving and addressing the
                           grievances.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Apr-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2009
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          14-Apr-2009
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Apr-2009
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2009
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          14-Apr-2009
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          in the credit/loan?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Cuong Duc Dang
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                Date: 09-Feb-2015
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/    Name:                                                  Date:
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
