                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8479

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P132562
                            Project Name:       CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistic Infrastructure (P132562)
                            Task Team           Arturo Ardila Gomez
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           25-Sep-2015                      Estimated        24-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (87%), Public administration- Transportation (13%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       234.52                Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      134.52
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         100.00
                              Total                                                                         234.52
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           20.     The PDO is to promote more efficient logistics in Xiaogan while mitigating environmental
                           and social externalities from increased freight activities.
                           C. Project Description
                           22.     The project comprises a balance of infrastructure and technology investments to support
                           Xiaogan’s vision for a Logistics Park in the Airport Economic Zone (AEZ). These components
                           include internal and external roads, a technology platform and facilities enabling a green freight
                         strategy.

                         23.      In this context, the Bank is considering financing the following components (C) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities. The proposed Bank loan would amount to USD 100 million, and the proposed project cost
                         would amount to USD 235 million:

                         •       C.1 Logistics Park road infrastructure (USD 44.63 mln): This component could comprise
                         five roads inside the Logistics Park for a total cost of USD 44.63 mln without contingencies. This
                         component could be financed up to 10.8% by the World Bank loan (for an amount of USD 4.51 mln)

                         •       C.2 Logistics Corridors to the Wuhan airport (USD 83.84 mln): This component could
                         include two corridors along the Chentian Avenue, connecting the Logistics Park to the cargo park of
                         the Wuhan airport, plus a major road within the AEZ, for a total cost of USD 83.84 mln without
                         contingencies. This component could be financed up to 70% by the World Bank loan (for an amount
                         of USD 58.62 mln):

                         o        C.2.1: The dedicated logistics express road in Xiaogan Logistics Park to the Wuhan airport
                         (USD 23.28 mln)
                         o        C.2.2: The passenger and freight Corridor along the Chentian Avenue connecting the cargo
                         park of the airport to the Xiaogan airport road (USD 30.08 mln)
                         o        C.2.3: Road running through the Logistics Park for a total cost of USD 30.48 mln without
                         contingencies.

                         •       C.3 Green Logistics Park development (USD 21.9 mln): This component could be financed
                         up to 84.6% by the World Bank loan (for USD 18.52 mln):

                         o      C.3.1 Traffic coordination and management system (USD 12.88 mln)
                         o      C.3.2 Vehicle access system (USD 3.38 mln)
                         o      C.3.3 Fostering Airport Economic Zone Green Architecture and Green Logistics Park
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Executive Committee (USD 5.64 mln)

                         •       C.4 Public Service Platform for Logistics development (USD 24.15 mln): This component
                         could be financed up to 76% by the World Bank loan (for an amount of USD 18.36 mln):

                         o       C.4.1 Creation of a Xiaogan Logistics Park Observatory and Development Commission
                         aiming at better monitoring data, OD, transport prices and volume trends, and improving projections
                         and investments for the Xiaogan Logistics Park (USD 4.83 mln).
                         o       C.4.2 Creation of a Supply Chain Excellence Training Center, which would set logistics
                         standards, train local resources, and share supply chain best practices. The Center would also invest
                         into vocational training to enhance the employability of women, through the involvement of the
                         partnering logistics companies (USD 19.32 mln).

                         In addition to these four components, logistics park social supporting activities would be financed up
                         to USD 60 mln: land acquisition for USD 22 mln, household compensation for USD 2 mln, and
                         resettlement for USD 33 mln. These activities component would not be financed by the World Bank
                         loan.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The project is located in Xiaogan, a prefecture-level city in east-central Hubei province, some 60km
                           northwest of the provincial capital Wuhan. It has jurisdiction over seven counties (two of which are
                           listed as national poverty counties) with a land area of 8,910km2 and a population of 5.27 million in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           2012. Around 50% of Xiaogan’s population was below the income line of RMB 12,000 marking the
                           bottom 40% of the population, the World Bank’s definition of poverty in China.

                           The infrastructure roads under the project are in the logistic park zone of the Xiaogan Airport
                           Economic Zone (AEZ). The logistic park zone has a total area of 3.6km2 with current land use of
                           farmland and rural communities (with total population of ca. 28,000). Development of logistic park
                           zone is underway, with a few trunk roads completed according to the road network plan and a few
                           land patches being developed by private logistic companies.

                           There is a Baishuihu Lake to the east of logistic park zone. The lake is a natural habitat located
                           between the logistic park zone and the Wuhan Tianhe Airport. Two connection roads linking the
                           logistic park to Wuhan Airport will traverse the lake via a long bridge.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           As the proposed project is the first World Bank funded project in the city of Xiaogan, the Project
                           Management Office and AEZ management authority do not have direct experiences of World Bank
                           safeguards policies. The PMO has been established by Xiaogan Municipal Government, which
                           include adequate dedicated staff responsible for different aspects of the project, including overall
                           social and environment management. The Bank team has provided environmental and safeguards
                           policy trainings to PMO at the project identification stage. Experienced EA and social assessment/
                           RAP consultants have been retained by PMO. These consultants, i.e. Wuhan Environmental Science
                           Institute and Wuhan University, have good experience of World Bank safeguards policies due to
                           their involvement in several recent World Bank projects in China. The close interaction between the
                           Bank’s task team and the PMO will be maintained throughout the project preparation and
                           implementation stage to ensure the adequacy of safeguards implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                           Peishen Wang (EASIN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The proposed project is a new construction of a
                           BP 4.01                                              number of roads in a green field, including two
                                                                                major connection roads (an exclusive freight
                                                                                highway and a passenger/freight mixed line)
                                                                                crossing over a natural habitat (Baishuihu
                                                                                Lake). Due to the project scale and ecological
                                                                                context, the project is likely to have significant
                                                                                environmental and social impacts, therefore is
                                                                                proposed to be a Category A project as per
                                                                                OP4.01. Full environmental and social
                                                                                assessment (ESIA) will be conducted. The EA
                                                                                documents to be submitted include: (1) a full
                         ESIA report; (2) a stand-alone ESMP; and (3)
                         an ESIA Executive Summary.
                         Besides common environmental issues (e.g.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts of noise, dust, waste management etc.)
                         during construction and operation, the EIA will
                         also pay special attention to the following
                         aspects (but not limited to):
                         -         Impacts on Baishuihu Lake, a natural
                         habitat in the project area;
                         -         Cumulative impacts of other major
                         construction activities in the project area within
                         the timeframe of the Bank projects, as well as
                         indirect environmental and social impacts
                         induced from the proposed infrastructure
                         project;
                         -         Physical cultural resources screening,
                         with special attention to those buildings or
                         physical resources that are not officially
                         designated as protected cultural resources, but
                         still present special historical values from social,
                         cultural or religious perspective to local
                         communities;
                         -         Alternative analysis: a scoping exercise
                         will be carried out to determine the specific
                         number and type of alternatives and impacts to
                         be considered in the ESIA. This will include
                         various alternatives (e.g. project schemes,
                         alignments, locations) with due consideration of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental, social, technical and economic
                         perspectives, including “Without project”
                         scenario.
                         -         Social impact: summarizing key
                         findings and recommendations of the Social
                         Assessment and Resettlement Action Plan, with
                         particular attention to the Bottom 40%
                         population;
                         -         Public consultation and information
                         disclosure as per OP4.01


                         Besides common environmental issues (e.g.
                         impacts of noise, dust, waste management etc.)
                         during construction and operation, the EIA will
                         also pay special attention to the following
                         aspects (but not limited to):
                         -        Impacts on Baishuihu Lake, a natural
                         habitat in the project area;
                                                             -         Cumulative impacts of other major
                                                             construction activities in the project area within
                                                             the timeframe of the Bank projects, as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             indirect environmental and social impacts
                                                             induced from the proposed infrastructure
                                                             project;
                                                             -         Physical cultural resources screening,
                                                             with special attention to those buildings or
                                                             physical resources that are not officially
                                                             designated as protected cultural resources, but
                                                             still present special historical values from social,
                                                             cultural or religious perspective to local
                                                             communities;
                                                             -         Alternative analysis: various
                                                             alternatives (e.g. project schemes, alignments,
                                                             locations) with due consideration of
                                                             environmental, social, technical and economic
                                                             perspectives, including “Without project”
                                                             scenario.
                                                             -         Social impact: summarizing key
                                                             findings and recommendations of the social
                                                             Social Assessment and Resettlement Action
                                                             Plan, with particular attention to the Bottom
                                                             40% population;
                                                             -         Public consultation and information
                                                             disclosure as per OP4.01
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The proposed project will traverse through the
                                                             Baishuihu Lake, a natural habitat in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             area, therefore, this policy is triggered. As a
                                                             natural habitat, Baishuihu Lake will be given
                                                             special attention in the EA process in terms of
                                                             ecological survey, presence of wetland, value of
                                                             flora and fauna, potential impacts, significance
                                                             of such impact in the context of ecological
                                                             function/value of the whole lake, alternatives to
                                                             reduce ecological footprint or construction
                                                             impacts, consultation with relevant authorities
                                                             and local communities, and mitigation
                                                             measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    There is no forest in the proposed project area,
                                                             therefore this policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not involve procurement of
                                                             pesticide or have any impact on pest
                                                             management practice. This policy is not
                                                             triggered.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           Based on initial field observation and available
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         information, there is no known physical cultural
                                                                                                                                 resources identified in the project area of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 influence. While, further field investigation by
                                                                                                                                 EA consultant and consultation with relevant
                                                                                                                                 authority/local community will be conducted
                                                                                                                                 during the project preparation stage. Regardless
                                                                                                                                 findings of such investigation, chance-find
                                                                                                                                 procedures will be included in the EMP.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Based on task team due diligence review,
                                                                                                                                 Xiaogan is a prefecture city with 531 million of
                                                                                                                                 populations, including about 7,000 Chinese
                                                                                                                                 minority populations scatted in the urban area
                                                                                                                                 and accounted in 44 Chinese minorities, and
                                                                                                                                 there are no Indigenous Peoples, as identified by
                                                                                                                                 the Bank, are present in, or have collective
                                                                                                                                 attachment to the project area. The information
                                                                                                                                 provided by the municipal department in charge
                                                                                                                                 of minority affairs also confirmed that the
                                                                                                                                 project area is Han population centralized area
                                                                                                                                 without any Chinese minority community in the
                                                                                                                                 project area and Han population is not identified
                                                                                                                                 as minority by the Bank. As the result, there are
                                                                                                                                 no Indigenous Peoples as identified by the Bank
                                                                                                                                 are present in, or have collective attachment to
                                                                                                                                 the project area. The task team concluded that
                                                                                                                                 the OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples is not triggered
                                                                                                                                 and IPDP is not requested.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Due to the land acquisition and resettlement,
                                 4.12                                                                                            this policy is triggered, and a resettlement action
                                                                                                                                 plan will be developed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve any dams,
                                                                                                                                 therefore, the policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            involve any international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                 7.60                                                                                            involve any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Dec-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESIA, ESMP, ESIA Summary, SA, RAP: Final by December 1, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Arturo Ardila Gomez

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)    Date: 27-Jun-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)   Date: 29-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
