                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC628

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P122383
                            Project Name:       Landscape Approach to Wildlife Conservation in Northeast China (P122383)
                            Task Team           Garo J. Batmanian
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           02-Jun-2014                      Estimated        30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Biodiversity

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         18.00                  Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      15.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                              3.00
                              Total                                                                         18.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           10.     The project development objective is to help create the ecological conditions for recovery of
                           threatened biodiversity in priority ecological landscapes in the far northeast of China, using the Amur
                           Tiger as an indicator species.

                           11.     The project would do this through: (a) enhancing the extension and effectiveness of
                           protected area/network management, (b) increasing wildlife carrying capacity through restoration,
                         expansion and connectivity of critical habitats, including the expansion of biodiversity-friendly
                         landscapes adjacent to protected areas; (c) promoting more effective law enforcement and monitoring
                         in both protected areas and the greater landscape to reduce mortality of flagship species; and (e)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reducing human/wildlife conflict by increasing benefits to and buy-in from local communities for
                         wildlife conservation.
                         C. Project Description
                         Project Components

                         Component 1: Institutional coordination to mainstream wildlife conservation across sectors.
                         (Estimated at US $5.59 million, including US$0.49 million from GEF and US$5.1 million from co-
                         financing sources). This component would support:

                         •       Policy and planning (identification of priority habitat areas for tiger protection, provincial
                         conservation and restoration plans, development/updating policies and regulations to reduce human/
                         tiger conflicts (e.g., through e.g., compensation mechanisms); and

                         •        Institutional arrangements (establishing a Northeast wildlife conservation panel); promoting
                         increased Sino-Russian cooperation for tiger conservation (e.g., promoting joint anti-poaching
                         activities, staff training and consolidation of statistics).

                         The expected outcomes are a strengthened policy framework for the implementation and
                         management of priority ecological landscapes to protect tiger and other wildlife habitat in
                         Heilongjiang and Jilin Provinces.

                         Component 2: A landscape approach to the conservation and restoration of priority ecosystems and
                         increased effectiveness of habitat protection in the Changbaishan Landscape. (Estimated at US$ 7.96
                         million, including US$ 1.36 million from GEF and US$ 6.6 million from co-financing sources). This
                         component would support:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Increased management effectiveness in 4 existing NRs (equipment, NR management plans
                         and plan regulation plans and training);
                         •        Creation of 3 new NRs (support for preparation & application materials and processes and
                         limited investment in 2 of the 3 reserves);
                         •        Ecological restoration (prey re-introduction, restoration of habitat, snare removal); and
                         •        Technical monitoring (wildlife/cats/prey, habitat, CC impacts).

                         The expected outcomes are: (a) increased management effectiveness among project supported NRs
                         measured by METT (target to be defined during preparation), (b) 3 new NRs established creating 877
                         km2 of new protected area for tiger and other wildlife enhanced forest ecosystem integrity in priority
                         landscapes in Northeast China and (c) integrated cross-provincial ecological monitoring program
                         established.

                         Component 3: Reducing human wildlife conflict in priority forest landscapes (capacity building and
                         enforcement, environmental education, incentives to build community support for conservation).
                         (Estimated at US$3.43 million, including US$0.93 million from GEF and US$2.50 million from co-
                         financing sources). This component would support:
                         •       Training of forestry staff outside of NRs focused on local community participation and
                         promoting tiger friendly land use;
                           •        Improved patrolling and enforcement through the implementation of SMART patrolling for
                           wildlife conservation in priority sites in Jilin and Heilongjang provinces (with phased adoption
                           throughout the PA network of the target area);
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •        Pilot mitigation measures (compensation, tiger-friendly forestry production through
                           reforestation, forest thinning and forest diversification); and
                           •        Increased public awareness

                           The expected outcome is: increased buy-in from local communities to conserve wildlife and protect
                           ecosystems.

                           Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (Estimated at US$1.02 million,
                           including US$0.22 million from GEF and US$0.8 million from co-financing sources). This
                           component would support project management activities to be carried out by the implementing
                           agency and coordination between provinces and across international boundaries.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is to extend or strengthen the existing restriction of access in some existing wildlife
                           protection areas in eastern Jilin Province and southeastern Helongjiang Province. The areas are
                           traditional forestry area in China and currently covered by forestry with low population density.
                           People living inside the areas mainly include forestry workers and their families, as well as few
                           villages, and their income is mainly from outside. The two provinces stated that the people inside has
                           very limited impacts on the protection of the areas, such as self-support farming around villages/
                           communities and collecting forest products in the forest areas. There are a few ethnic minority
                           villages, particularly Manchu and Korean, in the project areas.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The National PCU is within the State Forest Administration and the three provincial PMMUs are the
                           Jilin Provincial Forest Department and Heilongjiang Provincial Forest Department, which have no
Public Disclosure Copy




                           enough capacity for WB safeguard policies. The team will need to strengthen their capacity to
                           prepare and implement the project in line with World Bank environmental and social safeguard
                           policies. The PCU and each PPMU will assign a specific staff to take charge safeguard issues and
                           experienced environment and social consultants will be entrusted to assist preparation work related to
                           the safeguard instruments. Through the project cycle the World Bank Team will provide training to
                           the involved staff and consultants.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Yiren Feng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed project includes Improve
                           BP 4.01                                              management effectiveness of 4 existing
                                                                                protected areas (nature reserves), create 3
                                                                                protected areas, Reintroduce population of prey
                                                                                to improve tiger habitat, Restore vegetation
                                                                                (forest enriching, planting cut areas) to
                                                             improvetiger habitat, Improve monitoring and
                                                             enforcement outside protected areas, Increase
                                                             awareness of local communities (Envt.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Education) etc. The OP4.01 is triggered due to
                                                             the potential impacts on natural habitats and
                                                             social issues such as potential access restrictions
                                                             to protection and conservation areas etc., and
                                                             EIA (including EMP as one chapter of EIA) will
                                                             be prepared to meet the Bank safeguard
                                                             requirements. The EIA (EMP) will include the
                                                             following contents:
                                                             •Some small civil works such as the buildings of
                                                             protection stations are expected to be
                                                             constructed to improve management
                                                             effectiveness of existing protected areas as well
                                                             as the new ones to be created under this project.
                                                             Thus, the Environmental Code of Practice
                                                             (ECOP) needs to be prepared to address the
                                                             potential impacts and identify mitigation
                                                             measures.
                                                              •Key actions on vegetation restoration,
                                                             afforestation, artificial tending is expected to
                                                             take place to improve tiger habitats. The
                                                             Environmental Protection Guideline for
                                                             plantation will be prepared as part of the EMP,
                                                             and a stand-alone Pest Management Plan (PMP)
                                                             will be prepared.
                                                             •The proposed project includes reintroduction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             population of prey to improve tiger habitat, the
                                                             risk and potential impacts of such component
                                                             needs to be assessed and included in EIA/EMP,
                                                             including the requirements for artificial feeding
                                                             of prey, disease control and epidemic
                                                             prevention, and relevant monitoring activities to
                                                             ensure the safety of the tigers, and also how the
                                                             project will manage the risks.
                                                             • Institutional arrangements, monitoring and
                                                             reporting arrangements and budget for the
                                                             implementation of the EMP
                                                             A ToR for the EA/EMP will be submitted to the
                                                             RSS for review prior to beginning of studies.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The project includes the improvement of the
                                                             management effectiveness of existing protected
                                                             areas, and creation of new protection areas,
                                                             which are both critical natural habitats as
                                                             defined under the policy, and the project also
                                                             includes the potential impacts of reintroducing
                                                                 prey population on the ecology/ecological
                                                                 balance of the protected areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The project will include limited reforestation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and afforestation with local, indigenous species.
                                                                 It will not entail conversion of natural forests,
                                                                 commercial harvesting operation and the
                                                                 introduction of any invasive species. However,
                                                                 the project has the potential to have impacts on
                                                                 the rights and welfare of people and their level
                                                                 of dependence upon or interaction with forests,
                                                                 the policy is therefore triggered. Given the very
                                                                 limited relocation/access restriction proposed by
                                                                 the clients, the adverse impacts should be minor.
                                                                 The project will prepare social management
                                                                 plan (SMP), the relevant context of SMP will be
                                                                 incorporated into the EMP accordingly. In
                                                                 addition, the alternative livelihood will be
                                                                 designed and implemented outside of the
                                                                 protected areas, as part of the project activities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project will include critical areas of
                                                                 vegetation restoration, afforestation, artificial
                                                                 tending, and nursery management etc. A stand-
                                                                 alone Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be
                                                                 prepared to guide the application of pesticides
                                                                 for the forest activities.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Initial screening indicated that project sites are
                         BP 4.11                                 not located in or next to any known areas with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 physical, cultural, or natural relics. The further
                                                                 survey will be conducted as part of the EA
                                                                 preparation process. In addition, the chance
                                                                 findings procedure will be included in the EMP
                                                                 and the bidding document and contract.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Some villages of Manzhu Minority and Korean
                                                                 Minority were found in the project areas,
                                                                 particularly in Hunchun NNR, Laoyeling PNR
                                                                 and Niaoqingshan NNR, and so the OP 4.10 is
                                                                 triggered. Further IP screening will be
                                                                 implemented by the following mission and the
                                                                 social consultants in the next step. Given the
                                                                 specific project activities and their impacts on
                                                                 the minority villages are not clear at this stage,
                                                                 so an IPPF (EMDPF) needs to be prepared and
                                                                 an IPP (EMDP) will be prepared if needed in
                                                                 line with the prepared IPPF (EMDPF). The
                                                                 documents mentioned above should be
                                                                 integrated into a Social Management Plan to be
                                                                prepared covering all social issues under the
                                                                project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Land Acquisition and Resettlement: The project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                   probably triggers limited land acquisition and
                                                                relocation issue, including household relocation,
                                                                farmland transferred to forest land.

                                                                For any relocation of village/community
                                                                identified before project appraisal, resettlement
                                                                planning is needed, with one or several RPs

                                                                For any uncertain resettlement before project
                                                                appraisal, due to absence of function area
                                                                determination or other reasons, a resettlement
                                                                policy framework needs preparation;

                                                                Other relevant resettlement activities outside
                                                                protection areas should be integrated into the
                                                                above documents;

                                                                Any implemented and undergoing resettlement
                                                                actions relevant to the project should be
                                                                reviewed and documented in a resettlement
                                                                implementation review report.

                                                                Potential restriction of access: Most of project
                                                                protection areas possibly to some extent trigger
                                                                restriction of access issues. For all strengthened
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                or new-built restriction of access, which may
                                                                cause income reduction for the affected
                                                                population, a Process Framework should be
                                                                prepared. The PF covers identifying scope of
                                                                restriction action and affected people, evaluating
                                                                impacts and exploring measures, etc.

                                                                The RP/RPF/PF will also be integrated into the
                                                                SMP.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    the project will not finance nor are any of its
                                                                activities dependent on a dam as defined the
                                                                Safety of Dams policy.
                         Projects on International        No    The project is not located in any international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   waterways as defined under the policy. No
                                                                action is required under this policy.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    The project is not located in any known
                         7.60                                   disputed areas as defined under the policy. No
                                                                action is required under this policy
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      SFA will prepare an EA and Social Management Plan for the project
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Garo J. Batmanian

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 28-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Iain G. Shuker (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 29-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
