                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA9045
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                             Project ID:      P132621
                            Project Name:     Yunnan Highway Asset Management Project (P132621)
                            Task Team         Xiaoke Zhai
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Oct-2014                       Estimated   16-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (75%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (65%), Managing for
                                              development results (25%), Natural disaster management (1 0%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     281.00           Total Bank Financing:                 150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                               131.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  150.00
                              Total                                                                                  281.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of highway in Yunnan.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component A – Highway Asset Management Improvement. This component will improve asset


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         management decisions by establishing and operating an integrated highway asset management
                         system, it includes three sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a) Sub-Component A1 – Establishing an Integrated Management Information System. This sub-
                         component will finance the establishment of an integrated management information system and the
                         related IT infrastructures and hardware for the system, including: (i) a data management center; (ii)
                         data exchange platform; (iii) road asset management system; (iv) road network monitoring and
                         emergency command center with related system and equipment; (v) upgrade of existing databases
                         and management systems and their incorporation into an integrated management information system;
                         and (vi) improving and expanding the existing IT infrastructure and connections to operate the
                         integrated management information system.

                         (b) Sub-Component A2 ─ Supporting Data Collection for Management System Operation. This sub-
                         component will fund equipment and instruments for data collection, including: (i) upgrade of two
                         existing vehicles and adding a new vehicle for pavement condition data collection and an automatic
                         deflector meter; (ii) 9 bridge and 8 tunnel inspection vehicles; (iii) 63 permanent automatic traffic
                         recording stations and 80 portable counting sets; (iv) 33 sets of instruments and related software for
                         monitoring large landslides, key bridges and extreme large tunnels; and (v) 35 sets of portable
                         maintenance inspection equipment (patrol vehicles equipped with relevant software and hardware for
                         data collection and information transmission to control center).

                         (c) Sub-Component A3 ─ Adoption of Asset Management Approach. This sub-component will
                         provide technical assistance to YHB in adopting the asset management approach, making necessary
                         process changes for operating the asset management system, applying asset management principles
                         into business processes, and using the system outputs into decision making and performance
                         evaluation.

                         Component B ─ Maintenance and Emergency Response Capacities Enhancement. This component,
                         comprising two sub-components, will improve performance evaluation and enhance YHB’s capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to carry out maintenance works and emergency rescue activities:

                         (a) Sub-component B1 ─ Improving Performance Evaluation System and Indicators. This sub-
                         component will provide technical support to YHB to improve its performance management and
                         objectively measure efficiency and effectiveness of maintenance delivery. It will focus on:
                         identifying new and improved management objectives with enhanced management strategies, tools
                         and facilities; updating YHB’s evaluation system and indicators; enhancing performance monitoring
                         and feedback mechanism; and increasing accountability.

                         (b) Sub-component B2 ─ Providing Equipment and Facilities to Maintenance Stations and
                         Emergency Centers. This sub-component will enhance staff maintenance delivery and emergency
                         response capacity through: (i) provision of adequate equipment for routine and minor maintenance as
                         well as emergency response at Maintenance and Emergency Response Centers and Stations; and (ii)
                         expansion/construction of equipment shelters, administration and production buildings, and staff
                         dormitories at the Centers and Stations.

                         Component C ─ Pilot of Cost-Effective Maintenance Technologies. This component will support the
                         reduction of life-cycle maintenance costs by piloting cost-effective maintenance techniques,
                         including cold recycling of asphalt pavement for base course, modified asphalt chip seals, asphalt
                         slurry seals, and micro-surfacing, at 7 typical and suitable road segments with a total length of 290

                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         km.

                         Component D ─ Strengthening Institutional Capacities. This component will enhance the capacities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of YHB’s management and staff through four sub-components:

                         (a) Sub-component D1 ─ Highway Asset Evaluation Manual and Highway Asset Accounting
                         Guideline. This sub-component will provide technical assistance to review domestic and
                         international road asset valuation practices and accounting policies, develop highway asset valuation
                         manual and accounting guideline in compliance with acceptable accounting standards, evaluate
                         highway assets, and record asset values in YHB’s balance sheet.
                          (b) Sub-component D2 ─ Highway Maintenance Manual. This sub-component will provide
                         technical assistance to develop a highway maintenance manual contextualized to the specific Yunnan
                         geographic and highway conditions.

                         (c) Sub-component D3 ─ Highway Safety Study. This sub-component will study the road safety
                         situation of the trunk highway system and provide recommendations on road safety policy and
                         management improvements.

                         (d) Sub-component D4 ─ Study Tours and Trainings. This sub-component will support training and
                         study tours to help YHB staff to adapt to the new asset management approach and business systems,
                         learn to operate and maintain new equipment, and master innovative maintenance technologies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Project is located in Yunnan Province in southwestern China. The province has an area
                         of 394,000 km2, about 94% of which is mountainous and vulnerable to landslides, floods and
                         earthquakes. The eastern part of the province has an average altitude of 2000m, called Yunnan
                         Plateau; the western part is Hengduan Mountain characterized by great mountains and valleys. The
                         province has a rich water resource, including more than 600 rivers, and 37 lakes that are larger than
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1km2. The province, given its unique topography and location, has various climatic patterns,
                         including low-latitude plateau zone climate, north tropical zone climate and north temperate zone
                         climate. In general, it has a rainy season during May-October and dry sea during November-April.
                         Annual precipitation is about 1500mm, of which 80% takes place in rain season.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (GSURR)
                         Ning Yang (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Category B
                          BP 4.01                                            ECOPs prepared
                                                                             Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                             carried out.


                                                                             OP4.01 policy is triggered. Considering the
                                                                             nature of the construction activities, and the fact
                                                                             that the anticipated impacts are site-specific, and



                                                                     Page 3 of 9
                                                                         limited in scale, it is proposed to assign category
                                                                         B to the project. An environmental code of
                                                                         practice (ECOP) is suggested as the EA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         instrument for the project. The ECOP will cover
                                                                         both construction and operational stage, and shall
                                                                         include effective measures to prevent and
                                                                         mitigate potential negative impacts.

                                                                         During preparation of the ECOP, at least one of
                                                                         public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                         shall be carried out. The full draft ECOP shall be
                                                                         disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Four Section-level management stations and one
                                                                         city-level emergency center are located in
                                                                         environmental sensitive areas are included in the
                                                                         project, which will involve the experimental zone
                                                                         of national level natural reserve, Class III
                                                                         protection zone of the stone forest natural heritage
                                                                         reserve etc. The construction activities will take
                                                                         place within existing facilities, with no land
                                                                         acquisition. The ECOPs includes appropriate
                                                                         mitigation measures during design phase,
                                                                         construction phase and operation phase
                                                                         respectively to avoid, reduce or eliminate the
                                                                         potential adverse impacts on the reserves.
                                                                         Therefore, the project will not result in significant
                                                                         degradation or conversion of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not involve in any forests. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not result in procurement or use
                                                                         of pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project will not involve any known PCR.
                         BP 4.11                                         Chance-find procedure is included in the ECOPs.
                                                                         The policy is not triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Yunnan is well known as a multiracial province
                                                                         with 51 ethnic minorities. The project is
                                                                         provincial-wide, implementing activities in all the
                                                                         16 cities/prefecture areas of the province.
                                                                         Therefore the project will affect ethnic minority
                                                                         people and trigger the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project will build or extend maintenance
                         4.12                                            management and emergency response centers and
                                                                         stations, and restore or rehabilitate some sections
                                                                         of pilot road, which need land acquisition. So the
                                                                         policy is triggered.




                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project will not involve in any dams. The
                                                                                policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                 The project will not involve in any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project will not involve in any disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                The policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment

                             OP4.01 Environmental Assessment
                             Physical activities of the project include improvement or construction of equipment shelters,
                             administration and production buildings, and workers dormitories at the road management and
                             emergency response centers and stations(Component B1); and road pavement maintenance pilots
                             (component C).

                             The Component B1 involves 15 city/prefecture-level emergency response centers, 63 county-level
                             emergency centers, and 225 maintenance stations. Most physical activities will take place within
                             existing sites with no expansion or land acquisition needed.

                             The Component C involves 8 locations covering 280km roads, with no road alignment change or
                             permanent land acquisition involved.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Overall, the project is anticipated to bring positive impacts through lowering emissions from
                             vehicles on well-maintained roads, reducing risks and damages from natural disasters, and reusing
                             of pavement materials. Potential environmental impacts are mainly associated with construction
                             activities, such as dust and noise, construction wastewater, social disturbance, materials
                             processing. At operational stage, main environmental impacts resulted from domestic waste
                             management and maintenance material processing within these facilities and on the roads.

                             Considering the nature of the construction activities, and the fact that the anticipated impacts are
                             site-specific, and limited in scale, the project is category B for environmental purpose per OP4.01.
                             Comprehensive Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) was prepared by accredited EIA
                             Consultant. The ECOPs covers institutional arrangement, each type of typical physical activities,
                             environmental monitoring and supervision, capacity building, and training plan. The ECOPs was
                             reviewed by the Bank team and found satisfactory to the Bank safeguards requirements.

                             OP4.04 Natural Habitats

                             There are four segment-level management stations and one city-level emergency center that are
                             located in environmentally sensitive areas included in the project. These are existing facilities that
                             are responsible for road maintenance under their jurisdictions. Proposed activities will not result in
                             expansion of the current facilities or land acquisition. The ECOPs includes appropriate mitigation


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           measures during design phase, construction phase and operation phase respectively to avoid,
                           reduce or eliminate the potential adverse impacts on the sensitive areas. The impacts are rather
                           local, temporary, very limited and are not anticipated to affect natural habitats in their vicinity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Therefore, the project will not result in significant degradation or conversion of natural habitats.

                           Social aspects

                           OP 4.12, Involuntary Resettlement
                           The project Component B and C, triggering physical activity construction, will use land. Under
                           Component B, the construction or extension of the emergency centers, maintenance and
                           management centers will use land owned by the transportation authorities, and will not
                           permanently acquire land, except for four country level emergency centers in Yuxi City where
                           there is still potential permanent land acquisition after project design. Further the Component C
                           probably needs temporary land use for the construction or rehabilitation of some sections of the
                           pilot roads.

                           OP 4.10, Indigenous People
                           Yunnan is well known as a multiracial province with 51 ethnic minorities. The project is
                           provincial-wide, implementing activities in all the 16 cities/prefecture areas of the province.
                           Therefore the project will affect ethnic minority people.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N.A.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N.A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project owner engaged accredited EIA consultant to prepare the ECOPs. The ECOPs includes
                           how to manage the implementation of ECOPs such as institutional arrangement, responsibilities
                           and roles of each implementation stakeholders, specific code of practices for each type of
                           activities, etc. It also covers cross-cutting issues such as soil erosion control, social disturbance
                           management, wastewater treatment, management of cultural relics, health and safety, and solid
                           waste management..

                           During project preparation, the ECOPs were shared and discussed with relevant project
                           management staff and design engineer to ensure proper incorporation of the ECOPs into
                           engineering design. The ECOPs will be included in the bidding document and civil works contract
                           to be followed by the contractors.

                           A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared for the project to manage the potential land
                           use under Component B and C to be clearly determined in the implementation stage. At the
                           primary stage of the project preparation, 18 stations/centers at prefecture and county levels need
                           permanent land acquisition, and then a RP was required. However, as the project planning moving
                           forward, 6 county stations/centers dropped out due to project scope adjustment; the other 12 ones
                           at prefecture and county levels changed locations to utilize existing land owned by road
                           authorities, avoiding permanent land acquisition. Therefore, the RP was canceled because of no


                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           permanent land acquisition based on the present project design. On the existing land owned by
                           road authorities, a due diligence review has been carried out and is integrated into the RPF as an
                           Annex, which concluded that there is no pending resettlement issue. Any temporary land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           acquisition, not very clear at this stage, will be covered in the RPF. The RPF clearly determined,
                           among others, the procedures, timeframe and responsible agencies for resettlement planning in
                           project detailed design, and stated that any RP if needed should be prepared by PMO, and
                           reviewed and cleared by the Bank, prior to commencement of any related construction.

                           The EMDP was prepared in line with a free, prior and informed consultation and a thorough social
                           assessment, including 26 meetings with county minority commissions, 30 group discussion in
                           ethnic villages, 68 questionnaires for minority people, by which the ethnic minority express their
                           broad support to the project. The project impacts on the ethnic minority are mainly expected
                           positive in improving transportation condition and tourism industry, and the major adverse impacts
                           relate to temporary land use and construction-related disturbance locally. The EMDP identified all
                           the potential positive and adverse impacts and developed measures to enhance the positive impacts
                           and mitigate the adverse impacts, with tabulated budget for each measures and responsible
                           agencies to implement the measures. Further the EMDP will be implemented by the PMO and
                           semiannually monitored during the project cycle by an independent monitor with experiences on
                           similar work in projects financed by the Bank and ADB.

                           In order to strengthen the capacity of the PMO, an office responsible for RPF and EMDP
                           implementation, including prefecture and county levels, will be set up with dedicated staff prior to
                           the project launch workshop. These staff will be trained, responsible for the resettlement
                           implementation of the EMDP/RPF and for preparing the semi-annual resettlement implementation
                           progress report. The Office will engage social monitors, with experiences on similar work related
                           to projects financed by the Bank or ADB, to monitor the implementation of the EMDP/RPF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During the project preparation, the project owner and EIA and Social Consultants carried out
                           information disclosure and public consultation through posters, questionnaire survey, interviews
                           and public meetings in project counties, townships and villages. Consulted people include
                           potentially affected villagers, local governments and agencies. Their comments and suggestions
                           were incorporated into the project design and ECOPs, RPF and EMDP. The RPF and the EMDP
                           were locally disclosed on Aug 19, 2014. Full draft ECOPs were disclosed on the websites of each
                           project township and websites of each prefecture government or transport bureau on July 15, 2014.
                           The ECOPs is thus accessible to the public. All the documents were disclosed in InfoShop on Aug
                           20, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              19-Aug-2014
                           Comments:


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            19-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            19-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Xiaoke Zhai
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/       Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                            Date: 22-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
