                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3769

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P144447
                            Project Name:      India: Elementary Education III (P144447)
                            Task Team          Shabnam Sinha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-Dec-2013                      Estimated        20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      5854.65                  Total Bank Financing:        400.00
                            Financing Gap:           1747.89
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          3636.36
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  400.00
                              EC European Commission                                                        70.40
                              Total                                                                       4106.76
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO of SSA III is to provide universal access to quality education to all children 6-14
                           years of age, especially those from disadvantaged sections, and to improve retention and learning
                           outcomes.
                           C. Project Description
                           Program Components
                         The Bank financing will have two components:
                         •        Financing for SSA program
                         •        Technical Assistance (TA) component to support program implementation through identified
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutions. This will include support to:
                         o        NCERT(the national body mandated for activities around quality improvement):
                         Strengthening of National Achievement Surveys (NAS) and strategies for children with special needs
                         (CWSN)
                         o        National University of Planning and Administration (NUEPA): School leadership for teacher
                         standards and developing standards for school performance.

                         The component financing the SSA program will have a sharp focus on quality and learning outcomes
                         that inform and determine issues around access, equity and retention.

                         The program will support the following:

                         Quality and Learning Outcomes: Quality improvement with inherent accountability measures will be
                         provided special attention and will inform the SSA program in all its dimensions including access
                         and equity. The following areas will receive special attention:
                         •        Learning indicators for students: Years of schooling and grades completed continue to
                         remain an unreliable guide to what children learn and know. SSAIII will support development of
                         concrete indicators of students learning class wise at each level of schooling. This would increase the
                         focus on accountability for assessing learning outcomes and children’s performance. The national
                         institution, NCERT, will prepare the framework for learning indicators and this will be incorporated
                         appropriately in the results framework. The states will use this framework for implementation.
                         •        Strengthening early grade reading and numeracy: A priority area for SSA III will be to
                         improve student learning in elementary schools with a thrust on math and language in the early
                         grades (grades 1 and 2). This will ensure that the basic concepts of numbers and operations in math
                         are well understood in early grades, and the learning gap decreases as the children transition to
                         higher grades.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Strengthening Mathematics and Science Learning at Upper Primary Level: As students’
                         progress through the levels of primary schooling, the subject knowledge of teachers and the
                         availability and quality of the support materials they deploy become even more critical especially in
                         Mathematics and Science. In Phase 3 of SSA, the teaching of mathematics and science at upper
                         primary level will be one of the major priorities.
                         •        School Leadership: How schools are governed is also recognized to impact on quality. SSA
                         III will provide a major thrust on school management competence of school headmasters and
                         educational administrators. The national institution NUEPA (mandated to provide support on
                         educational management and administration) will be supported through its National Centre for
                         School Leadership to develop a school leadership program and states will be supported in
                         implementing these programs.
                         •        Standards for School Performance: School monitoring and assessment will receive priority
                         attention. NUEPA will take the lead at the central level in this support with international experience.
                         In addition NUEPA will strengthen the capacity of national and state level institutions in India to
                         undertake related research, development and monitoring in school performance enhancement.
                         •        Teacher Performance/accountability: Teacher performance can be judged by a range of
                         measures – competence, effort and student outcomes. These in turn can be variously measured.
                         Standards for teacher performance that are simple, understandable and monitorable will be developed
                         to help in the first place, the teachers themselves to identify their own performance requirements and
                         be able to modify the same. As of now, no systematic effort has been made to develop teacher
                         standards in India. Developing these will also serve a useful benchmark for educational practitioners
                         and the community to be able to understand what is expected out of the teachers. The NCERT will be
                         designated to undertake this task. With RTE prescribing a student: teacher ratio of 30:1, there are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         about 1.1 million teacher vacancies that need to be filled in over the next few years. All states are
                         now beginning to conduct Teacher Eligibility Tests (TET) for the teacher hiring process.
                         Identification of teacher performance standards will strengthen the process for hiring of teachers with
                         clear competencies identified and more transparency introduced. Teacher performance identification
                         will be linked to intensive assessment of teacher training, both in-service and pre-service, to ensure
                         that these reflect appropriately in school performance. The strategy will be to equip teachers with
                         relevant, up-to-date knowledge and approaches to teaching, and career progression structure. States
                         like Bihar are exploring performance-related pay/reward(s) that is likely to foster greater
                         accountability and teacher effort and this will be scaled up nationally if successful.

                         Children with Special Needs: While RTE Act and SSA have been instrumental to a large extent in
                         changing public attitudes/perceptions about the abilities of children with disabilities, there are inter-
                         state and even intra-state differences in the implementation. While SSA, thus far, has been able to
                         enroll a large number of Children With Special Needs in regular schools, they gradually start
                         dropping out and hence do not complete the elementary education cycle. This is more so in the case
                         of children with developmental disabilities. The program will support efforts towards retention of
                         CWSN through capacity building of in-service teachers, with a special focus on curricular
                         adaptations, classroom transaction and evaluation practices for children with developmental
                         disabilities (for e.g. those with Cerebral Palsy, Autism, Multiple Disabilities and Intellectual
                         Disabilities).

                         Monitoring and evaluation: Further capacity building is required to improve and enhance the
                         National Achievement Surveys to enrich and inform them with international best practices in
                         assessment. The process of strengthening all dimensions of the National Achievement Surveys will
                         be undertaken. Efforts for cross referencing this data with independent surveys, especially at the state
                         levels will be undertaken. Further, monitoring and evaluation systems will be strengthened to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that relevant, information is available to policy makers in a timely manner. Rigorous evaluations of
                         specific interventions will be built into the program to assess impact, and facilitate scaling up of the
                         more successful interventions and to also inform mid-course corrections.

                         The analysis of trends in age specific attendance rates (NSS uses the term “school attendance? for
                         enrolment rates rather than the daily attendance rates) using NSS shows that school attendance rate is
                         still much lower for ST and Muslim children even though the rate of increase in school attendance
                         rate increased for all social groups during SSA period. Between 2004-05 and 2009-10, the rate of
                         increase in attendance rate was the slowest for Muslim children. The project will ensure that data
                         bases like DISE/ Unified-DISE will include children in Madrassas and to enable a more precise
                         estimate of in-school Muslim children. Residual challenges of addressing equity issues will factor in
                         accurate estimates of out of school children. Independent surveys for assessing out of school children
                         will be undertaken with States cross validating and reconciling the data.

                         Improved Planning Management and Social Accountability:. There is a need to strengthen the
                         effectiveness and efficiency of schools to make them more accountable for learning outcomes
                         through strong monitoring mechanisms. Some key initiatives under SSA III will include:
                         •       Strengthening of QMT as a Quality and Management Tool: Quality Monitoring Tools
                         (QMTs) already exist to provide regular monitoring of each school covering school management as
                         well as quality monitoring. NCERT will strengthen the QMTs providing them with capacities to
                         collate and generate information from the state for feeding into planning at national and state levels.
                         •        School Autonomy and Empowerment of School Management Committees (SMCs):
                         Evidence shows that where the community at the grass roots was given an opportunity to be involved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in school operation and was legally empowered to perform certain management functions, the system
                         has performed better. The program will work with states to build capacity and empower the SMCs
                         for school monitoring, teacher performance and attendance reporting through gradually providing
                         them statutory powers.
                         •        Special Focus Districts: Educationally backward districts are allocated about 65% of SSA
                         funds. Such districts/states merit special treatment and will be provided with additional support and
                         more intense monitoring under SSA III. Low income states (and within them the special focus
                         districts identified by GOI) are generally the large spending states and will be provided special
                         attention for addressing concerns of out of school children, enhancing transition (especially for
                         children from special focus groups and migrant children) and for quality improvement efforts.
                         •        Appraisal and Supervision: SSA is massive in its overall reach and scaling up of this
                         program has many challenges for programme management, particularly for its appraisal and
                         supervision machinery. The mission based approach –with a participatory, grass roots planning
                         (informed by data gathering and analysis), a rigorous appraisal and supervision of the programme
                         needs to become integral to the program at the national, state and district levels. Realistic
                         decentralized planning and appraisal moving from input oriented towards output driven efforts will
                         be strengthened.

                          Performance-based budgeting: The project will strengthen budget processes to link them to medium
                         and long term s trategic educational planning. Financial planning at the state level will be undertaken
                         with focus on identified outcomes and MHRD fund releases will become increasingly tied to state
                         specific indicators, agreed on annually between the state and central government as part of the
                         Annual Work Planning and Budgeting (AWPB) exercise.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         India, covering 28 States and 7 Union Territories. The Sarva Skisha Abhiyan (SSA) is being
                         implemented in partnership with State Governments to cover the entire country and address the needs
                         of 192 million children in 1.1 million habitations.
                         Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is Government of India's program for achievement of Universalization
                         of Elementary Education (UEE) in a time bound manner, as mandated by 86th amendment to the
                         Constitution of India making free and compulsory Education to the Children of 6-14 years age group,
                         a Fundamental Right.
                         India has made long strides in the last 50 years in the field of education. The National Policy on
                         Education (1986) and Program of Action (1992) also accorded top priority for achieving the goals of
                         Universal Elementary Education. A number of programs / schemes were launched during the last
                         four decades for universalization of elementary education. Some of these efforts have been in the
                         field of primary education and a few also covering upper primary sector.
                         The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is a comprehensive and integrated flagship program of
                         Government of India to attain Universal Elementary Education (UEE), covering the entire country in
                         a mission mode. The program was launched in 2001-2002 in partnership with the State Governments
                         and Local Self Governments. The program aims to provide useful and relevant, elementary education
                         to all children in the 6 to 14 age group. It is an initiative to universalize and improve quality of
                         education through decentralized context specific planning and with a process based, time bound
                         implementation strategy. The program lays emphasis on bridging gender and social category gaps at
                         elementary education level. On one hand, SSA is a program with its own targets, norms and
                         processes and on the other it is an umbrella program covering other programs like District Primary
                         Education Program (DPEP), Lok Jumbish, Operational Blackboard, etc. The gigantic dimensions of
                         the program and the financial implications call for a meticulous planning and a rigorous appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Due to these interventions, initiated by Government of India and the respective state Governments,
                         there has been considerable progress in providing access, improving retention and the quality
                         improvement in primary education sector. However, much needs to be done for the special focus
                         groups, and the upper primary sector. Quality improvement still remains a major concern, especially
                         for upper primary sector. Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan is an attempt to fill this vacuum and covers all the
                         districts in the country unlike the earlier programs on elementary education. The program covers the
                         whole gamut of elementary education sector and has flexibility to incorporate new interventions for
                         girls, e.g., NPEGEL, Kasturba Gandhi Program.
                         The program supports opening of new schools in those habitations which do not have schooling
                         facilities and strengthen existing school infrastructure through provision of additional class rooms,
                         toilets, drinking water, maintenance grant and school improvement grants. Existing schools with
                         inadequate teacher strength are provided with additional teachers, while the capacity of existing
                         teachers is being strengthened by extensive training, grants for developing teaching-learning
                         materials and strengthening of the academic support structure at a cluster, block and district level.
                         The SSA adopts “the bottom-up? process of planning, wherein the felt needs of the served
                         communities and educational needs of learners are to be taken care of. In view of the fact that the
                         desired improvement and sustenance of the improved efficiency level cannot be achieved without the
                         active involvement of the community in the schooling system, SSA has emphasized the involvement
                         of local people & stakeholders in planning. This also ensures reflection of local specificity, which is
                         essential for achieving the goals of the program. SSA seeks to provide quality elementary education
                         including life skills. SSA has a special focus on girl's education and children with special needs. SSA
                         also seeks to provide computer education to bridge the digital divide.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Social :
                         As a result of a decade long campaign for community based decentralized planning and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of interventions, the general public has become increasingly more aware of the
                         vitality of elementary education, particularly that of girls. There is significant increase in enrollment
                         of girls and of children belonging to other disadvantaged groups (SC and ST). Several states engaged
                         teachers from the local community, besides also engaging volunteers for mobilization and support
                         activities. The recruits often constituted large percentage of women. Till now due to SSA II project
                         interventions, the proportion of girls, SC and ST children in schools are as per their share of
                         population.

                         A detailed capacity assessment will be carried out as part of the social assessment, based on which
                         propositions will be made for creating/strengthening borrower’s institutional capacity on social
                         safeguards.

                         Environmental :
                         The Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA) is governed at the Centre by a General Body chaired by the Prime
                         Minister, an Executive Committee and a Project Approval Board. In the states, it is implemented
                         through separately registered societies with staff deputed from the state government or appointed on
                         contract. A Governing Body and an Executive Committee functions in every state too. A State
                         Project Director oversees the SSA at the state level, in addition to the already existing Director/
                         Commissioner of Education.
                         The key stakeholders in the project will be the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD),
                         Department of School Education and Literacy and the State Implementation Societies (SIS) at the
                         state levels. The key stake-holders will not only cover the MHRD, the State Implementation
                         Societies (SIS) but also the district implementing agencies- the District Education Offices, the Block
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Resource Centers (BRCs) and the Cluster Resource Centers (CRCs). With the RTE being in place,
                         the School Management Committees (SMCs) will become key partners and stake-holders along with
                         the teacher workforce.
                         SSA has been operational since 2000-2001. Thereafter, the Government of India had passed the
                         Right to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE), which became effective in April 2010.
                         With the passage of the RTE Act, several changes have been incorporated into the SSA approach,
                         strategies and norms. The SSA program has been designated as the official vehicle to implement
                         RTE and SSA norms and the Framework for Implementation has been revised in 2011 to fully align
                         with the RTE provisions. The federal government through the Ministry of Human Resources
                         Development (MHRD) is operationalizing this through this nation-wide Centrally Sponsored Scheme
                         (CSS).
                         The changes are not merely confined to norms for providing teachers or classrooms, but encompass
                         the vision and approach to elementary education as evidenced in the shift to child entitlements and
                         quality elementary education in regular schools. Specifically with regard to environment
                         management and safeguards, the MHRD has helped states in developing the School Development
                         Plans that have started to factor-in building strategies that are specific to the needs of local conditions
                         - integrating also indigenous, environment friendly components/requirements. Teaching learning
                         materials based on the National Curriculum Framework (2005) have increasingly started to pay
                         attention to environmental dimensions with focus on concerns of environment protection and
                         preservation.
                         Awareness and capacities within the MHRD and the Technical Support Group (TSG) of MHRD on
                         issues of sound environmental management with regard to schools, which were practically non-
                         existent at the start of the program a decade back, have gradually started to develop. As part of the
                         SSA I and SSA II, environment friendly norms have been integrated into the program design and
                         documents. Tools (manuals and directives) and guidelines related to environment, health and safety
                         management have been prepared on the basis of findings from environment assessments that were
Public Disclosure Copy




                         carried out for the two previous projects supported by the Bank
                         Specifically under SSA II after learning lessons from the first project, several mitigation measures
                         were proposed to improve environmental management practices. These include: (a) all States were
                         required to prepare campus plans/maps for the new schools/classrooms to be built to ensure planned
                         expansion of schools/classrooms; (b) use of cost-effective construction technologies; (c) measures to
                         improve sanitation and cleanliness, including provision of water supply and separate toilets for girls;
                         (d) tests of drinking water in schools; (e) building staff capacity on environmental management by
                         introducing environmental issues and safeguard mechanisms in the engineers' training programs.
                         The MHRD, through the Elementary Education Bureau (EEB) has been playing a key role in
                         directing the planning process, strengthening consultation and instilling accountability into it.
                         Quarterly reviews are being used for resolving issues at the state level; and at the semi-annual
                         meetings with state ministries, the Ministry reviews project’s progress and implementation issues.
                         The SSA has a Joint Review Missions (JRMs) that review the progress of the project every six
                         months. The developmental partners of SSA, namely the World Bank, the DFID and the European
                         Commission, have been a part of this exercise, led by the MHRD. MHRD also works closely with
                         apex national institutions such as NUEPA and NCERT for the development of appropriate
                         monitoring mechanisms for the program.
                         Considerable progress has been made in SSA in providing access to schools and in addressing equity
                         issues in enrolment for special focus groups (SC, ST and girl students) whose representation in
                         schools is as per their share in the population. However, learning outcomes remain unsatisfactorily
                           low particularly for the socially and economically deprived groups and in educationally backward
                           geographical pockets of low income, large spending states like Bihar, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh,
                           Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh. The concern of providing inclusive education to children with special
Public Disclosure Copy




                           needs has to be addressed. In order to ensure that the load of non-comprehension (that is evident in
                           children at primary levels) is not carried further to upper primary levels, early grade learning should
                           be provided special emphasis.
                           While the Bank has supported the SSA in its earlier phases (I and II), the focus on quality
                           improvement and learning outcomes with accountability measures in this next phase/project will
                           bring in a new set of challenges of setting of national goals and grade level learning standards that
                           will be acceptable to all states; a strategy to improve early grade reading and numeracy that will be
                           applicable to all states and state level implementation that will ensure consistency of quality in
                           learning outcomes across all states.
                           While the focus of the program has increasingly shifted to ‘quality’, there is clearly a need for greater
                           focus – and commensurate capacity development - on improvements in learning outcomes and
                           classroom processes at the national and state levels. As the SSA is transiting towards Right to
                           Education (RTE), with its residual challenge of improving attendance, retention and enhancing the
                           quality of education, focus on the learning outcomes especially for the disadvantaged groups is
                           required. Special efforts are required to enhance social accountability, institutional reform and
                           governance for improved service delivery. On the environment aspects, while tools have been
                           developed, there is a need to strengthen/consolidate the various environmental management
                           initiatives and build capacity towards improving compliance/performance on the ground (involving
                           community/school management committee too).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                           Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Specific interventions envisaged under the
                           BP 4.01                                               project such as upgrading of the building
                                                                                 infrastructure may have some potential adverse
                                                                                 environmental impacts in the local context.
                                                                                 Even though the new buildings/blocks are likely
                                                                                 to be located within existing campus (within
                                                                                 available govt. land), planning, design and
                                                                                 construction of buildings and associated
                                                                                 facilities would require appropriate integration
                                                                                 of environment, health and safety measures to
                                                                                 ensure that adverse environmental impacts are
                                                                                 minimized and properly managed. Impacts/
                                                                                 issues related to sanitation/hygiene, water
                                                                                 supply, drainage, waste water management,
                                                                                 solid waste arrangements, access for physically
                                                                                 challenged and fire safety would require
                                                                                 attention.
                                                                                 More importantly, the efficacy of environment,
                                                                 health and safety management measures as part
                                                                 of the school operation/maintenance has a direct
                                                                 implication on the program outcome and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 therefore is important to consider from a
                                                                 safeguards perspective.
                                                                 OP 4.01 has been triggered to facilitate creation/
                                                                 strengthening of mechanisms whereby school
                                                                 buildings can be planned, designed and
                                                                 maintained in an environmentally sound manner
                                                                 through integration of appropriate approaches
                                                                 into the over-all decision making process of the
                                                                 program.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    OP 4.04 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 no interventions are envisaged in natural
                                                                 habitats, including those defined as ‘critical’
                                                                 under the policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    OP 4.36 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 no interventions are envisaged in forest areas
                                                                 and therefore no conversion/degradation of this
                                                                 natural resource is expected to occur.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                 biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                 reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                                 envisaged.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Since some civil works are involved, ‘chance
                         BP 4.11                                 finds’ at work sites is a likely impact that would
                                                                 have to be managed. Adverse impacts on any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 locally important cultural property would be
                                                                 examined, if any, for appropriate mitigation
                                                                 during planning and implementation stages.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The two previous projects (SSA I and II) have
                                                                 had specific focus on backward communities,
                                                                 including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                                                                 Tribes. The proposed project too would be
                                                                 required to adopt focused efforts and
                                                                 implementation arrangements to continue this.

                                                                 A social assessment will be undertaken to
                                                                 determine key social issues, including an
                                                                 analysis of the vulnerable communities
                                                                 including girls, SC/ST, urban deprived, minority
                                                                 children and children with special needs
                                                                 (CWSNs) associated with the project, identify
                                                                 present barriers to inclusion and their concerns
                                                                 with regard to social aspects, and recommend
                                                                 measures to mainstream these into project
                                                                                                                                 design and implementation arrangements.
                                                                                                                                 Focused Stakeholder Consultations shall be
                                                                                                                                 conducted with intended project beneficiaries
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and likely affected social groups on the
                                                                                                                                 proposed project objectives, components and
                                                                                                                                 implementation arrangements.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            OP 4.12 is not triggered for this project as no
                                 4.12                                                                                            resettlement is envisaged due to proposed
                                                                                                                                 project interventions.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                                                                                 there is no construction of new dams or
                                                                                                                                 activities that are concerned with safe
                                                                                                                                 functioning of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            there are no interventions planned/proposed
                                                                                                                                 over or around an international waterway that
                                                                                                                                 could cause a potential conflict. There are also
                                                                                                                                 no activities that may affect the use or pollute
                                                                                                                                 such a waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                                 7.60                                                                                            not proposed in any disputed area.

                                                                                                                                 Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to
                                                                                                                                 Address Environmental and Social Safeguard
                                                                                                                                 Issues in Bank-Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      In line with requirements of the Bank’s operational policies on safeguards, environment and social
                                      assessment studies will be conducted and based on the findings from these studies, the existing
                                      safeguard tools/instruments (EMF and SMF) for the programme/project will be revised/updated/
                                      refined. Since the World Bank has been requested by the MHRD for a third phase of support to the
                                      program after completion of two earlier projects (SSA I and II), the said assessments will be
                                      primarily ‘diagnostic reviews’ drawing lessons from the previous operations. Also, these studies
                                      will cover assessment and recommendations for elements such as CWSN that are new areas of
                                      focus under this project. Based on the findings, existing safeguard tools/instruments (manuals and
                                      guidance notes) for the programme/project will be revised/consolidated, as required.
                                      Expected time frame for completion of this Activity - Prior to appraisal.
                                      The safeguard-related documents will be disclosed before appraisal at the Bank’s Infoshop and in
                                      country in line with requirements of Bank's Disclosure Policy.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Shabnam Sinha




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)   Date: 16-Oct-2013
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)              Date: 21-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
