                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3437

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tuvalu                          Project ID:      P144573
                            Project Name:      Energy Sector Development Project (P144573)
                            Task Team          Roberto Gabriel Aiello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Feb-2014                     Estimated        22-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASNS                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (40%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                               (30%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      7.00                     Total Bank Financing:           7.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  7.00
                              Total                                                                        7.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to support Tuvalu enhance its energy security by improving the
                           efficiency and sustainability of the electricity system.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will consist of three components to be implemented by the Tuvalu Electricity
                           Corporation (TEC).
                         Component 1: Improving the efficiency of TEC's electricity system (estimated cost: $0.8M). This
                         component will involve two subcomponents:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pre-payment meters (estimated cost: $0.4M): TEC has a high level of outstanding debtors, with
                         accounts receivable standing at over 100 debtor days, i.e. over 3 months. The project will finance the
                         procurement and installation of pre-payment meters on all accounts, with Smart meters being
                         considered for large accounts. The project will also include a capacity building program for TEC
                         staff and a program to raise awareness of consumers.

                         Communications system, data and voice communications (estimated cost: $0.4M): Poor
                         communications between Funafuti and the outer islands is an impediment to utility operations and
                         customer service, and the current communications system is highly unreliable. The project will
                         finance the installation of a satellite and wireless communication system to facilitate voice and data
                         communications between the outer islands and the head office in Funafuti.

                         Component 2: Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency (estimated cost: $5.9M, depending on total
                         grant allocation). In line with the Energy Master Plan and TEC's vision for 100% renewable energy
                         generation by 2020, this component will focus on improving Tuvalu's renewable energy penetration
                         in Funafuti. By carrying out energy and power system modeling for the system, a best solution for
                         increase RE penetration will be proposed. Applying a process of grid integration and enabling
                         technologies, and combining with energy efficiency measures, significant improvements can be
                         made, increasing the overall RE penetration by up to 25%.
                         Key elements of the process involve:

                         a.       Power System Modeling: By carrying out energy and power system modeling for the system,
                         a best solution will be proposed for increasing RE penetration. The modeling will factor in the
                         renewable energy plans of other development partners, such as NZ's plan for 618kWp solar and
                         299kWp wind energy and build upon the existing system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b.       Generation Economic Load Dispatching System: With fuel accounting for the majority of
                         costs for Tuvalu's power generation, more efficient use of the generators will bring about savings in
                         fuel consumption. Installation of a generator load dispatch system at the Funafuti power generation
                         plant will lead to improved fuel efficiency of the operations, translating into direct cash savings for
                         TEC.
                         c.       Load control and automated demand side management: Load control and load shifting
                         initiatives can reduce reliance on diesel generation by matching demand more closely to the supply
                         profile for RE. Energy efficiency initiatives will reduce overall demand, hence enhancing overall RE
                         penetration of the network.
                         d.       Grid stabilization: Managing the active and reactive power will improve efficiency of the
                         system, minimizing network losses, and protecting against equipment damage and outages caused by
                         overloading and voltage fluctuations.
                         e.       Energy Storage: Combined with the initiatives implemented above, assessments will be
                         made on the cost benefit of adding storage to the Funafuti grid.

                         This is a layered process, and greater funding will enable greater gains to be made towards achieving
                         the 100% RE target for Tuvalu.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance to TEC (estimated cost: $0.3M). This component will support
                         project implementation and build capacity to operate, manage and maintain systems. This also
                           includes collecting electricity data and statistics, and development of information management
                           system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Gender screening analyses will be conducted during project preparation. Depending on results,
                           appropriate gender actions, and monitoring and evaluation will be conducted accordingly.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Tuvalu is a group of nine inhabited islands (4 reef islands and 5 coral atolls) with a land area of 26
                           km2 and maximum elevation of 4.5 meters. Few atolls are more than 800 meters wide. Roughly half
                           the country's population of some 9,847 lives on the main atoll, Funafuti. On the outer islands three-
                           quarters of the people still live in traditional-style housing. Transport to the Outer Islands is by boat,
                           and may take a week or more for a round trip from Funafuti.

                           Tuvalu is vulnerable to sea level rise, and currently experiences surface flooding in low areas during
                           king tides.

                           The location for the installation of communications equipment (i.e. satellite dishes) (Component 1) is
                           not currently known, although locations on Government leased land will be prioritized.

                           The location for renewable energy projects (component 2c) and for possible battery storage
                           (Component 2e) will not be known until project implementation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Tuvalu is the World Bank's second newest member.

                           TEC's current capacity to implement the project needs to be strengthened. Although TEC has not
                           acted as an implementing agency for a similar project previously, key managerial staff members are
                           capable and can be trained to carry on additional tasks that will be required to integrate the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           components of the project. TEC has basic awareness of, and willingness to work with safeguards
                           policies. Capacity building activities have been included in the proposed project as well as a
                           technical assistance allocation to support project implementation, and this should include safeguards.
                           Adequate monitoring and evaluation arrangements are critical during project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
                           Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASIS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Screening has identified some activities that
                           BP 4.01                                                may have a social or environmental impact.
                                                                                  These include the installation of
                                                                                  communications infrastructure, energy
                                                                                  efficiency investments and the installation of
                                                                                  energy storage (batteries or fly wheel). Some of
                                                                                  these investments will not be known until
                                                                                  project implementation. Therefore an
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework has been prepared that will provide
                                                                 assessment methods and other tools to apply to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 activities as they are identified, and prior to
                                                                 implementation. For activities that have already
                                                                 been identified, Codes of Practice have been
                                                                 annexed to the ESMF. The project will ensure
                                                                 that the TOR for the Technical Assistance under
                                                                 Component 3 include, as relevant, safeguards
                                                                 policies considerations and processes for
                                                                 environmental and social safeguard compliance.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project can be designed to avoid investment
                                                                 in areas that may cause adverse impacts on any
                                                                 natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project can be designed to avoid any
                                                                 activities that would affect the health/quality of
                                                                 forests, or the rights/welfare of people who
                                                                 depend on forests for livelihoods, or the
                                                                 management/protection/utilization of natural
                                                                 forests or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    No use or procurement of pesticides is required.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project can be designed to avoid activities
                         BP 4.11                                 that could impact on physical cultural resources.
                                                                 A chance find protocol will be included in the
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   96% of the inhabitants are Polynesian. The
                                                                 remaining 4% are mostly Micronesian originally
                                                                 from Kiribati, with which Tuvalu was joined
                                                                 under the colonial administration as the Gilbert
                                                                 and Ellice Islands. Inhabitants speak and
                                                                 identify themselves as Tuvaluan. The project
                                                                 will not impact their livelihoods, language or
                                                                 culture. It is entirely for the benefit of the
                                                                 indigenous population groups. Consultation
                                                                 planning in the ESMF will ensure that
                                                                 information about the project is in appropriate
                                                                 languages, and will use local institutions such as
                                                                 the village councils (kaupule) and women’s
                                                                 groups to ensure effective communications.
                                                                 Social assessment will be included in the ESMF
                                                                 and the outcomes incorporated into project
                                                                 design. Since the majority of people in the
                                                                 project area are IPs, an IPP is not required.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Improvements to the communications system
                                 4.12                                                                                            will require installation of some physical
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure. Though its physical footprint will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 be small, it may be installed on land that is not
                                                                                                                                 already government-leased. An RPF will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared and will lay out the stepsto be taken
                                                                                                                                 when any land is involuntarily acquired or
                                                                                                                                 voluntarily donated for project activities.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This project does not include any dam
                                                                                                                                 structures.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             There are no international waterways within the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            area of influence of the project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This project is entirely in Tuvalu and there are
                                 7.60                                                                                            no disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During project preparation, a Project Information Bulletin will be prepared in English and
                                      Tuvaluan and released to the Tuvalu News and the Tuvalu Media Corporation. The immediate
                                      aim will be to communicate to the public the changes that will directly affect them such as
                                      changes in the mode of metering, and possible installation of communications infrastructure, and
                                      to invite and direct comment to take into account in implementation planning.

                                      The draft ESMF and RPF will be prepared, disclosed and consulted on during this time. A social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      assessment will be carried out during this time.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Roberto Gabriel Aiello

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 23-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                                                                                                     Date: 24-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
