                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3971

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                           Project ID:      P125590
                            Project Name:      UG-North-Eastern Corridor Road Asset Management Project (P125590)
                            Task Team          Negede Lewi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Jan-2014                      Estimated        29-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTTR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (10%), General transportation sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Regional
                                               integration (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), A dministrative and
                                               civil service reform (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    255.00                     Total Bank Financing:        255.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  255.00
                              Total                                                                        255.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to reduce transport cost by improving and preserving the road asset on a
                           selected corridor through the introduction of an OPRC. This is expected to be realized through: (i)
                           the piloting of output and performance based road contracts (OPRC) for a 10 year period on a
                           transport corridor linking South Sudan, parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo, northern and
                         eastern Uganda to the port of Mombasa; (ii) improvement of the management of road safety and axle
                         load control over the entire corridor; and (iii) Institutional support to the UNRA, including
                         enhancement of its road asset management system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The following project components are proposed for the Uganda Road Asset Management Project
                         (URAMP).

                         Component 1:- Piloting of OPRC on a key Transport Corridor: This component is envisaged to
                         finance a 10 year OPRC on the Tororo – Mbale –Soroti-Lira-Kamidini – Gulu road (400 km). The
                         works and/ services will include: (a) the rehabilitation and/ upgrading of sections of the road
                         corridor, (b) routine and periodic maintenance of the whole corridor, (c) road safety measures and
                         traffic management, and (d) axle overload control. This component will also finance Consultants’
                         Services for: (a) Technical and Financial Audits of the Pilot Project Implementation, and (b) the
                         Project Manager who will be responsible for the overall administration of the Contract and the
                         overall supervision services to be performed on behalf of the Employer.

                         Component 2:- Institutional Support to UNRA and MoWT: This component is envisaged to finance:
                         (i) monitoring and evaluation of the pilot OPRC including recommendations to adopting the use of
                         fewer and larger transformative corridor based long term contracts , (b) the development of output
                         specifications for the long term contracts, (c) support to commercialization of axle load operations on
                         the national road network, (d) Technical Assistance (TA) for mainstreaming the use of the installed
                         road asset management system as a basis of investment decision making and prioritization of
                         interventions on national roads, (e) TA for developing standards for alternative road construction
                         materials and low cost seals including a trial project, (f) preparation of follow up road asset
                         management projects, and (g) TA support to UNRA for data collection including standardization of
                         data collection principles, methods, specifications, contracting modalities, upgrade of associated
                         software, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Based on the preliminary specifications for the technical options, the total cost of the project is
                         estimated at US$380 Million, and the proposed Bank contribution will be determined through further
                         consultation between the Bank and the Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development
                         (MoFPED).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will include rehabilitation and/ upgrading and routine and periodic maintenance as
                         well as instituting road safety measures and traffic management along the road corridor of Tororo –
                         Mbale –Soroti-Lira-Kamidini – Gulu road (400 km). This is an existing important transport port
                         corridor linking the Republic of South Sudan, parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo, northern
                         and eastern Uganda with the port of Mombasa. Although it is an existing road and the Social &
                         Environmental impacts generic to upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance works of existing roads
                         will be predictable, localized and readily mitigated, there could be some land acquisition for possible
                         road re-alignment, borrow-pit areas, soil spoil material, workers camps, equipment storage areas and
                         quarry sites which may have substantial environmental and social impacts. In addition, these road
                         works will impact on the existing ecosystems along the road including but not limited to major
                         wetlands, forest plantations adjacent to the road, Physical Cultural resources. The project may also
                         involve a trial project during development of standards for alternative road construction materials.
                         The proposed project will have impacts on HIV/AIDS associated issues, gender and poverty
                           reduction, given its long term (10 years).

                           The project could therefore raise social (including HIV/AIDS. Gender & poverty reduction) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental impacts that need to be addressed. To adequately address the environmental and social
                           impacts of the project, the consultant that will support UNRA to prepare the road asset management
                           contract for the project road, will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESMF will accommodate the issues of
                           HIV/AIDS, gender and poverty reduction implications. The framework approach is recommended as
                           the design of the road will be done by the contractor under the OPRC considering the prevailing
                           conditions of the road. Specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) including
                           Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be
                           prepared as and when necessary during implementation and will be guided by the ESMF and RPF.
                           The ESMF, including a chance find procedure for Physical Cultural Resources (PCR), and RPF will
                           be prepared and disclosed before project appraisal whereas the ESIAs and RAPs will be prepared and
                           disclosed before commencement of civil works.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           UNRA has been implementing Bank financed projects and have the experience in dealing with
                           safeguard issues under world bank financed projects. There is an established Social and Environment
                           Unit under the Directorate of planning. However the current monitoring, enforcement and reporting
                           of implementation of Social and Environmental aspects of the projects by UNRA and by some
                           Supervising Consultants could affect project implementation. UNRA will strengthen its contract
                           management and enforcement of contract conditions adherence. UNRA will put in place a
                           monitoring and enforcement mechanism of safeguards that will involve the respective Districts and
                           NEMA. Under the component 2, the capacity of relevant departments in the respective Local
                           Government, will be assessed and developed appropriately to raise the standards of safeguards
                           implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes           Although the road corridor is known (existing),
                           BP 4.01                                            the road design is not yet known. A framework
                                                                              approach for safeguards is recommended as the
                                                                              design of the road will be done by the contractor
                                                                              under the OPRC considering the prevailing
                                                                              conditions of the road. An ESMF will therefore
                                                                              be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed
                                                                              before appraisal. Subsequent ESIAs (ESMPs)
                                                                              will be undertaken during implementation
                                                                              before start of any civil works.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes           The natural habitats along the road project
                                                                              include rivers, wetlands, and forest plantations.
                                                                              The framework for management of
                                                                                                                                 environmental impacts of the road asset
                                                                                                                                 management project on the natural habitats will
                                                                                                                                 be incorporated in the ESMF. Where applicable,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the ESMPs will incorporate the management of
                                                                                                                                 impacts of the project on the Natural Habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                Yes                           There are no natural forests along the road
                                                                                                                                 corridor. However, there are a few forest
                                                                                                                                 plantations of mainly eucalyptus and pine tree
                                                                                                                                 species. The framework for management of
                                                                                                                                 environmental impacts of the road asset
                                                                                                                                 management project on the natural habitats will
                                                                                                                                 be incorporated in the ESMF. Where applicable,
                                                                                                                                 the ESMPs will incorporate the management of
                                                                                                                                 impacts of the project on the forest.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management
                                                                                                                                 issues.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           Because of the excavation works that will be
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         undertaken during the road works a chance find
                                                                                                                                 procedure for PCR will be developed as part of
                                                                                                                                 the ESMF and implemented during contract
                                                                                                                                 implementation.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The project may require land acquisition in
                                 4.12                                                                                            areas of road realignment/widening. While the
                                                                                                                                 road corridor is known/exists, the design is not
                                                                                                                                 yet developed and therefore the exact impact on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 land acquisition and subsequent resettlement/
                                                                                                                                 compensation cannot be defined before project
                                                                                                                                 appraisal. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared, consulted
                                                                                                                                 upon, and disclosed before project appraisal.
                                                                                                                                 Where appropriate, Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                                                                                 (RAPs) will be prepared as may be defined by
                                                                                                                                 the detailed design of the works.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dam related works.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas along the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            corridor.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The preparation of the ESMF and RFP will commence in June 2013 and the reports will be
                             disclosed both in country and infoshop in October 2013, before project appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The safeguards requirements will be included in the bidding documents and these will be subject
                             to Bank clearance before advertisement.

                             The specific ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs that will be necessitated during project implementation will
                             be prepared by the Contractor before any planned works. This will be subject to Bank’s clearance
                             and disclosure before start of construction.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Negede Lewi

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                      Date: 25-Sep-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                        Date: 18-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
