                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA8029
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Macedonia, former Yugoslav                  P148023
                                                                            Project ID:
                                               Republic of
                            Project Name:      Macedonia National and Regional Roads Rehabilitation (P148023)
                            Task Team       Liljana Sekerinska
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       24-Mar-2014                          Estimated   03-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSTR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), General public
                                               administration sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Regional integration (50%), Trade facilitation and market access (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        70.00           Total Bank Financing:  70.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       70.00
                              Total                                                                                       70.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to enhance the connectivity of selected national and regional
                           roads, primarily to Corridors X and VIII, and to improve PESR’s capacity for road safety and climate
                           resilience.



                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project will finance the rehabilitation of key state road sections to improve road
                         connectivity, safety and climate resilience. As transport costs and travel time decrease, more direct
Public Disclosure Copy




                         travel between origins and destinations will be generated, therefore creating a more accessible and
                         reliable transport system. It will also allow cost savings for road users and traveling will become
                         safer than it is today. The proposed project will also address the mobility and accessibility needs of
                         the poor in lagged regions, and by doing that, the project will maximize the poverty impact and
                         promote shared prosperity in the Macedonia. Well-managed and adequate transportation systems,
                         particularly inter- urban and regional corridors, are a key part of a country’s economic structure,
                         providing efficient and low cost access of goods and people. Two of the regions where the project
                         will be implemented rank low in terms of accessibility and are amongst the poorest in the country,
                         with poverty rates higher than the national average. Financing road improvements and improving
                         connectivity in these lagged regions could directly benefit low-income populations by improving
                         access to markets and social services on one hand, and securing short term and long-term
                         employment opportunities on the other.

                         In addition, the project will contribute to the ongoing efforts by the Government and the current
                         World Bank project (Regional and Local Road Program Support Project or RLRSP) to improve road
                         condition in an efficient manner through better road asset management practices (introduced and
                         currently under implementation of RLRSP ). The project is envisaged to have two components.

                         Component 1: Road Rehabilitation Works: US$62.2 million). The rehabilitation of some road
                         sections would include pavement rehabilitation, drainage rehabilitation, small repairs of bridges and
                         structures, and installation of road safety equipment/signs. This component will also support the
                         incorporation of road safety measures and climate resilience measures in the design of the Project’s
                         road sections. The three sections that have been identified with PESR for the first year program are:
                         •       Rehabilitation of national road M5 from Bitola to Makazi (23km)
                         •       Rehabilitation of national road M5 from Resen to Bukovo (11km)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Rehabilitation of regional road P409 from Boskov Bridge to Debar (8 km)

                         More road sections for rehabilitation will be further identified through the road asset management
                         system being developed under the ongoing Bank-financed Project.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Project management (Estimated Cost: US$7.8
                         million). This component consists of activities to strengthen PESR's capabilities on issues related to
                         road safety; climate resilience and road asset management. Also, this component will include project
                         design for later year road works, and is expected to finance the provision of goods, consultants’
                         services, and training, including a financial audit to support project coordination, implementation,
                         and management.

                         The road sections that will be part of the second to fourth year program of the Project will be selected
                         during project implementation following defined eligibility criteria that ensure economically viable,
                         satisfy social and environmental safeguards and are in line with the objective of the Project. The
                         definition of the second to fourth year program will benefit from PESR’s implementation of a Road
                         Asset Management System currently introduced with support from the ongoing Regional and Local
                         Roads Program Support Project.




                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The location of the project is determined by the location and configuration of the roads proposed for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the rehabilitation, as well as by the location of affiliated facilities such as construction materials
                         borrow areas, material processing plants, and construction plants.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
                         Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             This policy is triggered because civil works to be
                          BP 4.01                                             implemented under the project represent
                                                                              environmental risks which are mainly temporary
                                                                              and limited by the period of construction, and
                                                                              manageable and mitigatable. The potential
                                                                              impacts may include destabilization of slopes in
                                                                              sensitive areas, loss of tree plantations in various
                                                                              sections alongside the existing road, disturbance
                                                                              of drainage systems, extraction of road
                                                                              construction materials, increased dust production
                                                                              and air and noise pollution, disturbance to
                                                                              wildlife in the project area, etc. Because of the
                                                                              programmatic approach of this project, an
                                                                              Environmental Assessment and Management
                                                                              Framework has been prepared by the client,
                                                                              which underlines the main environmental risks
                                                                              associated with the implementation of the road
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              rehabilitation projects, and defines the
                                                                              procedures, institutional responsibilities and
                                                                              implementation arrangements for the preparation
                                                                              of road-specific Environmental Assessments and
                                                                              Management Plans (EAMP) for the roads to be
                                                                              identified later in the course of program
                                                                              preparation and implementation. The EAMF also
                                                                              provides for an assessment of client's capacity to
                                                                              manage environmental risks and ensure
                                                                              implementation of mitigation measures. In
                                                                              addition, the client has prepared separate and
                                                                              specific Environmental Assessment Reports and
                                                                              Management Plans for each of the road sections
                                                                              already identified for the first year of the Project.
                                                                              Those EAMPs determined site-specific impacts
                                                                              which are likely to occur due to the program
                                                                              implementation, proposed mitigation measures,
                                                                              defined responsibilities and arrangements for the




                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                         implementation of those measures, and outlined
                                                                         the monitoring mechanism.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The policy is not triggered because rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         of roads is not expected to cause any considerable
                                                                         impacts on natural habitats. In addition, the road
                                                                         specific Environmental Assessments and
                                                                         Management Plans considered anticipated
                                                                         impacts and identified adequatemitigation
                                                                         measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The policy is not triggered, however, the
                         BP 4.11                                         respective EAMPs include provision to be
                                                                         followed by the client and contractor in case of
                                                                         any chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The policy is triggered because of programmatic
                         4.12                                            nature of the road rehabilitation program. The
                                                                         program, beyond the first year, will invest in
                                                                         national roads that will be rehabilitation only and
                                                                         thus there will be unlikely need for Involuntary
                                                                         Resettlement, or perhaps impacts on livelihood.
                                                                         However, there might be need for small scale of
                                                                         temporary land acquisition or right of way
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         agreements. Because of unknown rehabilitation
                                                                         works to be financed beyond the first year, in
                                                                         order to avoid need for restructuring if small scale
                                                                         temporary or permanent land acquisition is
                                                                         needed, the implementing agency prepared a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework whereby impacts
                                                                         such as: temporary or permanent land acquisition,
                                                                         right of way impacts are addressed. The
                                                                         framework defines the sequencing,
                                                                         implementation arrangements and entitlements
                                                                         for each potential impact separately and also
                                                                         specifies a template for specific Land Action
                                                                         Plan. For the first year program there will be no
                                                                         impact on private assets or any other assets that
                                                                         are of any use. No need for impact of neighboring
                                                                         land has been specified with on the site specific
                                                                         Environmental and Social Mitigation Plans.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No




                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project has been assigned an environmental category B, because it will support the
                              rehabilitation of the existing roads within the the current ROW and without any changes to the
                              existing alignment, which is associated with environmental risks which are not significant or
                              irreversible, and can be mitigated if properly managed. The Environmental Assessment and
                              Management Plans (EAMPs) have been prepared for the three roads proposed for the first year of
                              the project implementation. Those EAMPs identified the following main types of potential
                              negative impacts which are likely to occur due to the project implementation:
                              - generation of solid and liquid construction and domestic wastes;
                              - dust, noise and vibration due to the use of construction machinery (construction phase), and due
                              to increased traffic flow (operation phase);
                              - air pollution by exhaust gases and dust;
                              - soil damage due to excavation works and borrowing construction machinery;
                              - soil contamination due to accidental spills of fuel and lubricants;
                              - water pollution due to improper waste management and accidental fuel and lubricant spills. Out
                              of the three roads proposed for the first year of the project, the risk of water pollution is anticipated
                              only in the case of the road Boshkov Most - Debar, which passes over the Lake Debar and goes by
                              the River Radica (no bridge rehabilitation is envisaged though);
                              - issues related to traffic safety and human health during the construction phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The above impacts will be minimized or mitigated by the implementation of measures envisaged
                              by the respective Environmental Mitigation Plans and monitored by PESR as provided for by
                              respective Environmental Monitoring Plans.

                              Most probably because of the nature of works, rehabilitation of the roads, no land acquisition is
                              expected due to the project implementation.However, since the project will finance a program of
                              road rehabilitation in future there might be a need for some alignments and in such cases there
                              might be need for small impacts of neighboring land. The Resettlement Policy Framework will
                              guide potential need for small scale land acquisition if needed.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The environmental aspects of the operation of rehabilitated roads are those related to air pollution
                              from automobile emissions, noise and pollution of soil and surface water with litter and drainage
                              from the roads. However, since the roads will be operated within the existing footprint, and noise
                              and drainage pollution will be decreased due to the improved road and drainage conditions, the
                              anticipated incremental impacts are expected to be insignificant.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A


                                                                           Page 5 of 8
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Public Enterprise for State Roads (PESR) has prepared the Environmental Assessment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Management Framework which underlines main environmental risks associated with the road
                           rehabilitation, and defines the procedures, institutional responsibilities and implementation
                           arrangements for the preparation of road - specific Environmental Assessments and Management
                           Plans (EAMPs) for the roads to be identified later in the course of the project implementation. For
                           the three roads already proposed for the first year of project implementation, the PESR developed
                           EAMPs which identified road specific impacts and proposed specific mitigation measures and
                           monitoring plans.

                           The PESR will be responsible for the implementation of the project. The PESR (earlier ASR) has
                           been involved in the implementation in similar projects for several years. Since 2010, the ASR
                           employed a full time Environmental Specialist who has been responsible for the project
                           environmental management and has been trained at the World Bank organized safeguard training.
                           After the institutional restructuring and establishing the PESR, a specialized Environmental and
                           Social Unit has been set up within PESR. The Unit was reinforced by the second Environmental
                           Specialist and a Social Specialist. The staff of the Unit is knowledgeable in the environmental
                           management practices and the requirements under the World Bank policies, and is able to carry
                           out proper supervision of the implementation of environmental mitigation measures. The staff of
                           PESR is also with the Bank Social Safeguard requirements given that the agency implemented
                           projects financed by the Bank in the past. The newly formed unit, Environmental and Social Unit,
                           will be also responsible for addressing social issues including cases that will trigger Involuntary
                           Resettlement safeguards.

                           The PESR also prepared the Resettlement Policy Framework which defined the sequencing,
                           implementation arrangements and entitlements for each potential impact separately and also
                           specified a template for specific Land Action Plan. For the first year program there will be no
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impact on private assets or any other asserts that are of any use and therefore no site specific land
                           acquisition plans will be prepared
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project stakeholders include the PESR, MoEPP, local residents and communities which will
                           benefit from the improved road conditions, local executive and environmental authorities. The
                           EAMF and three EAMPs have been disclosed and discussed in country at the public consultation
                           meetings held in March 2014 in the selected locations of the project area. The participants of the
                           consultation meetings included local residents/communities, NGOs, local governments and
                           municipalities as well as local environmental authorities. The Minutes of the public consultations
                           have been recorded and enclosed to respective EAMPs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           17-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        18-Mar-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                           06-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Public consultations were held in the towns of Bitola, resen and Debar. The disclosed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         documents included ESAMF, RPF and three road specific EAMPs. The documents
                                         were posted on the PESR official web-site on March 18, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                           06-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Public consultations were held in the towns of Bitola, resen and Debar. The disclosed
                                         documents included ESAMF, RPF and three road specific EAMPs. The documents
                                         were posted on the PESR official web-site on March 18, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:     Name: Liljana Sekerinska
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:       Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)                          Date: 19-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 8 of 8
