                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC621

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Lao People's Democratic                         P128393
                                                                              Project ID:
                                              Republic
                            Project Name:     Protected Area and Wildlife Project (Regional APL) (P128393)
                            Task Team       Jean-Michel G. Pavy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       16-Jan-2014                       Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASTS                              Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (60%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (60%), Environmental policies and institutions (35%), Climate
                                              change (5%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     25.23                   Total Bank Financing:         17.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          1.40
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                12.50
                              IDA Grant                                                                   4.50
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           6.83
                              Total                                                                      25.23
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           1. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen protected area management and wildlife trade
                           control in project areas with a focus on regional cooperation and active participation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           government and local communities.
                           2. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                         C. Project Description
                         This project is phase III of the horizontal Regional Adaptable Program Loan (APL) on Strengthening
                         Regional Cooperation for Wildlife Protection in Asia (SRCWP). In South Asia, Bangladesh and
                         Nepal have already started the implementation of the project. Bhutan will also commence shortly,
                         while the projects in India and Sri Lanka are still under preparation. In East Asia, in addition to Lao
                         PDR, Vietnam is in the process of preparing a project proposal. The APL applies a two-pronged
                         approach: (i) capacity building to address the illegal wildlife trade through regional cooperation; and
                         (ii) habitat protection and management to generate regional conservation benefits and address
                         human-wildlife conflict, thereby insuring the conservation of flagship species.

                         The project will be implemented by the Department of Forest Reserve Management (DFRM) of the
                         Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) and the Department of Forest and
                         Inspection (DOFI) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forest, and Fisheries (MAFF) with full
                         participation of local governments and communities. Activities would include investments in
                         physical assets (such as office building/facilities, equipment, and vehicles), technical assistance
                         (consultant services), policy formulation including new law; decree; and regulations, training and
                         workshops, community-driven subprojects to support their conservation efforts, and project
                         management. Project activities will be carried out through the following three components.

                         Component 1: Supporting protected area management and sustainable forest management (Estimated
                         cost: US$12.05 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.1: Capacity building and support at the regional level for protected area
                         management and wildlife conservation. Activities will tentatively include: (i)      Establishment of a
                         Virtual Regional Center of Excellence (VRCE) for protected area management and wildlife
                         conservation, by coordinating with agencies executing the APL on Strengthening Regional
                         Cooperation for Wildlife Protection in Asia to create a virtual network of scientists and practitioners
                         to share and disseminate knowledge, expertise and best practices through a knowledge platform,
                         training modules, workshops and seminars; (ii) DFRM and NPA Management Units to cooperate
                         with counterpart Vietnamese government agencies to foster transboundary protected area cooperation
                         at NPA project sites which have boundaries with Vietnam (e.g. Nam Et Phou Louey NPA).

                         Sub-component 1.2: Capacity building and support at the national level for NPA management and
                         wildlife conservation. Possible activities will include: (i) Support DFRM at central level with the
                         institutional set up; including support to establishment of office facilities, procurement of equipment
                         and vehicle; (ii) Support, including TA, to assess policy gap and develop ministerial regulations on
                         PA management and wildlife conservation; (iii) Develop technical capacity through TA, staff
                         training, and workshops for (i) planning and budgeting, (ii) implementation, and (iii) monitoring and
                         evaluation of the protected area system; (iv)       Establish an Endangered Species Sub-committee or
                         Working Group (under Environment Committee at the Prime Minister Office or MoNRE) to
                         facilitate high level and cross sectoral government engagement on endangered species issues; (v)
                         Establish multi-sector smart green infrastructure Committee or Working Group for coordination
                         amongst key sectors to avoid inappropriate and ill informed development in/around protected areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.3: Support protected area management including sustainable forest management
                         and wildlife conservation at the project NPA site level. Activities will include: (i) Support local levels
                         of DFRM for the NPA project sites with institutional set up; including establishment of office
                         facilities and providing required equipment and vehicle; (ii)      Support, including TA, to assess
                         policy gap and develop local regulations on PA management and wildlife conservation; (iii)
                         Support NPA management units to prepare management plans and annual plans for the project
                         NPAs; building capacity for site-level planning and monitoring of plan implementation; (iv)
                         Train protected area staff in (a) planning and budgeting, (b) implementation, and (c) monitoring and
                         evaluation; (v) Engage local community participation on forest and wildlife conservation, through:
                         awareness raising; village block grant for community alternative livelihood development (as their
                         access to natural resources might be restricted by enforcing protected area management system);
                         participatory demarcation of NPA boundary and internal zoning; and establishment of community
                         co-management committee; (vi) Conduct forest protection at project NPAs which would complement
                         the FCPF and Forest Investment Program (FIP).The activities might include a baseline forest cover
                         survey and assessment of drivers of deforestation, forest protection through land-use planning and
                         delineation with local participation, development of alternative livelihoods, and assistance for
                         increased and stabilized agricultural productivity outside protected area.

                         Component 2: Addressing the illegal wildlife trade at regional and national level (Estimated cost: US
                         $4.75 million)

                         Sub-component 2.1 capacity building and cooperation at the regional level for addressing illegal
                         trans-boundary wildlife trade. Activities to support this sub-component would include: (i) Support
                         GoL officials to cooperate bilaterally and regionally to control illegal trans-boundary wildlife trade,
                         including implementation of the current (and next) MOU with Vietnam on “cooperation in
                         controlling, preventing illegal trading and transporting of timber, forest products and wildlife.” (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         TA, support and training to strengthen CITES Management and Scientific Authorities in their
                         capacity for analytics and operational protocols to meet CITES requirements; (iii)Strengthen Lao
                         Wildlife Enforcement Network to become operational and work with ASEAN WEN and South Asia
                         WEN.

                         Sub-component 2.2 Institutional strengthening of national agencies to do illegal wildlife trade control
                         at the national and local levels. Activities to support this sub-component would include: (i)
                         Support DoFI’s set up at national and local level to control illegal wildlife trade through physical
                         capacity development such as the provision of office buildings and necessary equipment; (ii)
                         Support TA to assess policy gap and develop ministerial and local regulations to enforce illegal
                         wildlife trade in the country; (iii)        Provide training, equipment and incremental operational
                         cost for DoFI at national to local levels to address illegal wildlife trade at NPA project sites and
                         surroundings in the province and border areas of the NPA project sites.

                         Component 3: Project Management (Estimated cost: US$2.64 million)

                         The third component is to support the implementation of the two components described above.
                         Activities in this component include: (i) Project management including fiduciary, safeguards, and
                         monitoring and evaluation aspects. Project management unit will be established under DFRM/
                         MoNRE and manage for the overall project implementation including day to day implementation of
                           Component 1 (C1) and coordinate with DoFI on project management for C2; (ii) Sub-project
                           management unit will be established in DoFI under MAFF to oversee day to day implementation of
                           Component 2 (C2). Sub-project management unit.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Site selection criteria will be discussed with the client and finalized during the project preparation. It
                           will likely include the following aspects: size, importance in connectivity and potential for regional
                           cooperation, broad ecosystem type, key species, existing operations including current or potential
                           plans for mining or other development activities in the NPAs; and existing or potential plans for
                           village relocation or village consolidation in or near the NPAs, and potential for sustainable
                           financing and risks to success. The project will include up to four NPAs, but the final number will
                           also be determined during preparation process.

                           Lao PDR (Lao) is a sparsely-populated least-developed country in south-east Asia. Forests cover
                           41.5% (9.8 million hectares) of the total land area of Lao PDR. Forests harbor some 1,200 animal
                           species, including endangered species, such as the Indochinese tiger and Asian elephant. Of the 9.8
                           million hectares of classified forest in Lao PDR, around half of this is ‘conservation forest’ – the
                           National, Provincial and District Protected Areas. The remainder is ‘production forest,’ set aside for
                           timber extraction, and ‘protection forest,’ which serves the purpose of soil, slopes and watershed
                           protection.

                           The Protected Area System was designated in 1993 (PM Decree 164) and followed extensive data
                           collection to determine sites of high conservation value and to include 5-20% of every ecosystem
                           found in Lao (IUCN, 2004). This proposed project will address both the gap in resources and the
                           high threats to the Protected Area System of Lao, and aims to strengthen the protection and
                           conservation of the PA system’s high biodiversity value forests and wildlife.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The DFRM has been one of the recipients of the Lao Environment and Social (LEnS) project and is
                           familiar with WB safeguard policies and its implementation, while DoFI is new to WB operations.
                           In this context, safeguards training for DFRM, DoFI, and local authorities and local communities as
                           well as other stakeholders who may be involved in the project implementation, will be important.
                           Training program including an estimated budget and work schedule will be prepared during project
                           preparation and implemented as part of project activity during project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                           James Orehmie Monday (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              As noted at the PCN decision meeting held on
                           BP 4.01                                                January 31, 2012, the proposed project aims to
                                                                                  tackle several complex and multi-faceted issues.
                                                                                  Therefore, it is important that the proposed
                                                                                  safeguard instruments are indeed useful for the
                                                                                  overall project design to achieve the stated
                         objectives, by being informative for not only
                         avoiding/minimizing adverse environmental and
                         socio-economic impacts, but also to enhancing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project’s positive impacts.

                         It is in this context a standalone Environmental
                         Assessment (EA) for the project covering each
                         of the participating NPAs. The EA will address
                         the requirements of OP4.01, OP4.04 and
                         OP4.36 that are relevant for the revised project
                         scope. Specifically, the EA will include: (a)
                         Baseline information on each of the
                         participating NPAs, including its current
                         management practices, stakeholders involved in
                         its management, ongoing and planned
                         infrastructures (e.g., roads, transmission lines,
                         hydropower projects) or other natural resource
                         excavation activities (e.g., mining, wood
                         factory) in the participating NPA, the extent to
                         which the communities are using the timber/
                         non-timber forest resources, main biodiversity
                         value, etc.; (b) Assessment of whether the
                         ongoing/planned infrastructures or other natural
                         resource excavation activates would
                         significantly affect the effectiveness of the
                         project activities in achieving the PDO; and (c)
                         Preliminary review of the existing NPA
                         management plan(s) for the participating NPAs,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         if available, and identify areas that require
                         improvements to achieve the project objectives,
                         especially in the context of the findings from the
                         above assessment.

                         The above review and assessment will be used
                         as a basis for developing recommendations on
                         actions that need to be taken during project
                         implementation. The recommendations would
                         include: (a) Recommendations for the
                         formulation/update during project
                         implementation of NPA Management Plan and
                         annual plan, institutional arrangements of
                         sustainable use of non-timber forest resources
                         by local communities, demarcation of NPA
                         boundaries and internal zoning, etc. The
                         recommendations are expected to include advice
                         on how these activities will be designed and
                         implemented in a manner that will conserve the
                         health and quality of the forests; protect the
                         rights and welfare of local communities and
                         their livelihood of dependence on/interaction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with forests; and minimize the adverse impacts
                         from bringing changes in the management,
                         protection, and utilization of forest resources (as
                         specified under para 3, policy scope of OP4.36
                         Forests); (b) Recommendations for additional
                         studies and monitoring programs that may need
                         to be commissioned during project
                         implementation in order to inform the design
                         and implementation of NPA Management Plans
                         and annual plans, arrangements of sustainable
                         use of non-timber forest resources by local
                         communities, demarcation of NPA boundaries
                         and internal zoning, etc.

                         The EA will be prepared through a consultative
                         and participatory process by involving a
                         representative range of stakeholders, including
                         national and international NGOs, local
                         communities, key government agencies, and
                         disclosing relevant information in a timely
                         manner in local language(s)
                         As the proposed project will also assist the
                         government in formulating new regulations
                         during project implementation to help define,
                         strengthen, and enforce the existing laws and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         policies on NPA management/wildlife
                         conservation. It was agreed that these new
                         regulations will be developed through a
                         consultative, participatory, and informative
                         process, which engages key stakeholders
                         including indigenous peoples groups, and takes
                         into account the potential environmental and
                         socio-economic impacts on local communities
                         during the implementation of the new
                         regulations.

                         To mitigate any potential environmental impacts
                         from those small-scale civil works to be
                         financed under the community-level livelihood
                         development activities and establishment of
                         office facilities for the institutions, the project
                         will prepare Environmental Codes of Practices
                         (ECOPs) for each type of physical works. The
                         ECOPs will provide site selection criteria to
                                                                 avoid potential impacts on Physical Cultural
                                                                 Resources.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Project activity will not create significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 degradation of natural habitats but provide
                                                                 positive impact instead. However, as stated in
                                                                 the section under OP4.01 above, some project
                                                                 activities may have adverse impacts on natural
                                                                 habitats as defined by this policy. Therefore, to
                                                                 ensure this project related activities on natural
                                                                 habitats are fully understood, the EA’s prepared
                                                                 for each will assess these implications and will
                                                                 inform the management plans to ensure
                                                                 compliance with this policy and to ensure that
                                                                 there are no impacts on critical natural habitats.
                                                                 For anticipated minor impacts associated with
                                                                 the proposed minor civil works, the proposed
                                                                 ECOPs will contain the appropriate measures to
                                                                 avoid or manage these minor impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   This policy is triggered as the proposed
                                                                 activities involve changes in management of
                                                                 forest areas (financing NPA management
                                                                 plans), which may then affect the rights and
                                                                 welfare of people and their dependence on the
                                                                 forests (i.e. the NPA), as defined by Para 3 of
                                                                 the policy. The EA’s prepared for each selected
                                                                 NPA will inform preparation and
                                                                 implementation of the forest management plans
                                                                 to ensure compliance with this policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not finance procurement of
                                                                 pesticides as specified in this policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The project will not affect any known historical,
                         BP 4.11                                 cultural, and/or archeological, paleontological,
                                                                 historical, religious, or unique natural values of
                                                                 national and/or regional importance. However,
                                                                 the project area may involve ethnic minority
                                                                 groups such as Hmong, Mien, Lao Tai and
                                                                 Khmu and there could be a limited number of
                                                                 graves, village cemeteries, and/or spirit forests
                                                                 in the project sitesthat may be affected by
                                                                 project activities. If the project activities are
                                                                 likely to restrict the access to PCRs that are of
                                                                 spiritual or religious value for local
                                                                 communities, the policy will be triggered.
                                                                 Suitable mitigation measures will be
                                                                 incorporated into the corresponding NPA
                                                               management plan(s), Ethnic Peoples Plan
                                                               (EPP), or Process Framework.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes   Ethnic minorities (Hmong, Khmu, Mien,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Makong, Bru and others) living in and around
                                                               the NPAs are the main project beneficiaries.
                                                               These are considered to be vulnerable ethnic
                                                               groups in Lao PDR as their livelihood is heavily
                                                               based on subsistence agriculture and forest. The
                                                               presence and involvement of these ethnic
                                                               groups triggers this safeguard policy. An ethnic
                                                               screening will be carried out by the Bank task
                                                               team in all project NPAs before the
                                                               commencement of project activities in NPAs.
                                                               An Ethnic Peoples Framework (EPF, which is
                                                               equivalent to the Indigenous Peoples
                                                               Framework (IPF)) will be prepared prior to
                                                               appraisal which will provide the processes and
                                                               procedures as well as technical guidance for
                                                               screening, social assessment and consultations
                                                               with affected local populations including ethnic
                                                               minorities. If ethnic minorities are present in or
                                                               near project NPAs, a social assessment (SA)
                                                               will be carried out and an Ethnic Peoples Plan
                                                               (EPP) be prepared before the implementation of
                                                               project activities in consultation with affected
                                                               ethnic minority communities in participating
                                                               NPAs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               The EPP will describe the findings of SA, the
                                                               results of free, prior and informed consultations
                                                               conducted and evidence of broad community
                                                               support to the project. The EPP may also be
                                                               used to help address project impacts such as the
                                                               loss of access to natural resources in
                                                               combination with the PF (see next section).
                                                               The EPP will also ensure that local community
                                                               support and/or livelihood development
                                                               alternatives will be provided in culturally and
                                                               ethnically sensitive manner.

                                                               FPIC will be carried out as part of SA namely
                                                               to ensure that local villagers including ethnic
                                                               minorities are informed of their rights to use
                                                               forest (in the management zone) and provide
                                                               BCS to the measures to be carried out under the
                                                               project. Similar to other NPA management in
                                                               most developing countries, it is anticipated that
                                                                there may be issues related to conflicting land
                                                                use and land allocation in the NPAs. If such is
                                                                the case these issues and corresponding
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                mitigation measures will be identified in the SA
                                                                and included in EPP. Technical assistance to be
                                                                provided under the project will be designed to
                                                                address land and resources use issues. In
                                                                addition, in the case where the project support
                                                                any policy formulation related to the aboce
                                                                issues, a broad consultation process will be
                                                                carried out with the participation of civil society
                                                                and community representatives, and will include
                                                                an analysis of how local communities rights,
                                                                including customary land and resource uses of
                                                                Indigenous Peoples are incorporated into policy
                                                                development, and analysis of potential social
                                                                implications of various policy alternatives.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project will not involve physical relocation.
                         4.12                                   However, minor land acquisition may be
                                                                required under community livelihood activities
                                                                and/or small infrastructure rehabilitation/
                                                                upgrading for local government agencies. The
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                prepared during preparation that will set out
                                                                policies and procedures that will apply to such
                                                                impacts. Resettlement Action Plan(s) (RAP)
                                                                will be prepared for any activities that require
                                                                involuntary land acquisition known by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                appraisal.

                                                                The improvement/development of policies/
                                                                regulations for the management of protected
                                                                areas may restrict hunting and non-timber forest
                                                                product (NTFP) collection in the totally
                                                                protected zone (though it will be allowed in the
                                                                management zone) of protected areas, which
                                                                may lead to loss of access to some of the critical
                                                                sources of livelihood for local people. A Process
                                                                Framework (PF) will be developed prior to
                                                                appraisal that will cover all participating NPAs
                                                                if such resources access restrictions occur. This
                                                                framework will also outline participatory
                                                                processes through which the project affected
                                                                peoples (PAPs) are supported to articulate their
                                                                livelihood needs and participate in the design
                                                                and implementation of livelihood activities.
                                                                The Process Frameworks would also be used as
                                                                                                                                 the instrument to address impacts of restricting
                                                                                                                                 the access to PCRs by local communities due to
                                                                                                                                 the NPA management arrangements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve construction of any
                                                                                                                                 dam as specified in the policy.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Project activity will not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways as described in OP/BP 7.50.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project activities are not located in any
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as described in OP/BP 7.60.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Mar-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A.    Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared: August 30, 2012.

                                      B.      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
                                      stage ISDS: N/A

                                      C.Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                      The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS: (i)
                                      Environmental safeguards: One Environmental Assessment (EA) per NPA and one project level
                                      EMP including ECOPs, will be prepared and disclosed before appraisal, which is currently
                                      planned for October 30, 2012; (ii) Social safeguards: Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF);
                                      Ethnic Peoples Framework (EPF) and Process Framework (PF) will be developed for project sites
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      and disclosed before appraisal
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jean-Michel G. Pavy

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 01-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Janelle Plummer (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 01-Feb-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
