                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5333
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                            Project ID:    P131426
                            Project Name:     South Sudan- Eastern Africa Regional Transport , Trade and Development
                                              Facilitation Program (Phase One) (P131426)
                            Task Team         Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       23-Sep-2013                         Estimated   30-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTTR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (55%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (20%), General information and communications sector (15%),
                                              General industry and trade sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (50%), Regional integration (30%),
                                              Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     255.00           Total Bank Financing:               80.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           80.00
                              China Export Import Bank                                                             150.00
                              Total                                                                                255.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                     Page 1 of 18
                         1. The proposed Program Development Objective (PDO) of the South Sudan – East Africa Regional
                         Transport, Trade and Development Facilitation Program is to enhance regional connectivity of South
                         Sudan with its Eastern Africa neighboring countries and access to sea ports. This will be achieved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through increasing transport efficiency along the Juba – Nadapal – Eldoret corridor connecting South
                         Sudan to Mombasa port, facilitating trade and development, connecting Juba with fiber optics, and
                         linking the new landlocked country, South Sudan, to an alternative sea port of Djibouti.

                         2. The proposed program helps the eastern part of South Sudan and the north western part of Kenya
                         to boost export oriented agricultural development by facilitating increased agricultural production
                         along the Juba-Eldoret corridor, endowed with abundant natural resources, through improved
                         transport, trade facilitation ICT access, as well as development of export processing zones. The
                         proposed program contributes to the overarching goal of facilitating and lowering the cost of intra-
                         regional trade to support regional cooperation and integration of economies in the sub-region. The
                         program helps South Sudan compete in the regional and global market. The program will also
                         contribute to the reduction of transport cost that will help lower the cost of economic development,
                         service delivery to the poor, and doing business in the program influence area.

                         3. The program will be implemented in a series of three projects (SOP). Phase 1is defined herein
                         after as the “first project”. The imminent Development Objective for Phase 1-the first project- is
                         focusing on enhancing connectivity to Mombasa Port through one of the shortest route, in terms of
                         time and cost, through Kenya, as well as improving customs, trade facilitation and export processing
                         zone development along the Juba-Nadapal-Eldoret corridor.

                         4. The second project- Phase 2- will focus on the improvement of the road infrastructure not covered
                         under the first project and support priority trade and development facilitation along the Juba-
                         Nadapal-Eldoret corridor. The third project- Phase 3- will focus on enhanced support to trade
                         facilitation measures along the priority corridors linking South Sudan to Mombasa and Djibouti
                         ports, concentrating on interventions to be implemented within the territory of South Sudan and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kenya. The third project will also include completing the rehabilitation of the remaining sections of
                         the road infrastructure not covered under the previous phases on the Kenyan side. All the three
                         projects support the overarching program objective.

                         5. The principal factors for focusing on the Juba-Nadapal-Eldoret corridor, include: (a) the corridor
                         opens the massive agricultural, livestock, and mineral resources rich area in the eastern part of South
                         Sudan, an area closer to the regional and global market, and the less developed Turkana region of
                         Kenya; (b) the corridor crosses only one transit regime and will be the cost effective and shortest
                         connection to Mombasa, in terms of truck turnaround time; (c) the project crosses flatter terrain,
                         which will reduce vehicle operating cost and improve driving safety; (d) the corridor opens access to
                         an alternative sea port - Djibouti; and (e) the corridor offers the quickest route to the offshore
                         submarine cables off the East African coast.
                         3. Project Description
                         1.        The program will be implemented in three phases and have the following components:

                         2.        The First Project will include:

                         SOUTH SUDAN

                         3.        Component 1: Upgrading of priority road infrastructure (US$221 million): This

                                                                      Page 2 of 18
                         component consists of:

                         Sub-component 1 (a): Upgrading of approximately 125 km of the Juba-Torit section of the Juba-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nadapal-Eldoret corridor (about US$166 million) to be financed by the China EXIM Bank and
                         Government of the Republic of South Sudan (GRSS):

                         Sub-component 1 (b): Construction/reconstruction of bridges between Kapoeta and Nadapal, and
                         upgrading of approximately 40 km of the Kapoeta-Narus section of the Juba-Nadapal-Eldoret
                         corridor to a gravel sub-base level through a design and build (DB) arrangement (about US$49
                         million). This will focus on constructing bridges (reconstruction and replacement of old bridges and
                         drifts) starting about 10 km before entering into Kapoeta and up to Nadapal, which are critical to
                         ensure all season passability of trucks, and upgrading of the road to a gravel sub-base level, to be
                         paved under the second project.

                         Sub-component 1 (c): Road repair of approximately 190 km sections between Torit and Kapoeta, and
                         between Narus and Nadapal (US$2.0 million) to be financed by GRSS. In addition, GRSS will
                         provide about US$2.5 million for compensations to be paid for land acquisition for the Juba-Nadapal
                         section.

                         Sub-component 1 (d): Support to preparatory activities and capacity strengthening, planned to be
                         carried out through a Project Preparation Advance (PPA), in the amount of US$1.5 million.

                         4. Component 2: Facilitation of Regional Transport, Trade and Development (US$10 million): This
                         component supports promotion of sound transport, trade and development facilitation measures,
                         increasing the efficiency of the corridors. This includes:

                         Sub-component 2(a): Support to MoFCIEP/SSCS for establishing the institutional base and legal
                         framework for trade and development facilitation (US$5 million), including: (i) customs procedures
                         harmonization and setting the legal and institutional arrangements for the establishment of One Stop
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Border Post (OSBP) at Nadapal; (ii) provision of advisory services for the modernization of SSCS;
                         (iii) support to integrated border management through rationalizing and streamlining the number of
                         formalities, number of agencies at the border post, and user fee structures; and (iv) provision of
                         advisory services and equipment for the establishment of a Trade Information Platform/Portal within
                         MoFCIEP.

                         Sub-component 2 (b): Support to MTRB for the facilitation of transport, trade and development (US
                         $5 million), including: (i) carrying out a study on key regional corridors related to trade and
                         development facilitation as well as transport review; (ii) preparation/implementation of transit
                         transport agreement and protocol, and support to the national corridor management committee; (iii)
                         preparing agreements on establishing a networked vehicle overloading control system between the
                         two countries and preparation of the vehicle overloading control bill; (iv) introduction of corridor
                         performance monitoring system (CPMS); (v) carrying out a study of social infrastructures and social
                         services delivery needs assessment, (vi) providing technical assistance for developing legal
                         framework on traffic and safety, and conducting Road Safety audit along the Juba-Nadapal road; and
                         (vii) carrying out studies and ESIA for services at rest stops, axle load control station at Nadapal,
                         export processing zones (site and services, including access road, electricity, water, customs bonded
                         warehouses, products certification office, etc), and storage facilities, as well as certification of export
                         products and simplifying the process of import-export, including through electronic document
                         handling and online customs processing.

                                                                        Page 3 of 18
                         5. Component 3: Institutional Development and Program Management (US$5 million):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 3(a): Strengthening of MTRB’s institutional capacity through the provision of
                         advisory services and training as well as preparation of sectoral governance and anti-corruption
                         strategy to enhancing good governance in the transport sector.

                         Sub-component 3(b): Strengthening MTRB’s safeguards management capacity through engaging an
                         independent safeguards management firm to help the ministry through the process of the resettlement
                         and monitoring of implementation of safeguard measures for the entire Juba-Nadapal road while
                         strengthening the in-house safeguards capacity.

                         Sub-component 3(c): Provision of advisory services, training and logistical support (including office
                         equipment, materials, supplies), and operating costs required to sustain management and
                         coordination of Project implementation activities, including audits and monitoring and evaluation of
                         progress achieved in the execution of the Project. This will include support to institutions providing
                         technical support to the project implementation.

                         6. Component 4: Connecting Juba with Fiber Optics (US$15 million): This component will
                         support: sub-component 4 (a)- the construction of a fiber optic cable alongside the road from Juba
                         into Kenya (Lokichoggio) to bring high speed broadband internet connectivity into South Sudan for
                         the first time. The construction of the road into Kenya offers a one-time opportunity to create a high-
                         capacity, reliable terrestrial fiber link. On the Kenyan side of the border, fiber reaches as far as
                         Lokichoggio, and from there connects to submarine cables off the coast at Mombasa. Constructing
                         the fiber cable at the same time as the road will reduce costs and will avoid disruption that would
                         occur if it was built at a later date than the road. The fiber will be installed within the right-of way of
                         the road, adjacent to the side drains in rural areas and under the pedestrian walkway in urban areas.
                         Sub-component 4(b): A PPA to undertake technical study, establishment of an internet exchange
                         point and recruitment of telecom experts (US$0.5 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         KENYA

                         7.        Component 1: Facilitation of Regional Transport, Trade and Development (US$3.5
                         million)- to be implemented under the PPA for Kenya

                         Sub-component 1 (a): Support to KeNHA for facilitation of transport and trade (US$1 million),
                         including: (i) Carrying out a study on social infrastructure and social services delivery needs
                         assessment, and (ii) conducting Road Safety audit along the Nadapal-Eldoret road.

                         Sub-component 1(b): Support to KRA for facilitation of trade (US$1.2 million), including Capacity
                         building and technical assistance for Strengthening the Customs Department, focusing on training of
                         KRA staff in valuation, risk management, etc.; and strengthening the border management unit of
                         KRA.

                         Sub-component 1 (c): Support to MoTI for development of export processing zones and tourism (US
                         $1.3 million), including: (i) Introduction of CPMS; (ii) carrying out of studies and ESIA for site and
                         services for the export processing zones and tourism sites, certification of export products and
                         simplifying the process of import-export; and (iii) Support to national corridor management
                         committee.

                                                                        Page 4 of 18
                         8.         Component 2: Institutional Development and Program Management (US$2.5million), to be
                         implemented under the PPA for Kenya, including: Sub-component 2 (a): Institutional development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and project implementation support to KeNHA (US$2 million), through the provision of advisory
                         services, training and logistical support (including office equipment, materials, supplies) and
                         operating costs, focusing on preparation of OPRC bidding documents for the Nadapal –Eldoret
                         road, and training and systems development needs assessment.

                         Sub-component 2 (b): Support to MoTI (US$0.5 million), through the provision of advisory
                         services, training and logistical support (including office equipment, materials, supplies) and
                         operating costs, for program coordination and implementation.


                         9.        The second and third projects will support the overarching program objective and will have
                         the following components:

                         10. The preliminary scope of the second project includes :

                         11. Component 1: Support to MTRB and KeNHA for upgrading of road infrastructure (Investment
                         requirement to be determined depending on the resources to be leveraged for the first phase-up to US
                         $780 million): This includes:

                         (a) Upgrading of the Juba-Nadapal corridor in South Sudan - Upgrading of the remaining section
                         between Torit and Nadapal road from the first phase. The African Development Bank (AfDB) is
                         expected to support the upgrading of Torit - Lobira (about 70 km - US$100 million), while the
                         European Investment Bank (EIB) may provide support to the upgrading of part of the Kapoeta-
                         Nadapal section.

                         (b) Asset management contract to maintain the sections upgraded under design and build
Public Disclosure Copy




                         arrangement in South Sudan.

                         (c) Support to KeNHA for the Upgrading of the Nadapal-Eldoret corridor in Kenya -

                          Support to the upgrading of approximately 300 km of the Nadapal-Marich Pass section of the Juba-
                         Nadapal-Eldoret corridor through design and build arrangement (US$330 million). Part of the
                         Nadapal –Eldoret road which will not be under upgrading contract under the second project will be
                         maintained by KeNHA to ensure all season passability. The section between Marich Pass and
                         Eldoret estimated at US$200 million is expected to be financed by Japan International Cooperation
                         Agency (JICA). Both the European Union and the African Development Bank have also expressed
                         interest and could provide support to part of the road between Lodwar and Marich Pass that will not
                         be financed by the World Bank.

                         12.      Component 2: Support to MoFCEP/SSCS, MTRB-SS, KRA, KeNHA and MoTI for
                         Facilitation of Regional Transport, Trade and Development (US$50 million)- Support to the
                         implementation of the recommendations of transport, trade and development facilitation studies to be
                         conducted under the first project along the Juba- Nadapal- Eldoret corridor, and building on the
                         interventions initiated in the first project, including (i) Corridor performance monitoring; (ii) Support
                         to national corridor management committees; (iii) Strengthening the South Sudan Customs Services;
                         (iv) Establishing OSBP at South Sudan and Kenya side of Nadapal, through a design and build

                                                                       Page 5 of 18
                         (DB) arrangement; (v) Enhancing social infrastructure and social services delivery, including HIV/
                         AIDS prevention, and Road Safety along the corridor; (vi) Establishing overloading control weigh
                         bridge at Nadapal on the South Sudan side; (vii) Support to provision of site and services to rest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stops, export processing zones and storage facilities, as well as certification of export products and
                         simplifying the process for import-export; and (viii) connecting export processing zones, rest stops
                         and community centers and service centers along the corridor with ICT.

                         13.     Component 3: Support to MTRB, SSCS, KeNHA, KRA and MoTI for Program
                         Implementation and preparation of follow-on operations (US$10 million), including institutional
                         development support to the program implementation entities, as well as other institutions involved in
                         trade and development facilitation and private sector stakeholders, such as freight forwarders and
                         transporters association, and studies and design to provide access along Lobira-Kitgum and Gulu
                         (Uganda).

                         14. The third project, primarily will focus on enhanced support to trade facilitation measures along
                         the priority corridors linking South Sudan to Mombasa and Djibouti ports through Ethiopia, and
                         other countries of the East and Southern Africa The third project will also finance the rehabilitation
                         of the remaining sections of the Nadapal –Eldoret road not financed under the first and second
                         projects. The activities under the third project are estimated to cost about US$175 million.

                         15.     The Provisional Scale of the overall Program is estimated at about US$1.3 billion.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         1.       Considering the sequence of the three projects as described above, the physical
                         characteristics of the proposed project are as follows:

                         2.        The Juba - Nadapal- Eldoret road traverses the south–eastern part of South Sudan and
                         north-western part of Kenya. The section in South Sudan, the Nadapal to Juba Road is an interstate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road that links the Central Equatoria and Eastern Equatoria states. There are numerous villages
                         alongside the road, with a varying population. The total length of the road from Nadapal to Juba
                         (Nesitu Junction) is approximately 340 km of unpaved road, which provides transport connectivity
                         between Juba and the district headquarters, towns and villages of Juba, Torit, Budi and Kapoeta
                         Counties in Central and Eastern Equatoria states. The road also passes through significant townships
                         and trading centers i.e. Nadapal, Narus, Kapoeta, Lobira, Torit, Liriya, Ngangal and Nesitu junction
                         which marks the end point of the project road in South Sudan. The road serves as a regional and
                         international corridor linking the hinterland of South Sudan with markets in Kenya and international
                         markets through the port of Mombasa.

                         3.        The topography of the project area can be described as undulating at Nadapal (from Kenyan
                         border) and the hills surrounding Mineral Springs. The next section is mainly flat plain. From
                         Longario, there are high volcanic outcrops up to Liriya and Luluba. In the next section, from Torit to
                         Ngalagala, the road crosses numerous seasonal streams and rivers and follows a gently sloping ridge
                         through the subsequent section to Juba. The altitudes vary from an elevation of 741 m at the border
                         with Kenya to 800 m at Mineral Springs, 620 m at Torit and with gentle variations in slope down to
                         an elevation of 460 m near Juba.

                         4.       The proposed road segments within Kenya boundary, Eldoret- Nadapal, to be upgraded
                         under the proposed program is about 595 km and is on the main road corridor linking Tanzania,


                                                                      Page 6 of 18
                         Kenya and South Sudan. It runs in South-North direction on the Western part of Kenya. The southern
                         part of the general area of the road is densely populated and with high agricultural potential. The road
                         also passes through two large towns Eldoret and Kitale. The northern part, bordering South Sudan is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         largely sparsely populated and less developed. The section from Eldoret to Lokichoggio is paved,
                         while the Lokichoggio-Nadapal section is unpaved. The improvement will be carried out within the
                         existing right of way. Part of the Nadapal – Marich –Eldoret road is expected to be financed by the
                         World Bank and other development partners in the second project and the remaining part will be
                         upgraded in the third project. A meeting with potential financiers was held on January 29, 2013, in
                         Nairobi and a preliminary road map for the implementation of the program has been set.

                         5. The project screening identified a number of negative environmental and social impacts; however,
                         all of them will be minimized (or avoided) through implementation of the appropriate mitigation
                         measures. The project involves widening the road within the existing right-of-way: the carriage way
                         is proposed to be maintained at 7m width, with 2m shoulder on each side of the road. New quarry
                         sites are being identified to be developed for material extraction for the road construction. The road
                         upgrading work may require cutting of some trees. Some spots of swampy areas may exist alongside
                         the road, in particular this problem gets pronounced during the rainy season, as along some parts of
                         the road standing water creates ponds. It will also require temporary expropriation of some farm land
                         (for material sites and diversions). Work camps will require careful siting and supervision to avoid
                         stress on resources for surrounding communities (e.g. water, fuel).

                         6.        The project, when completed, is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts
                         in the long term, as it will facilitate economic and social development thereby promoting
                         improvement in livelihood of the population in the project influence area. It will also improve
                         drainage and seasonal river crossings, thus reducing runoff from the road.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
                         Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)
                         Bedilu Amare Reta (AFTHE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               Road rehabilitation works entail a number of
                         BP 4.01                                              potential site-specific impacts including cutting of
                                                                              vegetation, soil erosion, sedimentation of water
                                                                              bodies, temporary realignments of stream
                                                                              channels for bridge construction/rehabilitation,
                                                                              generation of construction solid wastes, noise and
                                                                              dust pollution, etc. These impacts may result from
                                                                              ground disturbance, operation of equipment, and
                                                                              labor force housing, quarry and borrow site
                                                                              operation and various ancillary activities during
                                                                              the construction and rehabilitation works. ESIAs
                                                                              for the project describe potential environmental
                                                                              and social impacts and the respective mitigation
                                                                              and recommended design enhancement measures



                                                                      Page 7 of 18
                                                                     of the proposed Project.

                                                                     For South Sudan: An Environmental and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Impact Assessment (together with ESMP) will
                                                                     also be an instrument guide the implementation
                                                                     team to minimize/avoid the anticipated impacts. It
                                                                     also serves as a guide for monitoring of the
                                                                     implementation of these mitigation measures.

                                                                     A draft ESIA for South Sudan was prepared in
                                                                     May 2010. It was updated, consulted upon, and
                                                                     disclosed on November 11, 2013.

                                                                     In addition, as the detailed design of the project
                                                                     was not available at the time of project appraisal,
                                                                     an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by
                                                                     KeNHA for the Eldoret-Nadapal road section in
                                                                     Kenya to provide an overall framework for
                                                                     policies and procedures to follow in ensuring
                                                                     environmental safeguards during project
                                                                     implementation. It has been consulted upon and
                                                                     disclosed in country on December 4, 2013 and at
                                                                     the Infoshop on December 9, 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            The project activities will not result in
                                                                     conversion, degradation or restoration of natural
                                                                     habitats or critical natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     The draft ESIA studies prepared for both
                                                                     countries concluded that there will be no major
                                                                     negative impacts resulting from the proposed
                                                                     project activities.

                                                                     However, this policy is triggered as the proposed
                                                                     road will pass through two wildlife corridors: (i)
                                                                     Kidepo in South Sudan - a seasonal migratory
                                                                     route where animal crosses to find food and water
                                                                     depending on the yearly season), and (ii) South
                                                                     Turkana National Reserve in Kenya - a migratory
                                                                     route for elephants and buffalos. The project is
                                                                     expected to create a temporary impediment on
                                                                     existing seasonal wildlife movements. There is
                                                                     also a risk of introduction of invasive alien
                                                                     species along the road corridor. This section of
                                                                     the road requires appropriate design measures and
                                                                     interventions to be implemented together with
                                                                     robust monitoring program both during project



                                                             Page 8 of 18
                                                                         construction and operation phases. Such
                                                                         monitoring program will be designed, based on
                                                                         the consultations with relevant stakeholders:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         South Sudan Ministry of Interior and Wildlife and
                                                                         Kenya Wildlife Service. The potential impacts of
                                                                         the proposed operation on natural habitats are
                                                                         addressed in the ESIA for South Sudan and
                                                                         ESMF for Kenya. Detailed mitigation measures
                                                                         will be included in the contractor bid document to
                                                                         be implemented during construction and
                                                                         operation phases.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The road improvement will follow the existing
                                                                         alignment with some widening, which is not
                                                                         expected to impact on forest resources, although
                                                                         the project may involve cutting some trees. In
                                                                         Kenya, the road will pass near Kamatira forest;
                                                                         however, the road upgrade will follow the
                                                                         existing right-of-way and will not require tree
                                                                         cutting within the forest plantation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The proposed road project does not involve
                                                                         activities that require pesticide use. Neither direct
                                                                         purchase of pesticides nor financing activities that
                                                                         use pesticides will be supported by the project.
                                                                         Therefore this policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            Although the ESIA reports identified no PCR
                         BP 4.11                                         along the proposed road, the road works and
                                                                         ancillary activities may encounter and/or affect
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         some PCR, therefore this policy is triggered. To
                                                                         mitigate or address issues regarding potential
                                                                         impact on the PCR, the project environmental
                                                                         safeguards instruments include procedures for
                                                                         identification and management of chance finds. If
                                                                         existence of physical/cultural resources is
                                                                         confirmed, the ESIA will be updated to include a
                                                                         Physical/Cultural management plan. In any case,
                                                                         “Chance Find” procedures will be included in the
                                                                         contract documents. South Sudan is a newly
                                                                         emerging nation and its cultural heritage
                                                                         resources are not yet known. In Kenya, the
                                                                         project will work with County authorities and
                                                                         National Museums of Kenya in case of such finds
                                                                         during civil works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes            In South Sudan, the vast majority of ethnic
                                                                         groups in the project area meet the OP 4.10
                                                                         criteria; the project design and the RAP will
                                                                         assure that the socio-economic activities are



                                                                 Page 9 of 18
                                                                         responsive to the socio-cultural norms of the
                                                                         ethnic groups. In addition, a draft Social
                                                                         Assessment has been prepared, addressing the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         impacts on Indigenous Peoples within the project
                                                                         area, providing applicable mitigation measures
                                                                         for minimizing adverse impacts, ensuring a
                                                                         process of free, prior, and informed consultation
                                                                         leading to broad community support of the
                                                                         project, establishing a grievance redress system,
                                                                         and ensuring effective monitoring and evaluation
                                                                         of the project outcomes on IP communities. The
                                                                         draft Social Assessment has been consulted upon
                                                                         and disclosed on November 25, 2013.

                                                                         In Kenya, the implementing agency (KeNHA) is
                                                                         in the process of conducting a social screening
                                                                         and assessment to evaluate the project’s potential
                                                                         positive and adverse effects on the Vulnerable
                                                                         and Marginalized Groups, and to examine project
                                                                         alternatives to avoid scenarios where adverse
                                                                         effects may be significant.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             In South Sudan, the project involves road
                         4.12                                            widening, within the existing right-of-way. The
                                                                         road upgrading will require relocating (basically
                                                                         moving back the properties within the existing
                                                                         open land) of about 180 households and 154
                                                                         small road side businesses, this will require
                                                                         expropriation of 375 ha of land and 517 land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         segments with different land use characteristics
                                                                         (predominantly farm lands) will be partially
                                                                         affected, along the Juba-Nadapal section. A RAP
                                                                         has been prepared, consulted upon. And disclosed
                                                                         on November 11~~ 2013 for the PAPs in South
                                                                         Sudan.

                                                                         In Kenya, the road crosses 4 counties (Uasin
                                                                         Gishu, Trans Nzoia, West Pokot and Turkana).
                                                                         The proposed activities will be implemented
                                                                         within the existing road reserve. The extent of the
                                                                         required compensation and/or resettlement is
                                                                         expected to be moderate (based on the project
                                                                         screening) and will be determined as part of the
                                                                         RAP preparation for this section of the road.
                                                                         As the detailed design of the project is not yet
                                                                         available, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (RPF) has been prepared for the Eldoret-Nadapal
                                                                         road and outlines the procedures and policies to



                                                                Page 10 of 18
                                                                                be pursued when preparing RAPs. The RPF was
                                                                                disclosed in country on December 4, 2013 and at
                                                                                the Infoshop on December 9, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                policy.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project does not affect any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways, thus the policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project does not operate in any disputed
                            7.60                                                areas, therefore the policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              As the project risks were determined to be reversible and site specific, which can be reduced with
                              implementation of the mitigation measures, the project was assigned an Environmental Category
                              B. Bank safeguard policies applicable to this project, include: Environmental Assessment (OP
                              4.01), Natural Habitats ( OP 4.04), Physical Cultural Resources (4.11), Indigenous People (OP
                              4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). No significant or irreversible adverse
                              environmental and social impacts were identified, as the proposed project activities involve road
                              upgrading, minor widening and raising the level of the road within the existing right-of-way. The
                              possible negative impacts identified, are attributed to ground disturbance, operation of equipment,
                              labor force housing, quarry and borrow site operation and various ancillary activities during the
                              project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The ESMPs prepared as part of the ESIAs will be incorporated in contract documents for packages
                             to be financed by EXIM bank, the World Bank, AfDB, JICA and other donors parallel-financing
                             the project. Joint supervision missions will monitor the implementation of the mitigation measures
                             to ensure consistent application of safeguard policies.

                             During implementation of the project, the Bank’s safeguards team will work closely with the
                             governments of Kenya and South Sudan to ensure the availability of technical assistance and
                             capacity building required at central, state and local government levels for effective follow up on
                             the safeguards instruments and timely implementation of the ESMPs, RAPs, and any other
                             safeguards instruments. It is also critical that the Implementation Units both in South Sudan and
                             Kenya commit to the regular monitoring program and partners with the local authorities to ensure
                             the mitigation measures defined in ESMPs are implemented on a regular basis.

                             Safeguards considerations for South Sudan:

                             GRSS has prepared ESIA/ESMP and RAP for the road upgrading project, and these instruments
                             will be provided to all financiers for adoption. A draft Social Assessment has been prepared,
                             addressing the impacts on Indigenous Peoples within the project area, providing applicable
                             mitigation measures for minimizing adverse impacts, ensuring a process of free, prior, and
                             informed consultation leading to broad community support of the project, establishing a grievance


                                                                       Page 11 of 18
                         redress system, and ensuring effective monitoring and evaluation of the project outcomes on IP
                         communities.
                         An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) study and Resettlement Action Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (RAP) for the road section in South Sudan (Juba-Nadapal) was completed in May 2010 and
                         December 2010, respectively. The Ministry of Transport, Roads and Bridges (MTRB) of South
                         Sudan, based on the Bank review, has updated the reports with the support of a Technical
                         Assistance. The updated ESIA and RAP have been reviewed and cleared by the Bank and
                         disclosed in country and at the Infoshop.

                         OP 4.01: majority of negative environmental and social impacts along the entire road length (340
                         km) in South Sudan are likely to include soil erosion during earthworks and construction of
                         structures, dust pollution, removal of light vegetation, disposal of solid wastes, impact on
                         occupational safety to construction workers and the nearby communities. The ESIA indicated that
                         some unexploded landmines on either side of the road may exist, and this could potentially pose
                         security and safety issues. The ESIA indicated that due to the presence of unexploded landmines
                         on either side of the existing road, the option of constructing new road along the existing one is
                         excluded, and this could also be a potential high security and safety issue during construction.
                         Thus, before the commencement of construction activities and RAP implementation, the
                         Government will ensure the clearance of landmines along the entire proposed road section where
                         the landmine impact is expected. The Government will also provide a map showing demined areas
                         by UN mines action, to be used in case the project will involve resettlement in new locations. The
                         ESIA will be shared with all co-financiers and contractors and this will help to make all
                         stakeholders aware of the landmines issue. The ESIA also confirmed that the indicated potential
                         impacts could be easily mitigated through the sound implementation mitigation measures
                         recommended in the report.
                         Under component 4, the proposed program will support the construction of a fiber optic cable
                         alongside the road from Juba into Kenya to bring enhanced international internet connectivity into
                         South Sudan for the first time. The construction of the road into Kenya offers a one-time
                         opportunity to create a high-capacity, reliable terrestrial fiber link. Constructing the fiber cable at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the same time as the road will reduce costs and will avoid disruption if it is built at a later date.
                         Given the installation of the proposed Fiber optic cable is within the right of way of the proposed
                         road upgrading work which is adjacent to the side drains in rural areas and under the pedestrian
                         walkway in urban areas, the nature and scale of the possible anticipated environmental impacts
                         would be encapsulated in the proposed upgrading works framework. Therefore, any anticipated
                         impacts generated due to the installation of fiber optics cable from Juba to Kenya boarder, will be
                         addressed and managed through implementation of the recommended mitigation measures
                         indicated in the Juba-Nadapal ESIA and ESMP report.

                         OP 4.12: As per the RAP and ESIA prepared for the South Sudan (Juba-Nadapal) section, over the
                         entire Juba – Nadapal road 218 household structures (consisting of 171 permanent and temporary
                         residential houses; 5 animal sheds; and 42 cooking sheds) and 145 household road side business
                         structures located within the road Right of Way will be affected. The estimated number of people
                         who live in the affected families is 1,218.The relocation of the houses will be within the respective
                         community (moving back the properties within the existing open land back from the RoW within
                         the community where the Project Affected People (PAPs) currently live). The GRSS will
                         compensate the PAPs for the lost property. In addition, 28 trees will be replaced. Segments of
                         farmlands totaling 375 hectares claimed by 517 individuals will be acquired by the project. During
                         the consultations the local administration communities have agreed to provide replacement land
                         for free. Because of the linear nature of the project, this small amount of land is spread within one

                                                                    Page 12 of 18
                         County (Juba) of Central Equatoria State and 5 Counties of Eastern Equatorial States (Torit,
                         Ikotos, Budi, Kapoeta East and Kapoeta North). As is it mentioned above in the OP 4.01 section,
                         the implementing agency, prior to allocating resettlement sites for the PAPs, will ensure that all
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resettlement sites (including access to such sites) are clear of the landmines.

                         OP 4.04: During consultations with the South Sudan Ministry of Interior and Wildlife
                         Conservation (MIWC) it was confirmed that the proposed road does not traverse through any
                         conservation areas of South Sudan. However, the road passes near the wildlife crossing corridors
                         around Kidepo Valley (from Kenya, Ethiopia and Uganda to Nimule National Park, Kidepo
                         reserve area). To minimize and/or avoid the possible negative impacts the MTRB, in consultation
                         with MIWC, would apply risk mitigation measures to be implemented during and after
                         construction works completion. These include speed/traffic calming structures (bumps/humps,
                         traffic signs, reduced speed limit, posted speed limit, post advisory speed limit, wildlife warning
                         signs, etc.); regular consultation with adjacent communities and other project stakeholders to raise
                         awareness of the road safety; regular reporting of any incidents involving wildlife, monitoring of
                         wildlife crossing time; and diligent implementation and enforcement of the traffic safety plan. The
                         construction may also increase incidence of malaria and other water borne diseases due to the
                         water ponds in the borrow sites around the construction area.

                         OP 4.11: South Sudan is a newly emerging nation and its cultural heritage resources are not yet
                         well known. The ESIA identified no anticipated impact on sites of historic or cultural sensitivity.
                         However, during construction unforeseen impacts on cultural resources including graves may
                         occur. “Chance finds” procedures will be included in activity design and in the contractors bid
                         documents. The ESIA that has been prepared also includes proper mitigation measures for any
                         unforeseen impacts on physical cultural resources including grave yards.

                         OP 4.10: On the South Sudan side the majority of the project affected people (PAPs) are
                         considered Indigenous Peoples. Based on OP 4.10, a separate Indigenous People Plan (IPP) is not
                         required. The ESIA and a separate draft Social Assessment for South Sudan include a vulnerability
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment, focusing on impacts on IP groups in the project area and measures for providing
                         culturally appropriate economic and social benefits and, where possible, avoiding, minimizing,
                         mitigating, or compensating adverse impacts.

                         Safeguards considerations for Kenya:

                         As the road traverses sparsely populated and less vegetated areas, no significant negative
                         environmental and social impact is expected. The road project involves widening and raising the
                         level of the road, within the existing right-of-way. No significant or irreversible adverse
                         environmental and social impacts were identified during in the environmental screening of the
                         proposed upgrading of the road to bitumen standard.

                         Timing of the safeguards instruments: Kenya is currently developing the design study for road
                         upgrading from Eldoret to Nadapal segment. As the road traverses sparsely populated and
                         vegetated area, no significant negative environmental and social impacts were identified during
                         screening. KeNHA has prepared the draft ESMF and RPF for Kenya side, which was disclosed in
                         country and at the Infoshop. Once the road designs are complete, KeNHA will prepare ESIAs,
                         RAPs and ESMPs for the 3 sections of Eldoret-Nadapal Road -- (i) Lesseru – Marich Pass, (ii)
                         Marich Pass – Lodwar, and (iii) Lodwar – Nadapal. The engineering design is in progress, it is
                         informed by the environmental and social screening conducted by the project preparation, as well

                                                                   Page 13 of 18
                         as the publicconsultations done as part of ESMF and RPF preparation. Under the first project,
                         there are no civil works on the Kenyan side and the financing for the studies and Technical
                         Assistance to be provided to Kenya as part of the first project will be delivered in a form of Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Preparation Advance. The ESMF and the RPF have been consulted upon and disclosed to guide
                         the subsequent development of the ESIAs and RAPs in preparation for the Second phase of the
                         project.

                         OP 4.01/OP 4.04: Between the towns of Lokichar and Kapenguria there is a South Turkana
                         National Reserve area crossed by the proposed road. Wildlife corridors were observed and
                         discussed with KWS, which require provision of the design modifications to accommodate these
                         crossings, as KWS reported regular wildlife traffic on this corridor. Such modifications may
                         constitute an animal underpass and fencing along section of the road frequently crossed by animals
                         to direct them to the under pass. A robust monitoring and supervision program will also be
                         discussed with KWS as part of ESIA preparation for this section of the road.

                         OP 4:10: On the Kenyan side, the vast majority of the people living within the influence area of
                         the road section on the Kenyan side are considered to be vulnerable and marginalized groups as
                         defined by the Kenya Constitution. Therefore, OP 4.10 will be triggered. KenHA is preparing a
                         separate social assessment that will identify the processes to ensure broad support of these
                         communities through free and prior informed consultations. The SA consultations will identify
                         how these communities could benefit from the project, as well as identify culturally appropriate
                         complaint redress mechanisms, mitigation measures from adverse impacts, and a monitoring and
                         evaluation process. No separate Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plan is necessary.
                         OP 4.36: The policy is not triggered. During early stages of project preparation, triggering of
                         Forests policy was considered due to the road section near Marich Pass, where it crosses a forest
                         plantation, Kamatira Forest, owned by the Kenya Forest Service. To maintain an acceptable slope,
                         one of the design options has recommended road realignment at Kamatira forest, but KeNHA has
                         reconsidered to follow the existing alignment and improve the gradient and curves. Kamatira
                         Forest section and Kitale town crossing are proposed to be improved in such a way that would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         minimize negative impacts on settlement by following the existing route. Upgrade of the segment
                         between Marich Pass and Kitale will be done in the second phase by JICA and safeguard issues
                         along this segment will be reconsidered by JICA and KeNHA. Overall on the Kenya side, the road
                         upgrading will follow the existing alignment and with the adoption of the environmentally friendly
                         approaches and implementation of the mitigation measures no adverse impact is expected. Further,
                         the trade and development facilitation related infrastructure would be constructed in open/
                         unoccupied sites, which will have no or limited negative impact.

                         OP.4.12: An RPF has been prepared and consulted upon and disclosed in country and at the
                         Infoshop. Per a preliminary RAP prepared in 2010 for Lodwar-Lokichoggio-Nadapal, the total
                         number of project affected persons (PAPs) as determined from the census surveys is 2,719.
                         Among these PAPs, 416 are found in Turkana Central Sub-county and 2,303 are found in Turkana
                         West Sub-county. The main areas that will be impacted will include the urban towns of Lodwar,
                         Gold, Kakuma, Kalobiyei and Lokichogio. It will also affect the rural Manyatta settlements of
                         Nasiger, St. Leo, Nakururum, Posta and Songot. Permanent and temporary structures alike will be
                         lost including crops, trees, and graves. Income losses are expected as a result of the project mainly
                         through loss of small and micro enterprises with minimal adverse impacts on agriculture.
                         Resettlement sites are not an option because the PAPs prefer to be resettled within their existing
                         communities. The RAP has documented the PAPs, including assets, which have been diligently
                         valued, and includes the names, contact addresses and location of the PAPs.

                                                                   Page 14 of 18
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Project does not entail any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts. No long term risks or impacts are anticipated with diligent implementation of the
                           mitigation measures proposed in the project safeguards instruments.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Overall, no project major project alternatives were considered for this operation as no significant
                           adverse impacts are foreseen from the proposed project activities. Throughout the design
                           preparation, the project teams in South Sudan and Kenya are working to minimize resettlement
                           and environmental impacts along the route. KeNHA has considered the option of re-aligning about
                           12 km section of the Lesseru- Marich Pass road. However, as the proposed re-alignment passes
                           through Kamatira forest the improvement of the existing alignment was pursued to avoid impacts
                           on the forest plantation. In the Lodwar-Lokichoggio-Nadapal section, to minimize land acquisition
                           and disturbances, by-passing congested town of Kakuma and Lokichoggio thus avoiding
                           demolition of over 50% of structures in each of these towns has been proposed by KeNHA.

                           In South Sudan, a 15-km bypass around Torit town was selected as an alternative to avoid
                           demolition of structures within Torit, which would have included a medical center and a prison.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The first Phase of the program will mainly involve South Sudan and Kenya, and the
                           implementation will be coordinated by a joint inter-ministerial committee representing Ministry of
                           Transport, Roads and Bridges (MTRB) of South Sudan and the Ministry of Transport and
                           Infrastructure (MoTI). The two ministries have formed national inter-ministerial committee. This
                           arrangement will be replicated for the other corridors during the second phase of the program. The
                           joint inter-ministerial committee will engage with the Intergovernmental Authority for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Development (IGAD), East African Community (EAC) and Northern Corridor Transit Transport
                           Coordination Authority (NCTTCA) on trade facilitation matters and inter-country coordination.
                           The second phase may involve more countries and at sub-regional level, IGAD with the support of
                           EAC is proposed to be the focal body for the overall coordination, as all stakeholder countries,
                           including Djibouti are members of IGAD.

                          South Sudan Implementation Arrangements:

                          The proposed project will be implemented by the Project Management Team (PMT) under the
                          MTRB, which was responsible for the implementation of the transport projects supported by the
                          Multi Donor Trust Fund for South Sudan (MTDF-SS). While the PMT is familiar with Bank’s
                          safeguards policies and implementation procedures, the capacity of the PMT to manage the
                          safeguards however, is severely lacking and needs to be further strengthened to manage the
                          additional tasks. While MTRB is committed to managing social and environmental impacts of the
                          project; the single environment specialist in the ministry has not been able to provide the support
                          required to manage the environmental and social impacts. MTRB requires substantial Technical
                          Assistance to manage the environmental and social impacts. MTRB has agreed to bring on board
                          full time consultants as essential to managing the social and environmental impacts of road
                          construction, especially in providing support to the state Ministry of Transport and Roads of the
                          Eastern Equatorial State to liaise with the local communities. The South Sudan Roads Authority


                                                                    Page 15 of 18
                           (SSRA) is under establishment and the responsibilities of implementing this project will be
                           transferred to SSRA when it becomes fully operational and capable of managing major projects.
                           The bidding documents clauses will reflect the ESMP obliging contractors to implement the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           proposed mitigation measures.

                           Kenya Implementation Arrangements:

                           On the Kenya side, the Kenya National Highways Authority (KeNHA) is responsible on the
                           implementation of the proposed projects. KeNHA has significant experience with implementation
                           of Bank-supported projects and is well familiar with the WB Safeguards policies, safeguards
                           instruments and relevant project supervision. The KeNHA safeguards compliance unit is staffed
                           with Senior Environmental Specialist and a Senior Sociologist. As KeNHA project portfolio is
                           growing, additional staff, who can help the unit address safeguards issues has been requested by
                           the team.

                           The key responsibilities of the Environmental and Social Specialists in the implementing
                           ministries South Sudan and Kenya include: (a) updating the ESIAs and RAPs prepared for the
                           proposed road, as further design details are provided; (b) training of the project management team
                           staff (both at the national and local levels) on the project environmental and social safeguards
                           arrangements for the project; (c) leading/providing oversight on the implementation of the RAP
                           (prior to beginning of works) and ESMPs; (d) reviewing of ESMP monitoring reports submitted
                           by the contractors on ESMP implementation; (e) conducting regular visits to project sites to
                           monitor the implementation of ESMP; (f) ensuring the grievance redress mechanism is in place
                           and functioning and liaising with the project stakeholders (e.g. KWS, county governments, etc.);
                           and (g) providing guidance and inputs to the project management team and contractor on
                           environment and social management aspects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In South Sudan, the key stakeholders include MoFCIEP, MTRB, MIWC, MoE, other relevant line
                           ministries at the national level, State Key Ministries and other relevant line ministries at state
                           level, local communities (Boma, Payam chiefs, State and County Governmentofficials) and
                           relevant NGOs.

                           In Kenya, the stakeholders include the MoTI, KeNHA, KRA, NEMA, Ministry of Lands, KWS
                           and other line ministries, and authorities as well as County Governments for North Rift Valley
                           region.

                           Consultations were undertaken to facilitate stakeholder involvement and raise awareness during
                           preparation of the project safeguards instruments. Public consultations will continue throughout
                           project implementation to ensure that the information required for decision making is available to
                           all interested parties.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         08-Oct-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      11-Nov-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                                    Page 16 of 18
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           South Sudan                                                      11-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           South Sudan                                                      11-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           South Sudan                                                      25-Nov-2013
                           Comments: The Social Assessment report was disclosed in-country and infoshop on November
                                         25, 2013.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples


                                                                   Page 17 of 18
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 05-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                         Date: 06-Jan-2014




                                                                       Page 18 of 18
