INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA1094
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Nov-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:       Europe and Central Asia   Project ID:  P152569
Parent       P128416
Project ID:
Project Name: Danube Water Program Additional Financing (P 152569)
Parent Project DANUBE REGION WATER AND WASTE WATER SECTOR CAPACITY
Name:          BUILDING PROGRAM (P128416)
Task Team      David Michaud
Leader(s):
Estimated                                Estimated    01-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                          Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                     Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):     Water supply (50%), Sanitation (40%), Public administration- Water, sanitation
and flood protection (10%)
Theme(s):      Other urban development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      7.09           Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                      Amount
Borrower                                                                  0.64
Free-standing TF for ECA                                                  6.44
Total                                                                     7.09
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a      No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 6


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The Development Objective of the proposed Danube Region Water Supply and Wastewater
Sector Capacity Building Program would be to support institutional capacity building and the
development of regulatory and policy instruments in the water supply and wastewater sector in
participating countries in the Danube Region. The program would support (i) development of
regulatory and policy instruments, and (ii) training and capacity building. The higher level
objective of the program is to contribute to improving the efficiency and quality of water supply
and wastewater service delivery in the Danube region.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The Development Objective of the Danube Water Program is to support institutional capacity
building and the development of regulatory and policy instruments in the water supply and
wastewater sector in participating countries in the Danube Region. The program will support (i)
development of regulatory and policy instruments, and (ii) training and capacity building.
3. Project Description
Component 1 (Bank executed): Provision of Policy and Regulatory Support to National Level
Authorities and Support to Program Implementation (original USD 2.1 million, revised USD 4.4
million)
Sub-component 1.1: Financing of Sector-specific Technical Assistance, Analytical, and Advisory
Work (original USD 1.9 million, revised USD 3.8 million)
The DWP is currently financing a regional "State of the Sector" review of all participating countries,
as well as five further countries of high relevance within the Danube Watershed (Austria, Czech
Republic, Hungary, Slovakia and Slovenia); the review will be completed in spring 2015. Its findings
are generating demand for deeper, country-specific analytical and policy engagement to address the
identified challenges. Under the AF, the main activities will therefore entail:
* National AAA. Analytical and advisory activities will be primarily conducted at national
level in those countries where the counterparts express demand, building on the work conducted at
regional level under the first phase;
* Regional AAA. Some regional analytical work on emerging gaps, such as access to services
for minorities, and non-public / rural supply, might take place.
* SoS Update. Towards the end of the AF, the State of the Sector review will be updated,
reflecting progress in the three year since the first review.
Sub-component 1.2: Provision of Program Implementation Support and Supervision Activities
(original USD 0.2 million, revised USD 0.6 million)
This sub-component will not be modified and will continue to finance activities to provide
implementation support and supervision during program implementation, including Bank staff time
and travel cost. The costs reflect the experience so far and the AF's duration.
Component 2 (Recipient executed): Capacity Building and Knowledge Sharing for Water Supply and
Wastewater Sector Stakeholders (original USD 3.9 million, revised USD 9.2 million)
Sub-component 2.1: Implementation of Regional Capacity Building and Knowledge Sharing for
Water Supply and Wastewater Utilities and sector stakeholders (original USD 1.8 million, revised
Page 2 of 6


﻿USD 3.4 million)
Capacity Building. Following strong demand from sector institutions and in particular utilities,
capacity building activities will continue to represent a very important segment of Program under the
AF. The Program is particularly interested in ensuring institutional and financial sustainability of
those activities beyond the AF's life. As a result, the utility capacity building offerings will continue
to build on the current model of creating, for each offering, regional training hubs (largely through
national waterworks associations) for the actual training delivery, and hiring technical partners to
prepare the training materials and train the trainers. Utilities will continue to pay for their
participation, and all capacity-building programs will result in concrete action plans for participating
utilities in the respective topic. Additionally, some activities might also be developed under an e-
learning concept if demand arises.
Topics. The specific capacity building proposed focus around the following main axes:
*      Existing Topics. Already established capacity building activities as energy efficiency, asset
management, commercial efficiency, and utility benchmarking will continue and be expanded to
more countries on a demand / need basis.
*      New Topics. The program will develop a few additional capacity-building programs on
topics such as NRW reduction, and preparation of Water Safety Plans (WSP), in close cooperation
with utility associations as local partners, following the same three-levels organization it currently
has, with IAWD at planning and coordination level, individual water utility association or stronger
individual utilities as hub for activity implementation at implementation level, and consultants or
hired expert teams as operational technical support;
Formalization of capacity-building curriculum. IAWD also intends to facilitate the development of a
more formal curriculum for all capacity building activities implemented under DWP and beyond,
jointly with utility / waterworks associations in the region. Early steps, such as the creation of a
waterworks associations roundtable, and the initial presentation of the concept, have taken place
successfully and the three years extension provided by the AF will be used to formalize those
proposed mechanisms.
Knowledge Sharing. The knowledge sharing activities will remain largely the same and can be
categorized as follows:
*      Program Website and Communication. The Program team will continue to maintain and
further improve the Danube Water Program website, www.danube-water-program.org. The website
will continue to feature program-related news and activities. Importantly, electronic versions of
training materials as well as analytical work developed under the program will be made available on
the website. In addition, the program will continue to distribute the electronic newsletter to program
stakeholders every four months.
*      Annual Danube Water Conference. The Program has organized an annual sector stakeholder
conference in May 2013 and 2014, which has received very good feedback from participants in the
survey and generally been highly welcomed. Therefore, the Program will continue to offer such a
conference; the May 2015 edition will focus on the launch of the State of the Sector report. Future
conferences may also extend invitations to additional participants from countries outside the Danube
River Basin, e.g. Turkey, Poland, Baltic and Caucasus countries, as observers and to contribute their
own experience.
*      DANUBIS Water Platform. The Program has launched the DANUBIS.org Water Platform
(www.danubis.org) as a repository of knowledge and information for and about water utilities in the
region. DANUBIS.org builds in particular on the extensive IB-Net database available in the region,
and is overseen by a Steering Group comprised of representatives from key institutions in all of the
region's countries. Whereas the content of the Danube Water Program website is DWP-specific, the
DANUBIS.org Water Platform features news, events, and resources covering the water sector in the
region at large. The website will be further developed and improved, and country-level access and
Page 3 of 6


﻿portals will be developed.
* Meetings of key stakeholders. The program will continue to facilitate knowledge sharing
activities among associations of water utilities, policy makers and water sector regulators, on a needs
basis; as much as possible those will happen on the side of regional events to minimize traveling time
and costs.
Sub-component 2.2: Financing of Country-specific Activities for Utility Management and
Operational Practices Improvement Support / "Competitive Grant Window" (original USD 1.1
million, revised USD 3.4 million)
Competitive Grant Window. Under the Program's on-going activities, a competitive grant window
was proposed and has resulted in very strong demand. Out of 71 applications, 14 have been funded
and their implementation is on-going for a total amount of around EUR 1.1 million (including EUR
0.7 million from DWP and EUR 0.4 million of counterpart funds). Under the AF, it was agreed to
implement two additional rounds of Competitive Grants Window selections process in the second
phase of Program implementation, each worth 500K Euros. The first round of selection is expected
to take place in year 2015, and the second round is expected in 2017 and will be dependent on
availability of expected additionally mobilized fund. It is expected that average grant size and focus
of the individual grants should remain similar to the first phase but more closely focused on
synergies between the proposed grants and the Program's overall activities. In addition, the
competitive grants might be provided on a performance base, with two tranches and the second
tranche made dependent on success indicators being met.
Sub-component 2.3: Project Management and Coordination of Program Implementation (original
USD 1.0 million, revised USD 2.6 million)
This Sub-component will not be modified and will continue to support the costs of maintaining the
Technical Secretariat (TS) function at IAWD, which is responsible for program implementation and
coordination. The proposed costing reflects the cost of the TS so far, and the longer duration of the
AF.
Sub-component 2.4 (new): Waterworks Associations Strengthening (new USD 0.8 million)
Given the importance of IAWD and national waterworks associations for the sustainable impact of
the Program, the AF will include a new Sub-component linked with the building of capacity among
participating waterworks associations at national and IAWD level. National associations will be
asked (and supported) to prepare a simple business / strengthening plan, whose initial
implementation will then be funded under the Program, possibly in two performance-based tranches.
Additional, limited support to IAWD will also be included, for example to support the development
of its own business strategy, as well as a membership increase.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment No
OP/BP 4.01
Page 4 of 6


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09  No
Physical Cultural Resources No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas No
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 5 of 6


﻿C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: David Michaud
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)          Date: 28-Jan-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


