                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7468
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Sep-2013, 24-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Lebanon                            Project ID:    P143594
                            Project Name:       LB-Environmental Pollution Abatement Project (P143594)
                            Task Team           Alaa Ahmed Sarhan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           19-Aug-2013                        Estimated   30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSEE                              Lending     Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         18.00                Total Bank Financing: 15.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                        3.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                          15.00
                              Total                                                                                          18.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to: (a) reduce industrial pollution in targeted Industrial
                           Enterprises; (b) strengthen the monitoring and enforcement capabilities of the MOE; and (c)
                           operationalize the BDL financial mechanism for environmental pollution control.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project has an envelope of US$18.0 million and consists of the following two components:

                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                         Component A: Technical Assistance, (total cost: US$ 3.0 million as parallel financing from the
                         Italian Cooperation):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to strengthen through technical support and training the capacity
                         of MOE, the banking sector and the industrial associations and provide project management support.
                         This component consists of establishing a 2-section PMU and makes it operational through the
                         recruitment and financing of its staff as well of its operations: one section within BDL’s Financing
                         Unit handling fiduciary matters; and one section under the MOE’s Ministers office handling the TA,
                         overall project management as well as technical, training, marketing, awareness and reporting
                         matters.
                         i) Providing TA for the detailed design, EAs, ESIA, and CAPs to eligible enterprises so that their
                         EAs/ESIAs/CAPs are prepared in accordance with the Environment Compliance Decree 8471-2012.
                         ii) Strengthening the MOE capacity in ESIAs/EAs for the industrial sector by establishing guidelines
                         for sector ESIA, enforcement and provide formal and on-the-job training at the national and local
                         levels in close coordination with the EU StREG Program.
                         iii) Providing technical support and training to BDL, the banking sector and the Association of
                         Lebanese Banking (ALB) for the development of guidelines on banking and the environment and
                         provide training on selecting and evaluating environmental related projects from the technical,
                         financial, environmental and social point of views.
                         iv) Conducting environmental awareness with the help of ALI, CCIA, MOI to market the project to
                         their constituencies, and communication campaigns with the help of NGOs for industrial pollution
                         control.
                         v) Financing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities of project progress, impacts and outcomes
                         in close collaboration with MOE and BDL.

                         Component B: Investment Component (total cost US$ 16.5 million of which IBRD is US$ 15.0
                         million and industrial enterprises US$ 1.5 million):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of Component B is to provide concessional loans through the banking sector for
                         pollution control to an estimated 20 to 25 public and private enterprises in order to bring their air
                         emissions, effluent discharges and industrial waste generation towards compliance with national
                         environmental standards in a cost-effective manner. The sub-projects could include pollution
                         prevention, resource recovery, clean technology adoption, fuel substitution, waste minimization, or
                         end-of-pipe environmental control where no other alternatives are available. This component will
                         provide sub-loans through local Participating Banks on a first-come, first-serve basis and as long as
                         the enterprise fulfills the eligibility criteria .Participating Banks likely to subscribe to LEPAP are
                         those having industrial clients interested in reducing their pollution. The current IBRD envelop of US
                         $15 million could be leveraged at a later stage by development partners to be provided directly to
                         BDL or indirectly through other institutions, i.e., MOF, CDR, etc. Enterprises seeking funds will
                         have to provide at least 10% in kind or in cash of the amount borrowed, which is equivalent to at
                         least US$1.5 million, to cover civil works and equipment import duties as IBRD will only cover
                         equipment costs.

                         This component will consist of a credit facility to provide sub-loans of at least US$100,000 per
                         enterprise to implement pollution control projects and thereby reduce their pollution load. The IBRD
                         loan will be disbursed over 5 years to the MOF that will pass it on to the BDL at the same IBRD
                         terms and conditions. The BDL will be the APEX bank and will sign a participating agreement with
                         the Participating Banks. BDL, which will provide an incentive scheme to defray the cost of capital

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         (see Annex 2), will lend the funds to the Participating Banks in accordance with the lending
                         considerations and subject to the eligibility criteria – provided below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed lending conditions for the industrial enterprises by the Participating Banks, are as
                         follows:
                         •       Tenor 5-7 years
                         •       Grace period: 1-2 years (included in the tenor)
                         •       Market Interest rate on the US$: approximately 5.5%
                         •       Effective Interest rate after the BDL stimulus package: ±0%
                         •       Commercial Risk: To be borne by the Participating Banks
                         •       Foreign Exchange risk: To be borne by the enterprise
                         •       Collateral: To be agreed upon between the Participating Bank and the enterprise
                         •       Minimum ceiling for borrowing per sub-project is US$100,000
                         •       PMU could approve a sub-project loan up to US$2.0 million: World Bank prior approval is
                         required if the sub-project loan exceeds US$2.0 million

                         If the industrial enterprise does not eventually borrow funds once the project has financed free of
                         charge the feasibility study, the EA, ESIA and CAP, then the enterprise will have to reimburse all the
                         costs of the preparation of these documents before re-applying to the MOE for an Environmental
                         Compliance Certificate (ECC) outside the LEPAP scheme

                         Thirteen enterprises have already expressed a strong interest in requesting further feasibility studies
                         including the preparation of EAs and CAPs. Of these 13, 5 enterprises cover the following sectors: 3
                         food, 1 paper, and 1 furniture. These industries have expressed strong interest in borrowing from
                         LEPAP subject to the completion of the environment and social requirements and prefeasibility
                         studies, and reaching an agreement with Participating Banks on the lending terms and conditions.
                         The proposed investments were estimated at about US$4.0 million (net of the civil works that will be
                         borne by enterprises) and could constitute the first project pipeline that could benefit from LEPAP
                         financing. The remaining 8 enterprises have already expressed interest in requesting further
Public Disclosure Copy




                         feasibility studies/EAs/CAPs before deciding to borrow.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project locations will cover the five regions of Lebanon with particular emphasis on Greater Beirut
                         and the Bekaa regions.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sherif Kamel F. Arif (MNSSU)
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             OP4.01 is triggered because of potential impacts
                          BP 4.01                                             related to industrial pollution.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The adverse impacts of untreated industrial wastewater, pose risks to human health, degradation of
                              soil resources with heavy metals, salinity and water logging, groundwater pollution through
                              percolation; creating of imbalances in water bodies and in the plants and reduction of biodiversity
                              and causing damages in the operation of municipal wastewater treatment plant. The adverse
                              impacts of not reusing water in industry would lead to an increase in the consumption of water and
                              energy, an increase of salinity levels leading to effluent toxicity and discharging pollutants into the
                              ecosystem. Furthermore, poor and/or lack of treatment of industrial solid waste have negative
                              impacts on soil pollution, groundwater pollution due the percolation of leachate and air pollution
Public Disclosure Copy




                              due to burning of hazardous and non-hazardous waste. The project will finance pollution control
                              investments in enterprises to mitigate these impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Indirect and long terms impacts cannot be assessed at this time because the industrial facilities
                              have not been selected. However any indirect and long term impacts will be assessed during the
                              preparation of the Environment and Social Assessment (ESIA) or Environment Audit which is a
                              requirement to have access to LEPAP funds. An ESIA will be required whenever there will be
                              expansion or establishment of new facility. An Environment audit will be undertaken whenever
                              the subproject is within the existing facility. This will be determined during the subproject
                              screening.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              As the project will finance 20-25 enterprises, analysis of alternatives will be made during the
                              ESIA/Environment audit phase of each subproject. However process change / cleaner production
                              will be considered over end of pipe treatment.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           The legal basis for the EIA system is established in the Environment Protection Law No. 444/2002
                           and Law No. 690/2005 on the reorganization of the MOE and the EIA decree No. 8633/2012 and
                           its annexes. The EIA decree and its annexes include all the requirements for screening, preparation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of the environmental assessment and the supervision of the environmental assessment process
                           including consultation and disclosure; and the Environmental Compliance for Establishments
                           decree No. 8471/2012 that will regulate all activities from classified establishments (such as
                           industrial ones) that may cause harmful pollution and environmental degradation. To obtain an
                           environment permit, MOE will also establish a compliance working group and will require that
                           polluting enterprises should prepare a compliance action plan (CAP) as part of the documentation
                           for accessing LEPAP funds. The EIA unit within the Environmental Technology Service, consists
                           of three full-time staff and 20 part time staff, of whom many are knowledgeable about the national
                           EIA system and the World Bank Safeguards for which they received substantial training.
                           Furthermore, the MOE is committed to reinforce the compliance and enforcement system by
                           restructuring the service of the urban environment service into an EIA unit, a compliance unit and
                           monitoring and enforcement unit. The MOI has established six Inter-Ministerial Permitting
                           Committees (IPCs) (of which the MOE is a member) and is headed by the MOI. The IPC are
                           responsible to provide industrial permits for the construction and operation facilities and would
                           require the MOE approval of an environment assessment. MOE commitment to the establishment
                           of an industrial pollution management system will be spelled out in a policy statement in LEPAP.

                           During the first two years of project implementation that developed environmental assessment or
                           environmental statements (as known in Lebanon for Category B projects) are reviewed and cleared
                           by the Bank, in addition to their review by the MOE. Afterwards, the review and clearance
                           responsibility of the environmental statements can be delegated to the MOE, with a spot check by
                           the Bank of some of these environmental statements to ensure the quality of the review process.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are: the selected commercial banks, the industrial enterprises, Association of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Lebanese Industrialists (ALI), Chamber of Commerce, Industry and Agriculture (CCIA),
                           Association of Lebanese Banks, and local NGOs whose mandate are related to pollution control.

                           A public consultation meeting was organized at the Ministry of Environment on the 27th of
                           March, 2013 to present findings of the Environmental and Social Assessment for the LEPAP. A
                           total of 38 participants attended the meetings and included representatives of the ministries of the
                           environment and industry, and CDR, the Banque du Liban, the Association of Lebanese Banks and
                           selected commercial banks; Kafalat; the Association of Lebanese Industrialists and industrial
                           enterprises from the private sector which are considered potential borrowers from LEPAP, NGOs
                           and international organizations.

                           Findings of the Environmental and Social Assessment of the LEPAP were presented, followed by
                           a discussion session in which questions, comments and inquiries were received. The presentation
                           was divided into two sections: (i) Institutional and Legal Gaps Analysis and Recommended
                           Actions; and (ii) Main Stages of Environmental Assessment of Sub-Projects. Forms were
                           distributed to collect written feedback from the attendees, and concerns and issues raised during
                           the public participation meetings were reflected in the ESA document.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Jul-2013
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Jul-2013
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Lebanon                                                          17-Jul-2013
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Alaa Ahmed Sarhan
                            Approved By


                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)               Date: 16-Jan-2014
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)   Date: 24-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 7 of 7
