                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC9056

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Congo, Democratic Republic                     P147555
                                                                               Project ID:
                                                of
                            Project Name:       Health System Strengthening for Better Maternal and Child Health Results
                                                Project (PDSS) (P147555)
                            Task Team           Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Sep-2014                          Estimated        18-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GHNDR                                 Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Population and reproductive health (30%), Child health (25%), Health system
                                                performance (25%), Nutrition and food security (10%), In juries and non-
                                                communicable diseases (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    220.00                      Total Bank Financing:        200.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   200.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                 20.00
                              Total                                                                         220.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to improve utilization and quality of maternal and
                           child health services in targeted areas. The primary focus of the project will be on maternal and child
                         health with improvements in MCH service delivery achieved though the scale-up and strengthening
                         of Performance-Based Financing (PBF) in the target areas. In addition to improving utilization of and
                         quality of MCH services, PBF will also address the above-mentioned health system challenges
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through improving human resources for health outcomes (motivation, distribution, etc.), financial
                         accessibility to health services, community engagement, and availability of material and equipment
                         at the point of service delivery.
                         C. Project Description
                         The geographical areas where the new project will be implemented will cover 140 Health Zones in 5
                         provinces (Bandundu, Maniema, Equateur, Katanga and Kasai Oriental). The project will target
                         approximately 24 million people. The provinces have been selected based on criteria such as poor
                         health indicators, lack of access to health services and the ability to build on/expand an ongoing
                         partnership with an international organization. The underlying strategy for this project will be
                         (together with the government and partners) to support entire provinces, when feasible, rather than an
                         unsystematic selection of scattered health zones.

                         Component 1: Performance-Based Financing (PBF) to improve the quantity and quality of maternal
                         and child health services

                         Component 1 aims to support the delivery of a basic and a complementary package of priority health
                         services which respond to the burden of disease in DRC . This component will finance PBF
                         payments to health service providers and health administration units (health facilities and hospitals)
                         contracted in the target areas. This component would be supported by IDA and HRITF as well as
                         potentially development partner funding from UNICEF, Global Fund and GAVI. PBF will be
                         financed through separate fund holding arrangements , while the purchasing, verification, community
                         mobilization and coaching will be organized through provincial purchasing agencies (EUPs:
                         Etablissement d’utilité publique).

                         The institutional framework for implementing PBF will extend the EUP model, which has shown to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be an effective and efficient model for successful PBF operations in DRC, leading to not only
                         successful implementation of PBF at lower costs (overhead costs of 15 percent for EUP versus 30
                         percent for international NGOs), but also strengthening national capacity for service delivery in even
                         the most challenging contexts.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Performance payments to health facilities
                         This subcomponent will provide grants for a package of Maternal and Child Health (MCH) services
                         and technical support for PBF implementation. Public, quasi-public and private health facilities,
                         including health centers and first level referral hospitals, will be targeted in rural and urban areas.

                         PBF grants financed under this component (based on the selected services to be purchased) will be
                         paid to these health facilities in proportion to, and in payment for, achieved results. Facility payments
                         will be based on (i) the quantity of MCH and other services delivered to the targeted population, and
                         (ii) the technical quality of these services. Facility payments will be made quarterly after service
                         volumes have been verified and quality of technical support and care has been assessed and certified
                         by the EUPs, and ratified through special governing boards at the health zone level. After the
                         quantity and quality of services provided are certified, payment will be released to contracted health
                         facilities via the fund-holding entities.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening capacity for Performance-Based Financing implementation
                         Subcomponent 1.2 will finance: (i) activities to support PBF implementation and supervision
                         (capacity building, verification and counter verification, IT system, etc.) through the use of EUPs for
                         contract management and verification; (ii) performance frameworks that will be introduced at all
Public Disclosure Copy




                         levels of the health system to hold provincial health administrative units (DDS – division
                         départementale de santé) accountable for services through incentive mechanisms; (iii) internal
                         performance framework contracts with DDS vis-à-vis their roles in the health system and
                         implementation of PBF; and (iv) performance frameworks with the PBF Technical Unit (CT-PBF),
                         who will coordinate key aspects of the project in close collaboration with the various technical units
                         with the MOPH.

                         This subcomponent will also finance activities related to verification and counter-verification of the
                         DDS, EUPs and drug regulatory authority/MOPH HMIS/MOPH. An external evaluation agency
                         (Agence de Contre-Vérification Externe - ACVE) will assess the performance of the EUP, DDS,
                         HMIS department/MOPH and the drug regulatory authority/MOPH.

                         Component 2: Strengthening Governance, Health Financing and Health Policy Capacity Building

                         This component aims to strengthen health care financing policy and practices in DRC, both to
                         improve equity and efficiency in health financing and to pave the way for Universal Health
                         Coverage. This component will be supported by the Government’s own funds, IDA resources and
                         the HRITF trust fund. Key activities will include technical assistance for: (i) improving budget
                         formulation and allocation practices; (ii) developing and implementing of a sound health care
                         financing strategy; (iii) improving regulatory functions for improved health system management at
                         central and provincial levels; and (iv) strengthening the health management information system and
                         monitoring and evaluation tools.

                         Finally, this component will cover project implementation and general monitoring and evaluation
                         activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The geographical areas where the new project will be implemented will cover 140 Health Zones in 5
                         provinces (Bandundu, Maniema, Equateur, Katanga and Kasai Oriental). The project will target
                         approximately 24 million people.

                         Institutional capacity building at national level is the focus of the project. Particular attention is given
                         to some of the most “foundational” system building blocks in each sector. No civil works will be
                         undertaken and no adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. The project does not
                         require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                         resources and livelihood. The project is expected to have a positive impact for all beneficiaries
                         including vulnerable groups such as children, women and the poor who are the main target
                         beneficiaries of the project.

                         This project will cover 5 provinces and hence part of the population targeted will include Indigenous
                         Peoples (IPs). The expected impacts are positive as the IPs do not have access to quality care and
                         hence the project will ensure that quality free care is provided to them to ensure a better health
                         outcome. An Indigenous Peoples Health Needs Assessment has been conducted as part of the current
                         PARSS (P088751) project; this will be used as a starting point in developing the Indigenous Peoples
                         Planning Framework (IPPF).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           At national level, the DRC has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good
                           environmental management. In addition, the DRC has signed a number of international treaties and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           conventions. However, implementation capacity is weak. Environmental policies and their
                           compliance are governed by the Ministère de l’Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du
                           Tourisme (MECNT) – (Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Tourism). The MECNT has
                           three departments in charge of environnemental monitoring and management: i) Le Groupe d’Etudes
                           Environnementales du Congo (GEEC); ii) le Centre National d’Information sur l’Environnement
                           (CNIE); and iii) La Cellule Réglementation et Contentieux Environnementaux (CRCE). The GEEC
                           is responsible for safeguards compliance of all projects in the country, but with emphasis on
                           environmental category A projects. The unit is understaffed and has limited capacity. Despite several
                           donor-funded capacity building initiatives, the unit still largely relies on donor funds to carry out its
                           field supervision duties. At project level, the project recognizes the above institutional framework for
                           safeguards compliance so it will instead rely on the current health project PARSS to update its
                           national health waste management framework as well as begin the process of developing the
                           Indigenous People’s Policy Framework (IPPF).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Antoine V. Lema (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The environmental impacts of the project are
                           BP 4.01                                               expected to be minimal. The project will finance
                                                                                 the updating of a national level medical waste
                                                                                 management plan and all waste management
                                                                                 will be governed by national and local laws and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 procedures.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not affect natural habitats.

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The project does not involve forests or forestry.

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               The project does not involve pest management.

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               The project does not involve physical cultural
                           BP 4.11                                               resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The project is a national level program that will
                                                                                 involve and affect Indigenous Peoples. An IPPF
                                                                                 will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed
                                                                                 before appraisal.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               The project does not involve land acquisition
                           4.12                                                  leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources and
                                                                                 livelihoods.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               The project does not involve dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The studies will be launched during pre-appraisal mission in July and are expected to be
                                      completed by end of August 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Hadia Nazem Samaha

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 21-Jul-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Abdo S. Yazbeck (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 19-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
