                                                  INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                           Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSR9783
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Papua New Guinea                             Project ID:           P107782
                            Project Name:        PG: Rural Communications Project (P107782)
                            Task Team            Natasha Beschorner
                            Leader:
                            Estimated            15-Apr-2010                                  Estimated   22-Jul-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:       GTIDR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector:              Telecommunications (90%), Public administration- Information and
                                                 communications (10%)
                            Theme:               Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Regulation and competition policy
                                                 (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                            No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        15.00           Total Bank Financing:                                         15.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                      0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                            15.00
                              Total                                                                                                  15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a            No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to facilitate improved access to affordable and reliable
                           telecommunications infrastructure and services in rural and remote area


                                                                                  Page 1 of 10
                         s of Papua New Guinea through a sustainable and transparent public-private fundi
                         ng mechanism. The project will provide access to telecommunications to over 500,
                         000 rural Papua New Guineans, and facilitate Internet access in at least twenty
Public Disclosure Copy




                         district centers. In addition, the project will demonstrate the practical operat
                         ional procedures and financing mechanisms for the Rural Connectivity Fund to be
                         replicated for future Universal Access projects once the RCF is fully operationa
                         l, and once it starts to collect industry levies.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The objective of the project is to facilitate improved access to affordable and reliable
                         telecommunications infrastructure and services in rural and remote area
                         s of Papua New Guinea through a sustainable and transparent public-private fundi
                         ng mechanism. The project will provide access to telecommunications to over 500,
                         000 rural Papua New Guineans, and facilitate Internet access in at least twenty
                         district centers. In addition, the project will demonstrate the practical operat
                         ional procedures and financing mechanisms for the Rural Connectivity Fund to be
                         replicated for future Universal Access projects once the RCF is fully operationa
                         l, and once it starts to collect industry levies.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project includes technical assistance, and financing of competitively bid output-based subsidies
                         (to telecommunications service providers) for rollout of telecommunications services to rural and
                         remote areas of Papua New Guinea.

                         The implementing agencies are: Department of Communications and Information (DCI) and the
                         National ICT Authority (NICTA). Project management responsibility will be transferred to NICTA
                         in this proposed restructuring. The proposed restructuring does not affect the safeguards category or
                         trigger any new safeguards policies. The Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) that was prepared by the Government during preparation was designed to apply to any UAS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project, including those financed under the Project.

                         The components are:
                         Component 1. Technical assistance for the National ICT Authority (original US$1.0 million,
                         restructured US$1.6 million). The scope is primarily to help the UAS Secretariat in NICTA to
                         manage the implementation of projects to be financed under the UAS Fund, but also to provide
                         regulatory support in other areas as required. The subcomponents are :
                          (i)     Development of UAS Regulations and Operational Procedures. After approval of the
                         National ICT Act, detailed implementing regulations and procedures for the UAS Fund have to be
                         prepared. This component will help NICTA draft these procedures and regulations, including the
                         accounting and reporting procedures for the financial management of the Fund. The technical
                         assistance will also support the establishment of the Secretariat and assignment of functional
                         responsibilities for the staff.
                           (ii)   UAS Management and Monitoring. This component will assist NICTA staff for the duration
                         of the Project in overseeing the implementation of Demonstration Projects outlined below, and also
                         to prepare new and evaluate proponent-initiated UAS projects. The scope of technical assistance will
                         include demand analysis, project preparation and execution, financial modeling, procurement and
                         monitoring/evaluation, and UAS financial management.
                           (iii) General regulatory advisory assistance. As NICTA is in some respects a new institution,
                         operating in a new legal environment, additional regulatory advice is anticipated, particularly to


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         strengthen the competitiveness of the telecommunications market for the medium-term, and to
                         address emerging challenges. This subcomponent will finance technical support to NICTA, including
                         but not limited to: spectrum management, licensing implementation, next-generation regulatory
Public Disclosure Copy




                         issues such as passive infrastructure-sharing, number portability, quality of service, for example. i)
                         The component also includes study visits/exchanges with other regulators, particularly those
                         implementing universal service programs.

                         Component 2. UAS Demonstration Projects (Original US$13.5 million, restructured US$12.1
                         million): will finance the first two Demonstration Projects to be supported under the UAS scheme
                         and hence demonstrate the proposed "least cost" or "output-based" subsidy mechanism. These
                         demonstration projects will test the UAS funds management mechanism as well as the governance,
                         selection, approval and monitoring and evaluation systems. Two demonstration projects for
                         telecommunications services are proposed in all four regions of the country. For these areas, the
                         Project will finance one-time capital subsidies for telecommunications network expansion and
                         internet services.
                           (i)    UAS Demonstration Project to finance a one-time-capital subsidy for the provision of voice
                         services in all four regions of the country, which will benefit up to 500,000 people.
                           (ii)   UAS Demonstration Project for the provision of internet services in targeted district centers
                         will provide a one-time capital subsidy to prospective bidders for (1) Mobile Broadband Expansion.
                         New build and/or network upgrade from 2G to 3G + in unserved rural areas. Coupled with
                         commercial rollout around major urban areas supported directly by the private sector, this investment
                         will help to bring broadband Internet to the majority of the PNG population within a 1-2 year period;
                         and (2) Community Internet centres. Located at eight PNG post-primary schools in district centres.
                         This component will also support user skills development, and facilitate access to teaching and
                         learning materials. It also supports outreach to the wider community to familiarize users with the
                         Internet and associated information resources.

                          Component 3: Technical Assistance for DCI (original US$0.9 million, including project
                         management; revised US$0.8 million for DCI TA)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance a second phase of policy-related advisory services, based on the outputs
                         from analytical and advisory services provided in 2012-2013. The scope of work will include the
                         following: (a) update of the national ICT policy, including stakeholder consultations and inter-
                         agency coordination mechanisms, and support for implementation; (b) advice on national and
                         government chief information officer functions and responsibilities; (c) capacity building for DCI
                         and other ministry/agency staff as appropriate.

                         Component 4: Project Management ($0.5 million)
                         This component has been separated from the original component 3 and will support NICTA and will
                         support Project coordination, procurement and financial management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project locations for the first UAS Demonstration Project for the provision of voice services has
                         been identified, and will be installed in 59 sites across all four regions of PNG to provide mandatory
                         voice services according to specified performance standards to nearly 500,000 currently unserved
                         people in all four regions of Papua New Guinea. However, specific sites, for the second UAS
                         demonstration project for the provision of internet services cannot be identified at this stage.The sites
                         will be identified by NICTA as a part of the preparation of the tender, and will specify a number of
                         sites or access points where 3G internet service would be made available. NICTA will identify


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                           locations with high population density which would normally be captured around the schools,
                           hospitals or district headquarters. The tender will also specify among other things, the eight schools
                           and the technical scope of each internet café setup. NICTA will conduct consultations with schools
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on how best to maximize the use of the internet service.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Josefo Tuyor (OPSOR)
                           Ross James Butler (GURDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               RATIONALE FOR RESTRUCTURING
                              The purpose of this restructuring is to support the introduction of the following changes to the
                              Papua New Guinea Rural Communications Project (IDA credit 4791-PG) under a level 2
                              restructuring: (a) officially transfer Project management from the Department of Communication
                              and Information (DCI) to the National ICT Authority (NICTA); (b) reallocate Credit proceeds
                              between categories 1 and 2 to reflect additional demand for policy and regulatory advisory
                              services; (c) redefine scope of the second Universal Access Scheme (UAS) Demonstration Project
                              for the provision of Internet; and (4) extend the Project closing date for two years to August 31,
                              2017. There are no changes proposed to the PDO.

                             The Board approved the Project on July 22, 2010 for a total of SDR 10 million (US$15 million


                                                                        Page 4 of 10
                         equivalent), and it became effective on March 7, 2011. The Project Development Objective (PDO)
                         is to improve access to telecommunications infrastructure and services in rural and remote areas of
                         Papua New Guinea. The Project includes financing for two major universal access and service
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (UAS) demonstration Projects—using competitively-bid one-time capital subsidies to stimulate
                         extension of ICT services to unserved and under-served areas of the country. The Project also
                         finances technical assistance to the NICTA for the establishment and administration of the UAS
                         and other regulatory matters; and to the DCI on ICT policy development.

                         Implementation progress was extremely slow in the first three years after Board approval. The
                         delays were largely due to: (a) poor Project management and weak fiduciary capacity of the
                         implementing agency (DCI) in both procurement and FM; (b) lack of coordination between DCI
                         and NICTA, the sector regulator and main beneficiary of Project-supported activities; and (c)
                         challenges associated with the Government of Papua New Guinea’s own systems for procurement
                         reviews and clearances. In the December 2012 ISR, the Project was downgraded from Moderately
                         Satisfactory to Moderately Unsatisfactory in both progress towards achievement of PDO and
                         Implementation Progress. Procurement and Financial Management (FM) were also downgraded to
                         Moderately Unsatisfactory.

                         The proposed restructuring is necessary to: (a) ensure that Project-financed activities—in
                         particular the UAS demonstration projects that explicitly target underserved rural communities—
                         can be implemented in time to achieve the Project’s development objectives, and reflect changes
                         in technology and telecoms market development in PNG; (b) provide additional support for the
                         ICT policy and regulatory framework; and (c) strengthen implementation capacity by transferring
                         the Project management responsibilities to NICTA, the main beneficiary of the Project and
                         manager of the UAS secretariat.

                         ENVIRONMENT (OP 4.01)
                         The project is expected to have minimal environmental impacts.
                         The technology adopted by the successful bidder for the first UAS Demonstration Project for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provision of voice services is mobile telecommunications. The majority of the potential
                         environmental impacts would therefore be related to construction of mobile network base
                         transceiver stations (BTS) towers for Component 2 (a) for the provision of voice services. In some
                         locations it may be necessary to construct small access roads o r tracks to transport construction
                         materials to the BTS sites, and for routine site maintenance. In some cases such materials would
                         be transported on foot. The majority of sites are expected to be remote, requiring materials for
                         construction and maintenance to be dropped by helicopter. The Environment and Social
                         Assessment (ESA) lists possible localized environmental impacts related to construction of tower
                         sites as follows:
                          (a) construction of access roads for installation of BTS towers and masts, primarily in rural areas
                         that may require cutting of vegetation;
                          (b) impacts on avifauna, insects, and herpitofauna due to collision with the infrastructure and
                         possibility of electromagnetic radiation;
                          (c) spillage of diesel fuel from storage tanks;
                          (d) Visual impacts, given the requirement for painting BTS towers and lighting at night (to alert
                         aircraft).

                         The second UAS demonstration project for the provision of internet services will rollout the
                         following:
                         (a) Mobile Broadband Expansion. New build and/or network upgrade from 2G to 3G + in

                                                                   Page 5 of 10
                         unserved rural areas. Coupled with commercial rollout around major urban areas supported
                         directly by the private sector, this investment will help to bring broadband Internet to the majority
                         of the PNG population within a one- to two- year period; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b) Community Internet centres. Located at eight PNG post-primary schools in district centres.
                         This component will also support user skills development, and facilitate access to teaching and
                         learning materials.
                         The work for this subcomponent entails some construction of 3G-enabled mobile network base
                         transceiver stations towers (BTS), and deployment and operation of computer equipment within
                         existing buildings/premises. Access to the Internet will likely be achieved using mobile
                         telecommunications networks; in some instances some local cabling may be required at the
                         premises. No significant environmental impacts are anticipated from this sub-component.

                         SOCIAL
                          The social impacts of the proposed Demonstration Projects in Component 2 are expected to be
                         largely positive. Potential positive impacts include: access to agricultural price information; ability
                         to obt ain information/advice on health issues; communication with family and friends;
                         organization of important family events and ceremonies, and emergency communications.
                         Potential negative impacts include: impact of costs of phone calls and power supply on household
                         budgets; risk of nuisance calls, particularly for women; risks to family relationships; use of
                         phones to plan robberies and other crimes; and risks of injury/spillage at tower sites due to
                         inadequate site security.

                         The project will have impacts on land use as Component 2 (a) for voice services will require land
                         for the construction of mobile network BTS or cell mobile phone towers, the possible construction
                         of small access roads or tracks, and helicopter landing areas. The project will not finance activities
                         that result in the involuntary resettlement of people, the involuntary acquisition of land, or the sale
                         of customary land. Land use will be based on voluntary negotiations with landowners
                         (communities or other landowning groups). OP 4.12 is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IMPLEMENTATION
                         Implementation progress was extremely slow in the first three years after Board approval, and as
                         at this restructuring in June 2014 the disbursement rate was still at 6 percent. The only progressing
                         component over the last three years has been technical advisory services for the DCI and the
                         NICTA on policy and regulatory development, which have not had impact on safeguards.

                         However, implementation progress is improving. The first UAS demonstration project for the
                         provision of voice services (US$7,055,304) was signed on May 16, 2014 between the Independent
                         State of PNG and Digicel (PNG) Limited. Under this contract, telecommunications points of
                         presence will be installed in 59 sites across all four regions of PNG, and will provide
                         telecommunications services according to specified performance standards to nearly 500,000
                         currently unserved people.

                         NICTA, the implementing entity, has hired an Environmental and Community Liaison Officer
                         who will be specifically in charge of working with the service provider and relevant stakeholders
                         to ensure that the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including the Land
                         Acquisition Guidelines in the Annex of the ESMF, is adhered to in the planning, implementation,
                         monitoring and evaluation. The ESMF include the provision that:
                         (a) the Projects are carried out in accordance with the ESMF, including special features for
                         implementation of the Project in an environmental and culturally appropriate manner;

                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                          (b) no Demonstration Project requires: (i) the involuntary acquisition of land, (ii) the purchase of
                          customary land or the destruction of physical assets (such as housing) or (iii) the purchase or use
                          of land under dispute or investigations; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (c) any Environmental Management Plan prepared in accordance with the ESMF is carried out in
                          accordance with their respective terms.

                          RATIONALE FOR RELEVANCE OF ESMF
                          The proposed changes do not trigger any additional safeguard policies and the Environmental and
                          Social Management Framework (ESMF), including the Land Acquisition Guidelines, that were
                          finalized during preparation applies to any UAS project and is not restricted to specific areas or
                          communities. Despite the time elapsed since the ESFM was prepared, the framework continues to
                          be relevant. Papua New Guinea continues to be almost 100 percent indigenous, having over 800
                          different local tribes, and the majority of Project affected people continue to be indigenous as per
                          the Bank’s policy. Approximately 80 percent of the population continues to reside in rural areas
                          of the country, where the infrastructure will be rolled out as identified during Project preparation.

                          Additionally, the Laws and Acts that were applicable to the development of the ESFM remain to
                          be relevant including the Environment Act, National Parks Act, Conservation Areas Act,
                          Protection and Control Act, Water Resources Act, Forestry Act, Land Act, and the Land
                          Registration Act. The ESMF continues to be a live document, and in the case of any changes to
                          legislation and policies are made over the course of implementation, NICTA is obliged to update
                          the ESMF and associated plans, accordingly.

                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            ENVIRONMENT
                            The BTS tower sites will continue to require maintenance, primarily delivery of fuel to sites and
                           routine repairs. Although there is public and scientific concern over the potential health effects
Public Disclosure Copy




                           associated with exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMFs), there are no conclu
                           sive data demonstrating adverse health effects from exposure to typical EMFs levels from mobile
                           phone communication base transceiver stations. The other long term impact that needs to be
                           closely watched and should be controlled is the opening up of forested or vegetated areas due to
                           access roads and tracks that may lead to human encroachment.

                           SOCIAL
                           The availability of telecommunications and Internet in previously unserved areas will provide
                           communities with access to information on a variety of topics. It will also provide acccess to
                           multi-media entertainment services at various levels of quality.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Alternatives to mobile telecommunications networks are: (a) fixed lines--which would entail
                           substantial civil works and environmental impacts, and (b) satellite communications--which would
                           be similar in nature and scope to mobile telecommunications networks.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Government has conducted an Environmental and Social Assessment of the Rural
                           Communications Infrastructure part of which is the preparation of an Environmental and Social


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                         Management Framework (ESMF) of the project, consistent with the requirements of the
                         Government and the World Bank's safeguard policies. The ESMF includes legal and policy
                         framework, environmental and social impact screening and assessment procedures, environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and management, including environmental guidelines and mitigation measures for the
                         Demonstration Projects in Component 2, as well as recommended guidelines for implementation
                         of all projects financed by the UAS Fund.

                          The ESMF contains the following elements:
                          (a) Background and Objectives of the ESMF;
                          (b) Brief Project Descriptions;
                          (c) Legal and Policy Framework and Analysis;
                          (d) Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Management Procedures;
                          (e) Institutional Arrangements and Capacity Building Program;
                          (f) Annexes including environmental and social safeguards guidelines for:
                          - location of BTS towers, construction and access roads
                          - land use arrangements
                          - good practice construction activities
                          - waste disposal
                          - underground cables
                          - environmental monitoring
                          - awareness and training for oversight institutions, in particular the Department of Environment
                         and NICTA. This includes the development of guidelines for new UAS project screening and
                         monitoring, as well as public consultations on new UAS projects.

                          INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
                         The project triggers OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples as most of the communities in the proposed
                         Demonstration Project areas fulfill the characteristics of indigenous people as per paragraph 4 of
                         OP 4.10. A separate IP Plan has not been prepared, rather the following elements of an IPP have
                         been integrated into project de sign.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (a) The results of a social assessment informed the project design.
                          (b) The requirement for free, prior and informed consultations leading to broad community
                         support is a pre-requisite to subproject requiring land use arrangeme nts. Guidelines for
                         community consultations are provided in the ESMF.
                          (c) A culturally appropriate grievance mechanism will be included in the ESMF. NICTA will
                         assign the responsibility for managing grievances to the community liaison. The final project
                         design will include a culturally-appropriate and accessible grievance mechanism. The increased
                         availability of communications media/tools will also facilitate this.

                          LAND USE
                         The original Project will not finance any activity that requires involuntary resettlement of people,
                         the involuntary acquisition of land, or the sale of customary land. All land use agreements will be
                         based on voluntary agreements and in the case of the use of customary land, bidders will be
                         required to consult with communities and obtain community support prior to carrying out
                         infrastructure works. The ESMF provides guidelines on land use arrangements and community
                         consultations.
                         Compliance with the ESMF will be a requirement in the bidding documents for the Project.

                         Institutional Arrangements
                         The National ICT Authority will coordinate with the Department of Environment and

                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                           Conservation. NICTA have engaged its own staff to monitor this; and also seek expert guidance
                           from DEC, academic institutions and, where feasible, NGOs and CBOs.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the communities targeted in the first (voice) and second (internet) UAS
                           Demonstration Projects and local governments. Field visits and consultations took place at the
                           project preparation stage, and feedback from consultations has been documented in the ESA. The
                           ESA was disclosed on the website of the DCI, and was made available to the public through
                           NICTA and provincial and local level governments as well as at the district level. Materials on the
                           project will be provided in a form and language that will be understood by stakeholders. The
                           timing of disclosure will be notified in local media. NICTA has hired a staff dedicated to
                           implementing the ESMF to coordinate with the services providers to conduct consultations with
                           directly affected communities, and these consultations will continue through the life of the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Feb-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Apr-2010
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Papua New Guinea                                                 31-Mar-2010
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Mar-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Apr-2010
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Papua New Guinea                                                 03-Apr-2010
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [       ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Natasha Beschorner
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 15-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                             Date: 15-Jul-2014




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
