                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6923
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                            Project ID:    P125590
                            Project Name:      North Eastern Road-corridor Asset Management Project (NERAMP) (P125590)
                            Task Team          Negede Lewi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Mar-2014                       Estimated   30-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTTR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (10%), General transportation sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Regional
                                              integration (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), A dministrative and
                                              civil service reform (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     255.00           Total Bank Financing:                243.80
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        11.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              243.80
                              Total                                                                                    255.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to reduce transport costs, enhance road safety, and improve and preserve the road assets
                           sustainably by applying cost effective performance based asset management contracts, along the
                           Tororo - Kamdini road Corridor.

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1 - Road Rehabilitation, Operations and Maintenance (US$241 million). This component
                         will finance long term OPRC for the Tororo - Mbale - Soroti - Lira - Kamdini road (340 km). This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road corridor links South Sudan, parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo, northern and eastern
                         Uganda to the port of Mombasa. The works and services under the OPRC contract will include: (a)
                         the rehabilitation and/ upgrading of sections of the road corridor; (b) routine and periodic
                         maintenance of the whole corridor; and (c) operations which will include management of traffic, road
                         safety and axle load control measures. This component will also finance consultancy services for the
                         Project Management that will be responsible for administering and supervising the OPRC contracts.

                         The North-East Corridor: The project road comprises of the paved road that stretches from Tororo up
                         to Kamdini located in the eastern and north eastern part of Uganda respectively. There are two road
                         corridors from Kamdini: (a) to DRC through Goli and Vurra and onward to South Sudan through
                         Oraba in north western Uganda; and (b) to South Sudan through Nimule in northern Uganda. Thus,
                         the project road is feeding traffic from the Mombasa port to South Sudan, DRC and Uganda. The
                         road traverses mainly a flat to rolling terrain through the districts of Tororo, Mbale, Bukedia, Kumi,
                         Ngora, Soroti, Kaberamaido, Dokolo, Lira, Kole and Oyam.

                         Component 2 Institutional Support (US$14 million). To ensure sustainability, technical assistance to
                         UNRA will focus on designing, awarding, and managing the OPRC contracts. In addition, local
                         stakeholders, including regulatory bodies, auditors, and the local construction industry need support
                         to build their awareness in order to contribute towards the change process in the way the road
                         network is planned, developed and maintained. The following will be provided as a package in order
                         to bring about sustained and lasting culture change to deliver the benefits of OPRC.

                         a)      Asset Management Support and Road Safety (US$ 7.5 million). Technical Assistance (TA)
                         support will be provided in data collection, life cycle cost analysis, development of output
                         specifications for the long term contracts, Monitoring and Evaluation, and reporting on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         performance of pavements and bridges. This component will also finance consultancy services that
                         will prepare asset management contracts for future projects. The Road safety activities are aimed at
                         the reduction of road traffic injuries and fatalities by strengthening the road safety management
                         capacity, and reducing road crashes in the project corridor. The safety interventions under the
                         NECRAMP will build on the lesson learned from “Safeway Right Way (SWRW) initiative”. The
                         component will support the road safety audit, monitoring and evaluation exercise and road safety
                         enhancement measures. It will be closely coordinated with the ongoing activities supported under the
                         TSDP to implement the National Road Safety Policy, the establishment of a National Road Safety
                         Authority (NRSA), and development of the National Road Crash Database.

                         b)      Support in Contract Supervision and Management of OPRC (US$5.5 million). UNRA’s
                         contract management set up is predominantly for managing admeasurement contracts. Consultancy
                         services will be provided to re-organize the contract management and administration systems and
                         practices in UNRA to ensure that OPRC contracts are appropriately supervised and monitored. The
                         component will also provide consultancy services in the areas of safeguards, financial management,
                         and enhancing the contract monitoring system. Support will also be given to the implementation of
                         the CoST initiative which is intended to reinforce good Governance and accountability in the road
                         sub-sector.

                         UNRA needs to influence planning, charging, enforcement, control, and information on the national


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         road network in order to operate the network effectively. Particularly the management of traffic
                         flow, safety and axle load control has to be enhanced in partnership with contractors and other key
                         stakeholders. Thus to improve UNRA’s network management capabilities, support will be provided
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to improve customer services, charging, and enforcement. This will also entail the preparation and
                         implementation of a project communication strategy to disseminate useful information to the public
                         as well as generate and secure a sustained feedback from all stakeholders to maintain or improve the
                         services. OPRC being a new initiative, a robust training program will be defined and prepared as an
                         integral part of the OPRC project, to ensure that UNRA and the road sector at large, appreciate the
                         benefits of OPRC. This will entail, among others, secondment of graduate Engineers on
                         implementation projects and specialist training to UNRA senior staff to skill them in the planning
                         and supervision of output and performance based contracts. Training will also be provided in
                         building the capacity of local contractors in undertaking such output based contracts.

                         c)          Operating Costs (US$1.0 million). The Project will finance costs of the implementation
                         that are directly related to NECRAMP implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         PProject activities will include rehabilitation and/ upgrading and routine and periodic maintenance as
                         well as instituting road safety measures and traffic management along the road corridor of Tororo –
                         Mbale –Soroti-Lira-Kamidini road (340 km), traversing through the districts of Tororo, Manafa,
                         Mbale (Eastern Uganda), Bukedea, Kumi, Ngora, Soroti, Kaberamaido (North-East Uganda),
                         Dokolo, Lira, and Oyam (Northern Uganda). This is an existing important transport corridor linking
                         the Republic of South Sudan, parts of the Democratic Republic of Congo, northern and eastern
                         Uganda with the port of Mombasa. This is an existing road and the Social & Environmental impacts
                         generic to upgrading, rehabilitation, and maintenance works of existing roads will be predictable,
                         localized and readily mitigated. However, there could be some land acquisition for possible road re-
                         alignment, borrow-pit areas, management of soil spoil material, establishment of workers camps,
                         equipment storage areas, acquisition and operation of stone quarry site which may have substantial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social impacts. In addition, these road works may impact the existing ecosystems
                         along the road including, but not limited to wetlands, forest plantations adjacent to the road, Physical
                         Cultural resources. The project may also involve a trial project during development of standards for
                         alternative road construction materials. The proposed project has potential impacts on HIV/AIDS
                         associated issues, gender and poverty reduction.

                         The project could therefore raise social (including HIV/AIDS, Gender & poverty reduction) and
                         environmental impacts that need to be addressed. To adequately address the environmental and social
                         impacts of the project, UNRA has prepared, with the support of the consultant COWI, an
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                         (RPF) to provide basic guidance on how environmental and social issues shall be assessed and
                         managed during project implementation. The framework approach is recommended as the design of
                         the road will be done by the contractor under the OPRC considering the prevailing conditions of the
                         road. The environment management actions will be one of the factors to determine the final
                         engineering road design. The ESMF includes issues of HIV/AIDS, gender and poverty reduction
                         implications, whereas the RPF has provided guidance for management of any involuntary
                         resettlement that may result during implementation of the project. Both frameworks provide
                         processes for grievance redress. The ESMF, that included a chance find procedure for Physical
                         Cultural Resources (PCR), and RPF has been prepared and disclosed in country on February 7, 2014.
                         Specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) including Environmental and Social


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Management Plans (ESMP) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as and when
                         necessary during implementation and will be guided by the ESMF and RPF. The ESIAs and RAPs
                         will be prepared and disclosed before commencement of civil works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes            Although the road corridor is known (existing),
                         BP 4.01                                          the detailed road design is has not yet been done.
                                                                          A framework approach for safeguards was
                                                                          recommended as the design of the road will be
                                                                          done by the contractor under the OPRC
                                                                          considering the prevailing conditions of the road.
                                                                          An ESMF was prepared, consulted upon, and
                                                                          disclosed before appraisal. Subsequent ESIAs
                                                                          (ESMPs) will be undertaken during
                                                                          implementation before the start of any civil
                                                                          works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes            The natural habitats along the road project include
                                                                          rivers, wetlands, and forest plantations. The
                                                                          framework for management of environmental
                                                                          impacts of the road asset management project on
                                                                          the natural habitats has been incorporated in the
                                                                          ESMF. Where applicable, the ESMPs will
                                                                          incorporate the management of impacts of the
                                                                          project on the Natural Habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes            There are no natural forests along the road
                                                                          corridor. However, there are a few forest
                                                                          plantations of mainly eucalyptus and pine tree
                                                                          species. The framework for management of
                                                                          environmental impacts of the road asset
                                                                          management project on the natural habitats has
                                                                          been incorporated in the ESMF. Where
                                                                          applicable, the ESMPs developed during
                                                                          implementation shall incorporate the management
                                                                          of impacts of the project on the forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project does not involve pest management
                                                                          issues.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            Because of the excavation works that will be
                         BP 4.11                                          undertaken during the road works a chance find
                                                                          procedure for PCR has been developed as part of
                                                                          the ESMF and shall be implemented during
                                                                          contract implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No



                                                                  Page 4 of 9
                                                                                 There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes             area.
                                                                                 The project may require land acquisition in areas
                            4.12                                                 of road realignment/widening. While the road
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 corridor is known/exists, the design is not yet
                                                                                 developed and therefore the exact impact on land
                                                                                 acquisition and subsequent resettlement/
                                                                                 compensation could not be defined before project
                                                                                 appraisal. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                 Framework (RPF) has been prepared, consulted
                                                                                 upon, and disclosed before project appraisal.
                                                                                 Where appropriate, Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                                 (RAPs) will be prepared as may be defined by the
                                                                                 detailed design of the works. While the project
                                                                                 could involve small amounts of land take from
                                                                                 PAPs along the RoW, major resettlement is not
                                                                                 anticipated.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project does not involve dam related works.

                            Projects on International        No                  The project does not affect international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  There are no disputed areas along the project
                            7.60                                                 corridor.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project activities will include rehabilitation and/ upgrading and routine and periodic
                              maintenance as well as instituting road safety measures and traffic management along the existing
                              road corridor of Tororo – Mbale – Soroti – Lira – Kamdini Road (340km). The Project has been
                              assigned Environmental Category B because the environmental impacts generic to upgrading,
                              rehabilitation, and maintenance works of existing roads will be predictable, localized and readily
                              mitigated. The potential environmental impacts of the proposed road corridor project include:
                              clearance of trees and other vegetation due to realignment and road works, road cuts, fills and
                              embankments, change in hydrology and drainage patterns and increase in sediment load of
                              swamps and waterways as a result of widening the road embankment across wetlands, and soil and
                              water contamination due to spillage and leakage of oils and other toxic materials, noise, dust and
                              air pollution from road works, health & safety issues, acquisition & operation of borrow pits and
                              stone quarries. There is no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated
                              given the fact that the proposed road corridor follows the existing road alignment, with likely road
                              re-alignment not causing any displacement of households, but rather displacing land-uses and
                              economic activities.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None



                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           At this stage and under OPRC, the final road design including the specific road works required for
                           the various sections and timing is not yet determined. ESMF and RPF were developed for the
                           project in close consultation with key stakeholders. The ESMF provides guidance for assessing of
                           the potential environmental and social impacts of project during implementation. The ESMF
                           established clear guidelines and methodologies for the identification and assessment of
                           environmental and social impacts. It gives clear guidance for environmental screening, preparation
                           of environmental assessments with basic TORs, as well as preparation of Environmental and
                           Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The ESMF has established basic TORs for EA of Road
                           Works; TORs for EA of Stone Quarries; Guidelines for acquisition and operation of borrow pits;
                           guidelines for establishment of Equipment Storage yards/ Workers Camp, etc. The ESMF also
                           outlines a framework for managing and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the
                           project, including management and handling of physical cultural resources through a chance Finds
                           Procedure, minimizing impacts on the natural habitats, and a mechanism for addressing
                           grievances. Specific ESIA including ESMPs and RAPs will be prepared as and when necessary
                           during implementation and will be guided by the ESMF and RPF. The ESIAs and RAPs will be
                           prepared and disclosed before commencement of any civil/road works. The following approvals
                           and clearances shall be obtained before commencement of road works: National Environment
                           Management Authority (NEMA)- EIA Certificates of approval, National Forest- A Forest areas
                           approval, MoU with Umeme, National Information Technology Authority (NITA) & National
                           Water and Sanitation Corporation (NWSC) to relocate any respective electricity, IT & water
                           service infrastructure along the road reserves.

                          Meanwhile Safeguards capacity assessment of the implementing agency UNRA indicates that they
Public Disclosure Copy




                          have sufficient experience in implementation of Bank financed projects and are thus acquainted
                          with environmental safeguards requirements. There is an established Social and Environment Unit
                          under the Directorate of Planning. UNRA has one (01) Environmental Specialist to coordinate,
                          supervise, monitor and report on the implementation of the environmental aspects of the road
                          projects. UNRA has experienced implementation challenges with regard to ongoing projects such
                          as Transport Sector Development Project (TSDP). The key challenges under TSDP include
                          inadequate monitoring and supervision by the Safeguards staff, failure to ensure timely conduct of
                          relevant environmental assessments for stone quarries, non-management and follow-up of
                          environmental and social impacts, and non-submission of the required quarterly environmental
                          reports. Apparently, the current staffing level appears to be overwhelmed by the numerous projects
                          UNRA is undertaking. During the pre-appraisal of the NCERAMP UNRA’s institutional
                          arrangements and environmental and social safeguards capacity to implement the ESMF and RPF
                          were assessed, and recommendations made to strengthen the unit by recruiting Environmental
                          Officer, Sociologist, and Right of Way Officer, in light of the finding that the current capacity is
                          being over stretched by the many projects the Authority is undertaking.

                          However, at District level, there are District Environment and Community Development Officers
                          who may be involved in project implementation especially by monitoring project activities in their
                          respective areas of jurisdiction and reporting in a timely manner any issues that need to be
                          addressed either directly to UNRA or through NEMA. A monitoring mechanism that involves the


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           district officials has been proposed in the ESMF and this is will strengthen UNRA’s field
                           monitoring and reporting capacity.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During compilation of the ESMF and RPF, the community along the road corridor, key district
                           technical and political leaders were consulted in the District Local Governments of Tororo, Mbale,
                           Bukedea, Kumi, Soroti, and Lira. Consultations with the listed districts took place at the respective
                           district offices through face to face meetings and discussions. Detailed consultations with Project
                           Affected Persons (PAPs) shall be undertaken during implementation along the project route at
                           major trading centers and at sites of road re-alignment before start of any civil works through the
                           Resettlement Action Planning process. Where necessary, respective Government Central Agencies
                           deemed shall be consulted for any guidance and collaboration that may be required especially
                           where some infrastructure or resources may need to be relocated or handled professionally. These
                           may include water lines, electricity power lines, PCRs, etc. Mobilization of local communities
                           (PAPs) shall be done though the Local Leaders (Local Councils) and through the Local FM Radio
                           stations. All consultations shall be undertaken in local languages with exception of district and
                           central government agencies consultations where English shall be used as medium of
                           communication. All safeguard documents prepared to address the triggered safeguard policies
                           have been disclosed both in-country and at infoshop, as appropriate. The ESMF and RPF have
                           been prepared and disclosure before project appraisal on February 7, 2014 and the ESIAs/ESMPs
                           and RAPs shall be prepared, during project implementation, consulted upon and disclosed both in
                           country and at infoshop before start of the applicable civil works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           07-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           07-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         PCRs management included and disclosed in the ESMF.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Negede Lewi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 13-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                    Date: 01-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
