                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6126

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ghana                           Project ID:      P145741
                            Project Name:      Ghana Secondary Education Improvement Project (P145741)
                            Task Team          Deborah Newitter Mikesell
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Mar-2014                     Estimated        20-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00                Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                100.00
                              Total                                                                      100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           21.     The proposed Project Development Objective is to increase access and improve equity and
                           quality of secondary education in Ghana. This objective is in line with the Government policy to
                           increase equitable access to high quality second cycle education that prepares young adults for the
                           various options available within tertiary education and the workplace. The PDO also aims to support
                           the government strategy to expand access and quality in an affordable and sustainable manner.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would support senior secondary education through a five-year US$100 million
                         Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument using a results-based-lending approach.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Increase Access with Equity

                         25.      The objective of this results area is to expand access to secondary education in under served
                         communities by constructing new schools, expanding enrollment in under subscribed schools, and
                         de-congesting oversubscribed schools. This component assumes government expansion of
                         infrastructure in a targeted and equitable manner. An expected increase in enrollment championed
                         by the government should focus on the poor who either cannot afford or have limited physical access
                         to SHS services. The Government aims to construct new senior high schools, expand and rehabilitate
                         existing schools and carefully target these investments based on transparent criteria. Since the
                         majority of the students presently are coming from the upper 50% of the population, building the
                         supply without targeting will only further contribute to inequity. The MOE’s policy of one
                         secondary school per district implies that newly created districts would have new secondary schools
                         if the justification could be made for the supporting catchment area.

                         26.     The cost of building space for one additional student roughly equals the costs of providing
                         the wages for the teachers and other services. Therefore, part of the planned expansion should be
                         providing the per capita expenditures (unit costs plus investment) to SHS institutions who assure
                         additional intake. Calculations for 2013 put the estimated annual unit cost per student at around
                         GHC600 (six hundred Ghana Cedis). Redirection of SHS subsidies could also be used to support
                         student spaces for poorer students. Expansion should not leave out the role of the private sector both
                         in terms of PPPs to facilitate the expansion of SHS infrastructure and private SHSs participating in
                         the expanded services. A cost-effective way of further expanding the physical capacities is through
                         performance agreements to existing public or private institutions to expand and provide services to
                         newly admitted students.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         27.      Program results: The detailed program has not yet been finalized, but current indications are
                         that access with equity interventions would focus on the following programs: (a) new school
                         construction for 23 districts without a SHS, in districts where the relevant population demands
                         additional classrooms and in existing institutions with capacity to expand; (b) rehabilitation of
                         existing secondary school structures in under served areas; (c) expansion of classrooms, laboratory,
                         library, workshops, in existing secondary school structures in under served areas; (d) scholarships for
                         poor students to attend secondary school (public or private); and/or (e) performance agreements with
                         institutions (public and private) to expand and provide services to newly admitted students.

                         28.      Disbursement linked indicators would include financing for outcomes of the above programs
                         determined by year. Pre-financing is provided through Year 0 indicators (based on already met
                         indicators such as package of final bidding documents for all school related construction/expansion
                         or school survey/mapping exercise completed). Other DLIs could include school grants for
                         rehabilitation and upgrading transferred for first year; timely reporting on school indicators
                         (attendance, performance, enrollment); scholarship transfers targeted to poorest students verified;
                         number of new spaces provided by under subscribed schools; all requisite recurrent costs allocated
                         for new schools constructed in under served areas. Eligible expenditures budget lines could include
                         SIP subsidies, compensation for secondary teachers, or scholarship program.

                         29.     A key requirement for undertaking these investments would be accurate mapping of public,
                         private secondary schools with estimated relevant population figures, condition of schools, and scope
                         for expansion. Expansion will need to be based on realistic planning of human resource needs,
                         recurrent costs, progressive financing with cost-sharing as long as access remains inequitable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subsidies provided to the top SHS schools could be refocused on providing scholarships to students
                         coming from poor families and communities. Private sector participation will be critical for
                         encouraging most cost-effective expansion.

                         30.     Measuring results for Access with Equity: Potential performance indicators could include:
                         Gross enrollment in SHS in beneficiary districts. Intermediate indicators might include: Additional
                         classrooms built or rehabilitated; Number Improved school facilities in beneficiary districts; number
                         of scholarships; number of performance agreements.

                         Component 2: Quality and Relevance of Secondary School Teaching and Learning

                         31.      The objective of this results area is to improve learning, with a focus on math, science, and/
                         or ICT in low performing senior secondary schools. Improved quality would require reliable and
                         consistent transfer of resources from key sources of financing (GOG, GET Fund, etc.), effective
                         leadership, accountability mechanisms, competent teachers, committed non-teaching staff and
                         increased financing from communities. The allocation of trained teachers would need to be
                         rationalized. Other key measures to improve school administration could include incentives and
                         enforcement of sanctions, management and administrative training for School Heads, school boards,
                         and PTAs. In addition, schools may need to focus on curriculum modifications, remedial support,
                         ICT training and teacher professional development.

                         32.      For the majority of the students, SHS will be the terminal level of education, and the schools
                         should be incentivized to engage in innovative employment, entrepreneurial, job and business skills
                         training programs. All public SHS schools should have increasing accountability for performance,
                         incentives to expand services and engage in knowledge sharing. The goal is to make upper secondary
                         education more broadly competitive for both public and private SHS schools. Accountability and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         competitiveness means providing more information to parents and better services to host
                         communities. The project could support annual publication of school characteristics, performance
                         and teacher attendance. Private schools could also be eligible for performance grants to encourage
                         their contribution to improving government agenda to improve quality.

                         33.      Program Results: The detailed program has not yet been finalized, but current indications are
                         that quality and relevance interventions would focus on the following: (a) incentives and resources
                         for school improvement plans through proposal based quality activities; (b) performance contracts to
                         improve on-time completion of syllabus and WASSCE pass rates, particularly in math, science and
                         ICT; (c) introduction/enhancement of (new) programs in secondary schools; (d) empowerment of
                         Heads of Institutions, PTAs and School Boards to improve accountability for school management;
                         (e) strengthened supervision at school, district, regional levels; (f) twinning arrangements and
                         exchanges between high performing schools and low performing schools; (g) effective teacher
                         allocation, supervision and consistent professional development and training; (h) link to funding
                         from e-Transform to support ICT education and greater internet connectivity; (i) funding for short
                         courses in life skills, innovation, business and entrepreneurial skills; (j) mentoring of students; and
                         (k) incentives for teachers based on performance.

                         34.     Potential Disbursement Linked Indicators: These indicators would indicate year on year
                         school implementation capacity to carry out the above quality interventions. DLIs could include:
                         Budget allocations and expenditures from all financing sources available and reported on;
                         Availability and quality of teachers to be employed by the expanded facilities; Increased supervision
                         and INSET of teachers; ICT roll out; Replacement of allowances to trainees of colleges of education
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with student loan facility; Reduction in study leave with pay; Employment of graduates from
                         teaching universities to fill new vacancies; or Teacher deployment policy enforced. Eligible
                         expenditures budget lines could be SIP subsidies, compensation for secondary teachers, school grants
                         program.

                         35.      Measuring results for Quality: Potential performance indicators could include the following:
                         Share of SHS3 students registering for the WASSCE final examination (%); WASSCE examination
                         pass rate in math and science (%) for low performing beneficiary schools; Retention rate for SHS1
                         and SHS2 by program. Intermediate indicators: SHS School Grants; Broadband connectivity;
                         School Report card/annual reporting for all schools; number new programs introduced.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance and management support

                         36.      The objective of this component is to contribute to improved efficiency and effectiveness of
                         secondary schools. This component would provide essential capacity building and technical and
                         advisory support related to the GOG secondary strategy. These activities would be financed
                         following standard investment lending procedures and would enhance the capacity for monitoring
                         and reporting as well as sector analysis to inform the government program and strengthen the
                         available data for policy makers. It could also finance the review of education financing and
                         projections, definition of minimum standards, analysis of unit costs; analysis of the relevance of the
                         curriculum and scope for sustainable investments. The activities would complement ongoing
                         investments and activities implemented by the government. This component would also provide
                         rigorous monitoring and evaluation activities, including support for independent verification of
                         disbursement linked indicators and achievement of results; expenditure tracking surveys; and
                         possible impact evaluations. Support for strengthening the partnership between the MOE, MOFEP
                         and the Ghana Statistical Service could also be funded. One of the critical areas would be how to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         better engage with the private sector and how to increase private financing for the sector in a more
                         equitable manner. The recent mapping work on Education Markets could guide this analysis.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is to expand access to secondary education in underserved communities by constructing
                         new schools, expanding enrollment in under subscribed schools, and de-congesting oversubscribed
                         schools. This component assumes government expansion of infrastructure in a targeted and equitable
                         manner. An expected increase in enrollment championed by the government should focus on the
                         poor who either cannot afford or have limited physical access to SHS services. The Government aims
                         to construct new senior high schools, expand and rehabilitate existing schools and carefully target
                         these investments based on transparent criteria. Since the majority of the students presently are
                         coming from the upper 50% of the population, building the supply without targeting will only further
                         contribute to inequity.

                         Environment and social safeguards issues will be addressed using the Updated Environment and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF) of GPEG sub-projects. The updated ESMF will include the
                         environmental checklist for sub-projects to assist to screen and carry out environmental appraisal of
                         investments they make; prescribed a set of mitigation and monitoring measures during
                         implementation and operation of the sub-projects. Participating entities are also equipped to identify
                           potential environmental and social impacts of sub-projects and to address them by incorporating the
                           relevant mitigation measures into the designs of the sub-projects. New school construction will be
                           funded under the project and not of all of the sites will be known at the time of appraisal. Therefore,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared. In the cases where the sites are known by
                           appraisal, an abbreviated RAP will be prepared if there is land acquisition and/or any resettlement.
                           Site selection for school construction will seek to avoid resettlement as well as ensuring the
                           appropriate equity targeting.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           52.     Social Safeguards: The social impact of the project, by the nature of its development
                           objective is positive. While the project will avoid where possible adverse impacts on people, land
                           and other economic resources and livelihoods, the Involuntary Resettlement policy will likely be
                           triggered owing to the plan to acquire lands for new school construction. A Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) would need to be prepared by the government and disclosed in country and in the
                           World Bank infoshop prior to appraisal to mitigate any adverse impacts in situations where this can’t
                           be avoided. If the sites have already been selected then Resettlement Action Pans would need to be
                           prepared for each site (as needed) demonstrating that the government has been responsive to
                           community inputs, avoided negative impacts and made applicable compensation if required (as per
                           RPF guidelines).

                           53.     Environmental Safeguards: The Government of Ghana is familiar with World Bank
                           environment and social safeguards policies. Some of the personnel who have been trained on
                           safeguards and fiduciary management from existing WB/IDA assisted projects are available and have
                           successfully implemented projects, including use of relevant environment and social safeguards
                           frameworks.

                           The existing Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which is applied to GPEG
                           project, will be updated and used for the Ghana Secondary School Project activities. Although there
                           are no serious environmental or social consequences expected, the ESMF has specific guidance for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           indicating if an ESMP will be required. This determination will be made during the initial safeguards
                           screening for project activities. Similarly, the initial safeguards screening for projects will
                           incorporate the principles in the RPF, specifically to avoid or minimize land acquisition or
                           resettlement. School sites will be screened to determine the status of the land for the proposed sites
                           and to determine any additional issues relevant under OP 4.12.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
                           Moses Yao Duphey (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project potential environmental and social
                           BP 4.01                                               impacts resulting from project activities related
                                                                                 to school infrastructure rehabilitation, expansion
                                                                                 and construction has triggered the Environment
                                                                                 Assessment OP 4.10. Since the exact location
                                                                                 of investments and/or services are not known,
                                                                 Government of Ghana would update the current
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework (ESMF) which was recently
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 disclosed in 2012, and has the basis to ensure
                                                                 that all prospective investments are adequately
                                                                 screened for their potential environmental and
                                                                 social impacts, and the mitigation measures to
                                                                 be adopted are reflected in the updated ESMF
                                                                 document. The ESMF will provide the
                                                                 framework within which all negative
                                                                 environmental and social will be addressed
                                                                 including the environmental clauses to be
                                                                 inserted in contractors’ bidding documents. The
                                                                 updated ESMF would provide a helpful
                                                                 screening process for infrastructure investments
                                                                 for which exact locations are not known prior to
                                                                 appraisal. The updated and revised ESMF will
                                                                 be disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   The project is not expected to take place in or
                                                                 near natural habitats, but this will be confirmed
                                                                 by appraisal.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This project does not involve or affect forests or
                                                                 forestry.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This project does not involve pest management.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This project is not expected to affect or involve
                         BP 4.11                                 physical cultural resources; however Chance
                                                                 Finds procedures would be in place for any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 eventuality. The triggering of the policy will be
                                                                 confirmed by appraisal.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project activities will avoid where possible
                         4.12                                    adverse impacts on people, land and other
                                                                 economic resources and livelihoods, and the
                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement policy will be
                                                                 triggered as school construction may require
                                                                 land acquisition. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                 Framework (RPF) would need to be prepared by
                                                                 the government, consulted upon, and disclosed
                                                                 in country and at the World Bank Infoshop prior
                                                                 to appraisal. Where the sites have already been
                                                                 selected, Resettlement Action Plans (likely
                                                                 abbreviated due to the scope of impact) will be
                                                                 prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before
                                                                 appraisal for each site. Once sites are selected
                                                                                                                                 during implementation, RAPs will be prepared
                                                                                                                                 in line with the RPF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF is already being updated with support from the World Bank environmental safeguards
                                      specialist and should be ready for consultation and discussions with stakeholders by December
                                      2013. The launching of the RPF has begun and the client is hiring a consultant to support the
                                      development of the framework in addition to advising on the need for Resettlement Action Plans
                                      for sites that have already been selected. The RPF would be drafted by January 2013 and
                                      reviewed by the Bank.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Deborah Newitter Mikesell

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 28-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                                                                                            Date: 28-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
