                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA1171

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Malawi                             Project ID:    P148617
                                                        Parent         P133620
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:     MASAF IV Strengthening of Safety Nets Systems Additional Finance (P148617)
   Parent Project    Strengthening Safety Nets Systems - MASAF IV (P133620)
   Name:
   Task Team         Peter Ivanov Pojarski,Ivan Drabek
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         20-Feb-2015                        Estimated   26-Mar-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GSPDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Other social services (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                     (25%), Irrigation and drainage (10%), Primary educatio n (10%), Agro-industry,
                     marketing, and trade (5%)
   Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (50%), Social
                     Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (50%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      75.00           Total Bank Financing:                75.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              6.50
     IDA Grant                                                                               68.50
     Total                                                                                   75.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                             Page 1 of 11
Is this a            Yes
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objective of the proposed project is to strengthen Malawi’s social
   safety net delivery systems and coordination across programs.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The proposed MASAF IV would be implemented using an Investment Project Financing (IPF) for a
period of 4 years starting in January 2014. The project is a second generation safety net which would
improve key safety net programs; and support the building blocks fora coordinated and systematic
approach to safety nets. It would complement MASAF III and would innovate by improving the
Social Cash Transfers Program, Public Works program through MASAF and COMSIP and the
capacities of implementing agencies and ministries to support the key building blocks of a safety net
system - Integrated and Coordinated Social Safety Nets Program. The goal of the new Program, to be
supervised and coordinated through MASAF under the LDF-TST mechanism, would be to reduce
vulnerability and extreme poverty and improve livelihoods, resilience and quality-of-life for the poor.
The Program would focus on safeguarding people and the environment, on which their livelihood
depends, through linkages between agriculture, food security, water, irrigation, social welfare,
vulnerability, poverty, children and gender issues. The program would be designed on the basis of
the following principles: (i) Fair and transparent client selection (ii) Timely, predictable transfers (iii)
Gender Equity (iv) Participatory planning and (v) Environment protection. The Program approach
would be an area and watershed management and development for building food security,
livelihoods, and resilience against natural disasters through community identified and managed PWs,
livelihood programs and social cash transfers.

The proposed three components, detailed below, aim at contributing to the GoM’s National Social
Policy goals of:
•       supporting the most vulnerable and poorest households with
•       appropriate and easily accessible, timely cash transfers and support through
•       socially accountable, harmonized and coordinated set of programs which are
•       flexible and able to respond to vulnerability and crisis.

Component I: Productive Safety Nets: This component would focus on three safety net programs: (a)
cash transfers through labor on productive community driven public works which build productive
community assets; (b) social cash transfers for those who are most vulnerable and labor constrained
including the elderly, disabled and sick; and (c) livelihood and skill development interventions for
poor households.
Productive Community Driven Public Works would finance cash transfers for public works and
multiple community driven assets through investments in productive public works. Community


                                               Page 2 of 11
driven productive public works would create assets in the same communities for multiple years
designed to increase impact on household level incomes and food security and reduce households’
exposure to risks associated with climate change and other disasters. The design would follow and
area development watershed management approach. Communities priorities include those related to
water supply and irrigation, bridges, storage facilities for maize and other grains, maize mills, oil
mills, afforestation, nurseries for seedling cultivation, soil and water conservation through check
dams for gully transformation, solar stoves, fish ponds, solar panels, mobile bicycle ambulances, and
health posts.
Livelihoods and skills development would finance grants for increasing household level incomes and
assets savings and investments in livelihood opportunities through Community Savings and
Investment Promotion groups. The grants would promote investments which would increase incomes
and assets of households and reduce risks of food insecurity and promote better nutrition and health.
Such grants would fund, for example, grain storage facilities, grain mills, livestock and crop
diversification etc. and catering of food for school meals through kitchen gardens. The sub-
component would also finance training in nutrition, health and enterprises. During implementation
potential for offering risk insurance against crop failure, to members will be explored. The
Cooperative Society Act 1998t , under the Ministry of Industry and Trade, requires cooperatives to
have an office as a meeting place. This is a burden on the COMSIP groups whose savings would be
better used to improve their productive assets and livelihoods. COMSIP is now seeking a waiver to
delay this requirement so that members of cooperatives can use their savings for productive
livelihoods.
Social Cash Transfers: This sub component would finance support for capacity building, technical
assistance and cash transfers to strengthen the existing system which is targeted to the poorest and
most vulnerable labor constrained households. The SCT currently functions in 8 districts. The sub
component would finance cash transfers to another two districts and cover 21,000 ultra-poor labor
constrained households in the two districts of Dedza and Nkhata Bay. The SCT program is expected
to be in all districts by 2015. The SCT provides an opportunity to reach the most
vulnerableMalawians through a Program which uses, proxy means targeting through the use of
poverty scorecard survey and community verification techniques. It delivery of transfers include E-
transfers. The Social Cash Transfers Program is financed by KfW, Irish Aid, EU and UNICEF.
Targeting and identification of beneficiaries will continue to use proxy-means testing and community
verification methods. The project will continue financial and technical support to COMSIP, a large
ongoing program developed by the Bank under MASAF III to encourage savings and investment in
underserved rural and peri-urban communities as a tool for its members to withstand sudden losses of
income and food insecurity. COMSIP will provide matching grants to its members’ savings that can
be used towards training and small investments in a range of areas, such as retailing, small –scale
enterprises (agricultural produce, investment in livestock, cash crop farming, and production such as
bakery, winery, and mushroom growing), bee keeping, irrigation farming, among others.

Component II: Systems and Capacity Building. This component would finance investments in
strengthening systems and capacity building to finance technical assistance, training, staff and
equipment for improving targeting through the SCT and MASAF-LDF; a unified registry system and
databases for monitoring and evaluation. It would finance technical assistance, training, staff and
equipment for improving targeting through the SCT and MASAF-LDF; a beneficiary registry system
and databases for monitoring and evaluation.
(i) Targeting: This sub-component would finance investments in technical assistance and capacity
building to strengthen and refine the unified registry systems and targeting mechanisms for SCT and
for MASAF-LDF. The proposed project would take an area development approach and would test,
scale up and strengthen an existing mix or a hybrid of targeting in struments. GoM plans to establish

                                            Page 3 of 11
a Unified Registry System of all citizens in Malawi using a proxy means targeting formula and is
moving forward with the creation of a National ID Card. There are also plans for linking citizen
wealth ranking through a dedicated serial number to the National ID Card. However, this will take
time and will probably not be implemented within the preparation time frame for the proposed
MASAF IV. Nevertheless, these developments could over time, during implementation, be
incorporated into the new SP Program for the purposes of client targeting and delivery of services.
(ii) Unified Registries and MIS: This subcomponent will finance investments in a unified registry
data base for all beneficiaries of social safety net programs that could be used for a number of cash
transfers and service delivery programs targeted to the vulnerable. This subcomponent would
strengthen and build on the SCT registry of the extreme poor as well as the beneficiary lists covered
under the MASAF IV public works. The list would be refined on the basis of poverty criteria.
(iii) Monitoring and Evaluation: This subcomponent will finance investments in the MIS system for
SCT and for MASAF. Under MASAF IV, community based participatory planning, monitoring and
the maintaining and updating of databases would be strengthened for the MASAF and for the Social
Cash Transfers programs.
(iv) Training of Staff: This subcomponent would finance the training of community extension
workers and other District Council staff who would participate in the delivery of safety nets under
MASAF IV. Districts as well as the Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Welfare expressed
needs related to strengthening extension workers capacity through training in community
development and mobility challenges that limit regular travel to villages for supervision and
monitoring.
(v) Social Accountability (SA): This sub component would finance the refining, strengthening and
implementation of social accountability mechanisms. It would support developing the capacity of a
local research institution to implement SA tools.
(vi) Increasing Environmentally Friendly Initiatives: This sub component would finance piloting and
introducing environment friendly technologies into communities and it would strengthen the capacity
of the line Ministries to undertake and implement such initiatives. Malawi faces countrywide
challenges related to environmental degradation.

Component III: Project Management. The LDF-TST mechanism has evolved over the years from
implementing MASAF I which was focused on community development and participatory
approaches to safety nets to having become the GoM’s key supervisory and coordinating capacity for
carrying out several windows of financing for infrastructure programs. For example, school, block
and teachers’ staff house construction under the multi-donor financed Education Sector Wide
Approach Program (ESWAP). The LDF-TST has a capable staff that is professional and
knowledgeable. However, additional capacity development and training in community and watershed
management approaches and building linkages with all development practitioners in these areas in
the country would need to be supported. The window under the LDF-TST mechanism, which is
meant for MASAF will su pervise and coordinate the World Bank-financed MASAF IV and would
focus entirely on the new community driven Safety Nets Program.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
MASAF IV is to be implemented countrywide and will include activities (to be determined during
project implementation) that are demanded by the community. Some examples of sub projects may
include those related to water supply and irrigation, bridges, storage facilities for maize and other
grains, maize mills, oil mills, afforestation, nurseries for seedling development, soil and water
conservation activities, solar stoves, solar panels, mobile bicycle ambulances, and health posts.
Productive Community Driven Public Works activities will be carried out in rural communities


                                             Page 4 of 11
across Malawi’s three regions (Northern, Central and Southern), selected on specific criteria to be
outlined in the MASAF IV Program Implementation Manual. COMSIP investments are based on
specific criteria outlined in the COMSIP Guidelines. Component 3 of MASAF IV proposes
investments in the Malawi Social Cash Transfer (SCT) Program. It is currently implemented in 8
districts including: Mchinji, Mangochi, Machinga, Salima, Chitipa, Phalombe, Likoma and Balak.
MASAF IV would see the expansion of the Program to two additional districts: Dedza and Nkhata
Bay.

The activities expected to be supported under the program will be those that improve the
management of natural resources and prevent land degradation through afforestation and appropriate
biophysical soil and water conservation activities such as hill side terracing, soil and stone bunds,
micro basins, gully control and treatment structures, tree planting, area closures etc. Other activities
may include; improved agricultural land productivities through technologies that promote soil
fertility and conserve soil moisture (agro forestry, forage development, compost making, etc.);
promoting access to existing water sources and also promoting rain water conservation and
harvesting technologies; improving market infrastructure through construction of rural farm to
market roads, bridges and community level grain and food storage facilities; improving access to
drinking and irrigation water through development of springs shallow wells, and water ponds;
increasing availability of fodder through vegetative fencing and multi-purpose nurseries; and
improving school and health facilities through repairing and constructing classroom and health
facilities. Certain sub-projects are not eligible under the public works, such as sub-projects that
degrade the environment and subprojects which are a significant burden to and have the possibility of
depleting communities existing resources.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)

6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment          Yes            Some project activities involving construction,
OP/BP 4.01                                       however small, are likely to have adverse
                                                 environmental impacts (such as loss of vegetation,
                                                 soil erosion, siltation, pesticides poisoning, traffic
                                                 accidents, dust, water run-off, etc.). Borrower has
                                                 updated the parent-project ESMF to make it
                                                 consistent for activities proposed under the MASAF
                                                 IV project. It also defines environment and social
                                                 due diligence requirements for each sub-project
                                                 activities based on its size, scale, location and
                                                 significance of environment and social impacts, and
                                                 accordingly prepare, consult upon, and disclose an
                                                 Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                 (ESMP). Each sub project involving new
                                                 construction and/or rehabilitation activities such as
                                                 small-scale irrigation schemes, water supply and
                                                 sanitation, feeder roads and bridges etc. will be pre-
                                                 screened for environmental and social risks. This will
                                                 lead to preparation, consultation about, and


                                             Page 5 of 11
                                         disclosure of site specific ESMP based on site
                                         specific consultation with communities and site
                                         characteristics. The ESMF has been prepared,
                                         consulted upon, and disclosed in-country and at the
                                         InfoShop before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No        MASAF will not fund any sub-projects that will have
                                         negative effects on natural habitats and subprojects
                                         affecting natural habitats will be systematically
                                         excluded.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes       The policy is triggered due to the likely forest
                                         harvesting and reforestation activities involving
                                         woodlots and nurseries under MASAF IV. The
                                         ESMF includes recommended mitigative measures,
                                         and procedures to ensure adequate consultation with
                                         local people and mitigation of any of project
                                         activities during project implementation.
Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes       This policy is triggered as MASAF IV support for
                                         agricultural sub-projects may increase the use of
                                         agro-chemicals. Although the scale of application
                                         may be small, the risks associated with pesticides
                                         will require to be managed to minimize the potential
                                         social, environmental, health and safety risks
                                         involved. The Pest Management Plan (PMP) has
                                         been updated to support MASAF IV activities. LAs
                                         will rely on guidelines for implementation of
                                         pesticides management under sub-projects as
                                         coordinated by the Director of Crops, Ministry of
                                         Agriculture, or, the Crops Officer at the District
                                         level.
Physical Cultural Resources    Yes       Subprojects activities may involve civil works that
OP/BP 4.11                               could encounter or affect physical cultural resources.
                                         MASAF will not fund any sub-projects that will have
                                         negative effects on physical cultural resources.
                                         Chance Find Procedures have been including in the
                                         ESMF to adequately mitigate any unexpected
                                         encounters.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No        There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area,
4.10                                     thus the policy is not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes       Subproject activities may involve civil works that
BP 4.12                                  could require acquisition of land and lead to loss of
                                         property, shelter, livelihoods and goods or assets
                                         with possible physical resettlement of project
                                         affected persons (PAPs). The Resettlement Policy
                                         Framework has been updated, and makes the
                                         customary provision for consultation and disclosure
                                         of site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), as



                                     Page 6 of 11
                                                     and when required.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              MASAF IV will not fund any subprojects involving
                                                     the construction or use of dams.
   Projects on International      No                 National or international water resources are not
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              affected by proposed subprojects.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                 The policy is not triggered because there are no
   BP 7.60                                           disputed land areas in project areas

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     While the exact type and location of subprojects will be chosen by communities during project
     implementation, possible subprojects include: soil and water conservation activities; forestry and
     agro-forestry; rehabilitation and maintenance of rural feeder roads and market access roads;
     drainage improvements; construction and rehabilitation of reservoirs and connections, small scale
     irrigation schemes; bridges, storage facilities for grains, nursery for seedling cultivation, small fish
     ponds, health posts, school blocks. There may also be increased agricultural production as a result
     of an increased focus on watershed management activities.
     Environmental and social impacts are expected to be similar to earlier MASAF subprojects as
     activities are within the same scope and development objective. While their environmental
     footprint may not be large, MASAF IV AF subprojects could potentially have negative
     biophysical and social impacts, such as soil erosion, disruption of downstream water uses, impacts
     on forested land, disruption and contamination of water bodies if irrigation practices are poorly
     managed, water logging if roads and reservoirs are not constructed or maintained properly. Under
     MASAF IV, project activities will provide substantive positive social impacts leading to improved
     quality of life for the most vulnerable Malawians. But land use changes leading to either
     displacement of and/or restricted access to PAPs, increased social tensions over land use and/or
     livelihoods restrictions, limitations on local capabilities could be potential social impacts. OP/BP
     4.36 is triggered as communities will establish community woodlots (managing nurseries, planting
     the seedlings, and harvesting the wood as income generating activities, construction material and
     cooking fuel). With OP/BP 4.11 triggered, chance finds procedures have been developed to
     mitigate any likely impacts.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No significant indirect and/or long-term impacts associated with the project are expected.
     However, the Project recognizes that Malawi faces countrywide challenges related to social
     changes and environmental degradation, and that the subprojects may contribute to adverse
     impacts. The project has responded to potential impacts by setting out mitigative measures in the
     safeguards documents.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.

   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                 Page 7 of 11
  A detailed ESMF has been prepared to ensure that MASAF IV funded subprojects are designed
  and implemented in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner. The ESMF includes a
  mandatory screening process for all subprojects to assess potential impacts. Environmental and
  social screening processes will be an integral part of service delivery subproject cycles, and based
  on community appreciation of the need for sustainable management to address environmental
  degradation. Following environmental and social risk screening, site-specific ESMPs will be
  prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed for each type of investment when individual subprojects
  and locations are identified.
  Productive Community Driven Public Works financed under the project may require acquisition of
  land or have an impact on assets, including economic and natural resources. Although it is unlikely
  that there will be subprojects that generate significant resettlement impacts, an updated RPF sets
  out the customary land acquisition planning and management processes, including participation
  and disclosure arrangements, has been developed along with a grievance redress mechanism, that
  will be reflected in site-specific RAPs.
  Under the original project -MASAF IV – no ESMPs were prepared because the duration between
  that and this AF was quite short. Additionally those projects which were financed did not require
  EMPs as they were very small and localized works with miniscule risk (e.g., dirt road repairs etc.);
  instead, they followed the environmental measures set out in the ESMF. However, under MASAF-
  III, ESMPs were satisfactorily prepared and implemented for those small works which required
  them.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  MASAF IV AF will continue to be implemented through the LDF-TST, the intergovernmental
  fiscal transfer agency established to coordinate financing and implementation of MASAF at
  district and community levels. The LDF-TST is also responsible for backstopping related to
  environmental and social safeguards. LDF-TST will coordinate closely with the Directorate of
  Environmental Affairs and Ministry of Lands and Housing on all aspects of safeguards
  implementation including capacity building, screening and monitoring of mitigating measures
  during MASAF IV AF.
  Institutional Arrangements for the new program clarify the roles, responsibilities and coordination
  arrangements of implementers, and ensure that targeting mechanisms are coordinated and
  harmonized. Several key Ministries would play a role in overseeing the coordination and
  harmonization process: the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economic Planning and
  Development, Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Environment and Climate
  Change and Ministry of Gender, Children and Social Welfare. The goal is to delivery timely and
  cost effective programs through fostering cooperation and coordination with development partners
  and institutions focused on rural poverty reduction

 There is also a strong focus on capacity building - Staff at Central and District levels will
 participate in training courses for MASAF IV AF public works, which includes training on
 preparing ESMPs and RAPs. LDF will coordinate the Directorate of Environmental Affairs and
 the Ministry of Lands and Housing to ensure that training is provided to District Councils, which
 will then be cascaded to AECs. MASAF IV AF will ensure that capacity to implement safeguards
 is built at the community level during MASAF IVproject implementation. A Safeguards Officer is
 being recruited to reinforce the capacity of the LDF-TST to ensure the implementation and
 monitoring of environmental and social safeguards during MASAF IV AF. The project will
 mainstream mitigating measures as part of subproject design to improve implementation and
 monitoring. Cascaded training to the community level will also anchor safeguards implementation


                                            Page 8 of 11
  as not just part of subproject planning but as an ongoing process. Key indicators will also be
  reported in the M&E system. The application of the ESMF is vital to ensuring that subprojects are
  environmental and socially sustainable and that inappropriate subprojects are eliminated. The
  quarterly monitoring on safeguards implementation initiated by the Directorate of Environmental
  Affairs in 2012 will be continued during MASAF IV. Annual reviews will also examine the
  participatory planning process and grievance redress mechanism and feedback information to the
  M&E system.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Sep-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Oct-2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Malawi                                                           21-Oct-2013
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Sep-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Oct-2013
"In country" Disclosure
  Malawi                                                           21-Oct-2013
  Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Sep-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Oct-2013
"In country" Disclosure
  Malawi                                                           22-Oct-2013
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]


                                           Page 9 of 11
    If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
    in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
    Management Specialist?
   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Practice Manager review the plan?
   OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
    Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    and constraints been carried out?
    Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    overcome these constraints?
    Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    does it include provisions for certification system?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Ivanov Pojarski,Ivan Drabek



                                              Page 10 of 11
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 17-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Manuel Salazar (PMGR)         Date: 17-Feb-2015
Manager:




                                    Page 11 of 11
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
