                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC7355

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Croatia                          Project ID:       P145171
                            Project Name:       Social Protection System Modernization Project (P145171)
                            Task Team           Ivan Drabek
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           30-Jun-2014                      Estimated         30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSH3                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         95.00              Total Bank Financing:              95.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          95.00
                              Total                                                                          95.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project will improve service delivery in social protection. It will aim to do this by:
                           reducing fragmentation in the delivery of social assistance cash transfers; harmonizing disability
                           certification procedures; reducing error and fraud in social assistance programs; supporting the
                           adoption of incentives for work able social assistance beneficiaries to seek employment; and
                           reducing the number of children and adults in residential institutions.
                           C. Project Description
                         A. Concept

                         1. Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Government of Croatia (GoC) is undertaking an ambitious, wide-ranging reform agenda in
                         social protection. The goal of the proposed reforms is to “achieve the financial and procedural
                         rationality and efficiency of the social assistance system.” It aims to do this through consolidation of
                         benefits using the support allowance program as a base for a new Guaranteed Minimum Benefit
                         (GMB) program, which will provide the backbone of last-resort social assistance, by mid-2014;
                         harmonization of the eligibility criteria for remaining benefits under the Ministry of Social Policy
                         and Youth’s purview; improved information systems to promote better decision making and to
                         reduce the scope for error and fraud. The proposed project aims at supporting the government’s
                         reforms of the social protection system, with a special focus on four areas: i) consolidation of
                         programs and simplification of procedures; ii) reducing error fraud and corruption, iii) activation of
                         social assistance beneficiaries; and iv) de-institutionalization.

                         Consolidation of programs and simplification of Procedures: One stop shop and Central Disability
                         Certification Institute (CDCI)
                         A key element of the Government’s reform is the consolidation of cash administration for social
                         welfare programs, family policy programs and unemployment benefits through a single delivery
                         network. Four social assistance benefits will be consolidated into a single GMB in the Ministry of
                         Social Policy and Youth starting in January 2014. At the same time, a one-stop-shop (OSS) for
                         administration and payment of cash benefits will be implemented. The OSS will gradually include a
                         larger number of cash benefits, starting with the new GMB from September 2014, and later
                         incorporating child allowances, maternity benefits, and unemployment benefits. The OSS, one of the
                         highest priorities of the current government, will transform the experience of social assistance
                         beneficiaries by providing a single service point to apply for and receive a range of cash benefits.
                         Having a OSS will reduce the time and cost of application for beneficiaries and will create the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         opportunity of introducing a cap to the total amount of social assistance benefits paid to one
                         household, generating potential for savings and reducing work disincentives associated with the
                         provision of multiple need-based social assistance benefits.

                         Another major reform supported by the project is the creation of a Central Disability Certification
                         Institute (CDCI). The reform, led by the MLSY and coordinated with the MLPS, will introduce a
                         single certification procedure for persons with disability along the medical, social inclusion and work
                         capacity domains. This reform will simplify administrative processes and harmonize standards, and
                         ensure horizontal equity for all persons with disability in Croatia. It is a revolutionary initiative, that
                         it would encompass disability assessment procedures currently administered by several agencies
                         including Croatian Pension Insurance Institute, Ministry of War Veterans, and Croatian Health
                         Insurance Institute. Spending on disability benefits in Croatia is among the highest in EU, next to
                         Denmark, Sweden and Finland. With 3.6% spent on disability programs in 2010, Croatia exceeded
                         the EU27 average by 64%. Assuming that disability spending numbers would converge to 20%
                         above the EU27 by 2035 (factoring in the objective disability factors in Croatia, such as Homeland
                         war veterans’ disability) could lead to cumulative fiscal saving between 10 and 11% of GDP over the
                         next two decades, with savings of up to 1% over the project period.

                         Reducing Error, Fraud and Corruption
                         The Government is committed to tapping significant fiscal savings by developing the mechanisms
                         and institutions needed to reduce the level of error and fraud in the social protection system.
                         International evidence shows that any mass payment system is prone to error, fraud and corruption
                         (EFC). In Croatia, benefits with high a-priory risk of EFC include income and means-tested
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs (e.g., th e child allowance and GMB programs), income-replacement programs, as well as
                         disability pensions and allowances. The current delivery system of these benefits relies only on
                         preventive measures to stamp out EFC, but fall short of a comprehensive system. Complementing
                         these measures with an efficient detection and deterrence system will help safeguard the social
                         protection system against EFC. The MSPY, MLP, Croatian Health Insurance Institute, Croatian
                         Pension Insurance Institute and the Ministry of Public Administration agreed to work with the World
                         Bank on identifying cutting edge EFC strategies and activities that could be applied to their benefits
                         in the context of this project. It was also agreed that the project would support the application of EFC
                         to the disability pension and allowances, where an important proportion of savings are expected to be
                         generated. Support to the EFC agenda is expected to generate cumulative savings of 0.5-1% of GDP
                         over the lifetime of the project.

                         Activation of Social Assistance Beneficiaries
                         The Government is keen in reforming social assistance programs and employment services to
                         stimulate the labor market participation of social assistance beneficiaries. Croatia has a relatively
                         large number of social assistance recipients that are able to work but do not work. About 35 percent
                         of the beneficiary adults in the poorest quintile are not in employment, education, training, disabled
                         or retired, and the share increases to 45 percent for beneficiaries of social assistance in cash. Partly,
                         this is a reflection of the fact that poor households are often better off on assistance than on low-wage
                         employment. Moving from assistance to employment would make them ineligible for means- and
                         income-tested benefits, a feature of these programs that acts as an implicit tax on earnings. The
                         Government could stimulate a higher employment rate by ensuring that the GMB and Child
                         allowance programs reward work, and by offering tailored work support services to work-able
                         beneficiaries from the poorest quintile. The project would support these efforts through specific
                         technical assistance and by supporting the development of operational plans for using ESF for
                         incentivizing and supporting the transition from assistance to employment for work-able adults from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the poorest quintile. Activities would be defined during preparation and after an initial assessment of
                         the working-age individuals who experience persistent labor market detachment, with a focus on
                         those inactive who are beneficiaries of social assistance.

                         Deinstitutionalization
                         The MSPY’s reform plans also encompass a process of deinstitutionalization in the provision of
                         social services currently implemented by State-run institutions. The goal of the proposed reforms is
                         to shift the balance of service provision for key vulnerable groups from institutional, residential care
                         to a range of services provided by a variety of service providers in family-type environments outside
                         of the institutions. De-institutionalization can be a life-changing event for each individual, allowing
                         independent, supported living through foster care, small housing units and other family-type
                         environments. The Plan for Deinstitutionalization and Transformation of Social Welfare Homes
                         (2011-18) will be translated into an Operational Plan by December 2013, describing the precise steps
                         and sequencing of the deinstitutionalization process, including the number and rate of people to be
                         deinstitutionalized (approximately 1,000 adults and children with mild disabilities and children
                         without parental care). The project would support this reform; specifically, the Bank will assist the
                         authorities with the design and focus of its proposals for European financing and reward the
                         achievement of specific milestones. The funds disbursed from the project could then be channeled
                         back into contributing to the Government’s co-financing share for further European fund proposals.
                         The Project will take a results-based financing approach to the implementation of agreed activities
                         under a first component of the project [E50m]. Thus, under this component, project disbursements
                         would off-set Government expenditures on the new consolidated Guaranteed Minimum Benefit
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program (defined as the project’s eligible expenditures); and would be triggered by the achievement
                         of specific results (“Disbursement-Linked Indicators” or DLIs), agreed with the Government of
                         Croatia, that track step increases towards key results, which will then trigger disbursements:

                         DLI 1: One Stop Shop. Possible DLIs (4): Disburse each time a Social Assistance program is
                         transferred and being administered through the OSS: GMB, Maternity/Birth allowances, Child Allo
                         wances, Unemployment Benefits
                         DLI 2: Central Disability Certification Institute. Possible DLIs (4): Disburse with each
                         development stage of CDCI: harmonized procedures implemented; full staffing across regional
                         network; fully operational
                         DLI 3: Error Fraud and Corruption. Possible DLIs (4): Disburse when minimum EFC capacity is in
                         place; Thematic inspections completed; Data cross checks with x other databases complete; Risk-
                         based inspection completed
                         DLI 4: De-institutionalization. Possible DLIs (4): Disburse each time numerical milestones are met
                         related to the number of children w/out parental care and children and adults with developmental
                         difficulties transferred from institutions to family-type living environments

                         Achievement of the DLIs would gradually lead to the achievement of the PDO over the project
                         period. The main characteristics of the disbursement mechanism are: (a) each DLI would be
                         associated with a specific value that would be disbursed upon achievement of the indicator; (b) the
                         Government would provide evidence of achievement of each DLI, to be verified by the World
                         Bank’s technical team; (c) the World Bank will disburse the amount triggered by the DLIs that have
                         been met. Disbursed funds would flow to the Croatian Treasury against expenditures made under the
                         GMB program.

                         A second component [E20m] would support investments and technical assistance that are necessary,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         but not sufficient, to support achievement of the DLIs. Examples include: upgrades to the MIS to
                         integrate systems currently used by other cash transfer programs and the IT system supporting CDCI
                         operations; technical assistance on cutting-edge error fraud and corruption techniques and
                         investments in the prevention and detection infrastructure; training and technical assistance on
                         disability certification methodology; and communications campaigns to raise public awareness of the
                         reforms to social assistance and disability benefits and to attract foster families.

                         The government has indicated it may request a Project Preparation Advance to support investments
                         needed to make headway on project activities during the preparation period. Such activities could
                         include the detailed needs assessment and preliminary drawings, analytical studies, and
                         environmental assessments for renovations of one-stop-shops.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Environment
                         The part of the project likely to involve rehabilitation of infrastructure is the One-Stop Shop
                         component. A detailed assessment study of the buildings is currently ongoing, which might identify
                         additional rehabilitation works to be covered by the project. At present, beneficiaries have to visit a
                         range of different decentralized branches of different Ministries, present similar documents at each
                         and get separate decisions from each: Centers for Social Welfare (118 nationwide) administer cash
                         benefits that will be consolidated into a Guaranteed Minimum Benefit in mid-2014; the Health
                         Insurance Fund branches nationwide administer maternity and layette benefits; the Pension Insurance
                         Fund branches administer Child Support Allowance; the Public Employment Centers administer
Public Disclosure Copy




                         unemployment benefits; while the Public Administration Offices administer two war veterans’
                         benefits (which are soon to be included in the new GMB). The proposed one-stop-shop will
                         transform the experience of social assistance beneficiaries by providing a single service point for
                         them to apply for and receive a range of cash benefits. Having a OSS will reduce the time and cost
                         of application for beneficiaries.

                         The intra-governmental working group leading the OSS preparations has determined that the Public
                         Administration Offices will be the primary hosts of the new OSS. However, a detailed assessment of
                         the current facilities (space, renovations, IT etc.) of the PAOs has not yet been conducted. It is likely
                         that significant investment and technical assistance would be needed to allow such transfers to
                         happen effectively through the OSS housed in Public Administration Offices. Investments required
                         would include: re-organization and upgrade of space, training of personnel and integration of a
                         Management Information System. It is unlikely that any new build will be required, since there are
                         so many public offices in every region that if one Public Administration Office is entirely unsuitable,
                         the OSS could be housed in another government building (for example, in the Center for Social
                         Welfare, Health Insurance Fund, Pension Insurance Fund or Public Employment Center).

                         The scope of environmental impacts is considered site specific, predictable and easily mitigated as
                         the project might support only smaller buildings rehabilitation.

                         Social
                         The Program is expected to have positive social implications, with cash benefits more readily and
                         easily accessible by beneficiaries; more means-testing to ensure cash benefits go to the needy and
                         vulnerable groups; and greater de-institutionalization of vulnerable children and adults.

                         It is expected that the proposed program will stimulate greater social integration and assist in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development and implementation of more inclusive social policies to target better the vulnerable
                         social groups. The implementation of the ‘one-stop shop’ concept for social benefits could also
                         contribute to social accountability by increasing the effectiveness of controls of social service
                         delivery outcomes that are currently shared by many different institutions.

                         Also, it could contribute to increase the ability to monitor and evaluate provisions of social welfare
                         delivery system; increase the voice of beneficiaries and civil society groups in delivery of social
                         welfare policies and programs; and improve their feedback on the program and state responsiveness.

                         Potential social risk associated with proposed de-institutionalization (approximately 1,000 adults and
                         children with mild disabilities and children without parental care) to be supported by the Project is
                         not a safeguards issue. However, it will be further elaborated in the PAD.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Borrower has implemented several investment projects with the World Bank, including the
                         Social Welfare Development Project (which closed in 2011) in which renovations were made to
                         Centers for Social Welfare. At the time, responsibility for social welfare was under the Ministry of
                         Health and Social Welfare which had an experienced Project Implementation Unit. The Ministry
                         was later divided and responsibility for social protection now lies with the Ministry of Social Policy
                         and Youth, which has never had a PIU. It is likely that the PIU for the proposed project will reside in
                           the Ministry of Public Administration. Competent staff for such a unit will be identified if the
                           Project Concept Review meeting authorizes the team to proceed with preparation of an investment
                           project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In addition, although there might be no specific environmental expertise with in the participating
                           agencies, the PIU will include technical personnel that will be trained by the WB staff on
                           implementation of WB safeguards policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Vera Dugandzic (ECSSO)
                           Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Project will trigger OP/ BP 4.01 due to expected
                           BP 4.01                                              rehabilitation works in buildings, mainly inside
                                                                                of the buildings. The works will not include any
                                                                                changes in blueprint. The impacts will be
                                                                                temporarily, site specific and typical for small
                                                                                scale construction / rehabilitation works. The
                                                                                impacts will be mitigates through preparation of
                                                                                site specific EMP checklists.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      TBD             Many social care buildings in urban areas are
                           BP 4.11                                              protected as cultural monuments and as such
                                                                                special provisions should be triggered in EMP
                                                                                checklists.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              Though a detailed assessment of the
                           4.12                                                 investments required for re-organization and
                                                                                upgrade of space has not yet been conducted, no
                                                                                land acquisition, displacement of occupants
                                                                                (legal or illegal), or restriction of access to
                                                                                resources or income streams is expected under
                                                                                the proposed Project. As currently stated, the
                                                                                Project will not finance any new construction
                                                                                but instead will support only small rehabilitation
                                                                                works within the existing buildings. Any sites
                                                                                presenting situations that would trigger OP 4.12,
                                                                                will be excluded from project consideration.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      March 2014, site specific EMP checklists
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ivan Drabek

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 16-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Aylin Isik-Dikmelik (SM)                                                                                             Date: 17-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
