INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC6055
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Vietnam                    Project ID:   P144825
Project Name:    Vietnam Regional Industry Competitiveness (P 144825)
Task Team        Andres F. Garcia
Leader(s):
Estimated        22-Jan-2015                Estimated     29-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                        Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):       SME Finance (40%), General industry and trade sector (60%)
Theme(s):        Other Private Sector Development (50%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
support (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     151.00             Total Bank Financing:    96.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development             0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      96.00
Local Sources of Borrowing Country                               55.00
Total                                                           151.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of this project is to facilitate and support the emergence of an SME sector
in upstream activities and supporting value chains of the large anchor investments in the economic
zones in Thanh Hoa Province. The project is also expected to help develop a platform to catalyze


﻿clusters development, job creation and investments in Thanh Hoa province (TH) in the medium-and-
long-term.
C. Project Description
The project would consist of three components to facilitate economic development in Thanh Hoa
province, particularly the development of MSMEs across the value chains of large anchor
investments in the NSEZ and elsewhere in the province. The project aims to build capacity directly
to the private sector and to public sector agencies with a mandate to promote and enhance investment
,      and SMEs (eg. the Thanh Hoa Investment, Trade, and Tourism Promotion Agency -ITTPA, the Nghi
Son Economic Zone Management Authority - EZA, and the SME support organizations). The
project also provides a line of credit to SMEs through commercial banks. Each component will take
care to include the following cross-cutting priorities: i) Participation and economic empowerment of
women; ii) Care for the natural environment, and mitigation of harmful effects; and iii) Care for
social welfare and mitigation of adverse effects on the livelihoods of the people in project areas.
Component 1 - Technical Assistance to Government Agencies for the Purpose of Enhancing
Industrial Investment in Thanh Hoa Province - Tentatively $6 million*
This component is designed to enhance the capacity of public institutions crucial to attracting
investment to Thanh Hoa province, including the Nghi Son Economic Zone Management Authority
(EZAEZA) and the Thanh Hoa Investment, Trade, and Tourism Promotion Agency (ITTPA).
1.1    Nghi Son Economic Zone Development Authority Capacity Building. This sub-component
would enhance the capacity of the EZAEZA to: i) Plan, design, and execute development in the
NSEZ and other zones in Thanh Hoa province consistent with market demand and which protect the
natural and social environment; ii) Promote the NSEZ and other industrial zones in Thanh Hoa
province to domestic and international investors, and provide streamlined services to them; and iii)
Provide outreach to MSMEs to better incorporate them into industrial zone design, operation, and
promotion. This would include the following activities designed to strengthen the capacity of the
EZAEZA:
*      Enhancement of the NSEZ Masterplan based on market-based demand for land,
infrastructure, and services. This could include review of the master plan for the overall NSEZ,
creation of feasibility studies for new industrial zones within the NSEZ or throughout Thanh Hoa
province, exploration of options to mitigate effects on the natural and social environment, and low-
carbon and green special economic zone application opportunities.
*      Explore public-private partnership (PPP) opportunities to attract private primary investors
(zone developer/operators) to the NSEZ and other industrial zones in Thanh Hoa province. Expand
the marketing of the NSEZ and other industrial zones to private developers.
*      Expand the EZAEZA's services to cater to MSME development inside the NSEZ and other
industrial zones in Thanh Hoa province.
*      Provide capacity building for the analysis and enhancement of EZAEZA's institutional
architecture, policy and legal framework, and planning capacity.
*      Enrich the investment promotion and marketing capacity of the EZAEZA, and develop
linkages to the marketing efforts of EDA, Thanh Hoa ITTPA, and marketing efforts of private zone
developers.
*      Generate a demand analysis for investments in NSEZ to identify target sectors for
investment generation, including those linked to downstream investment opportunities and priority
value chains of large anchor tenants such as the Nghi Son Petrochemical. This includes widening the


﻿business opportunities for SMEs in Thanh Hoa province that can benefit from large anchor investors.
1.2 Thanh Hoa ITTPA Capacity Building-This sub-component would enhance the capacity of the
ITTPA to better promote investment in Thanh Hoa province, including investment by SMEs. This
O
would include the following activities designed to strengthen the ITTPA:
*      Create marketing linkages between EDA, Thanh Hoa ITTPA, EZAEZA, and individual
industrial zone developer/operators to more efficiently attract investment to Thanh Hoa province.
Develop marketing plans for Thanh Hoa province based on market-based forecasts and
analyses.
*      Enhance ITTPA's outreach to SMEs to increase their investment in industrial value chains.
*      Boost the market research capacity of the ITTPA to better analyze and track market trends in
Thanh Hoa province, particularly for the benefit of SME development.
1.3    Assistance to other government agencies, as needed.-This sub-component will strengthen
the capacity of other national or provincial institutions that support private sector development. This
will complement the ongoing projects and programs (by the World Bank and donors) focusing on
strengthening institutional capacity of key government agencies in the area of SME development and
ability to deliver adequate services to investors aiming at investing in Thanh Hoa province and
industrial zones in particular (eg. SME policy implementation support, Public and Private Partnership
Strategy and implementation)
1.4    Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation Support: The project will be implemented
by a Project management Unit (PMU) under the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI). The
project will provide support to the Project Management Unit (PMU), Provincial Project Management
Unit (PPMU) in Thanh Hoa, and the PFIs, for project management, coordination, capacity building,
oversight, monitoring and evaluation, reporting and audits to enable them to perform their
responsibility for project coordination, management and implementation.
Component 2 - Financial support to SMEs consisting of a line of credit (LoC)- tentatively $84
million*
O
This component aims to provide long-term credits (more than 3 years) to Household Business and
a      SMEs in Thanh Hoa. A Line of Credit will be provided to the Government for on-lending to
qualified participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) for financing new SME loans in Thanh Hoa. At
this stage several local banks have expressed interest in participating in the LoC facility (BIDV, VP
Bank, VIB Bank, Vietinbank and Vietcom Bank). The assessment of capacity of potential PFIs will
be carried out together with the government during appraisal. PFI selection criteria and subloan
criteria have been drafted and will be agreed and finalized with the government before project
appraisal. It is expected that the PFIs will provide long-term loans at market rates to privately-owned
SMEs and Household Business in Thanh Hoa for expanding business or improving productivity and
competitiveness of the borrowers, such as equipment purchase or leasing, service, civil works (except
for housing), raw materials and operating expenses, technical assistance, and incremental working
capital. PFIs are expected to carry out the credit risks assessment of the borrowers in accordance with
their established credit and operational policies and procedures, but are also encouraged to co-finance
eligible sub-projects.
Component 3: Linkage Formation - Tentatively $10 million*


﻿This component is designed to enhance the capacity of SMEs and banks to participate in the growing
opportunities for the development of value chains and clusters in Thanh Hoa province (as support by
Component 1 and 2), and to support the development of a business center to facilitate linkages
between large investments and SMEs.
o
3.1    Technical Assistance for SMEs - This sub-component aims to provide targeted technical
assistance to enhance SME capability to benefit from business opportunities in the value chain of
anchor investments in Thanh Hoa. It will be designed based on an assessment of binding constraints
faced by prospective firms and sectors in relevant value chains and clusters.
3.2    Technical assistance to the develo pment of a "business center" through which technical
assistance to SMEs would be offered. This sub-component is designed to provide training and
mentoring to SMEs, strengthen linkages between large investments and SMEs, and be the vehicle
through which all support to SMEs is given. Efforts will be made to ensure that the activities under
this component are sustainable after the project ends. Whether developed as a virtual or a physical
"center", potential activities might include:
(a)    Formation of cluster working groups and associated training and mentoring activities-for
carefully targeted sectors;
(b)    General SME development services, including fee-for-service diagnostic, training,
mentoring, marketing, business, and financial support, for MSMEs;
(c)    Advanced SME accelerator services for selected SMEs ready to enter into contracts with
large anchor investors (eg. through an Accelerator Fund). The Accelerator Fund would be in the form
of a matching grant scheme which would finance 50 percent of the cost of business and technical
services needed by these SMEs. The remaining 50 percent will come from SMEs themselves. The
grant would consist of the following windows: i) costs associated with services such as packaging,
business planning, extension, quality and standards, etc. and as such support SMEs in their efforts to
access markets and link to pre-identified value chains and to enhance technical capacity; and ii) costs
for service providers to enhance capacity for technical assistance to SMEs, including twinning
arrangements with foreign business service providers, professional training business development,
and marketing services.
(d)    Integrated local procurement strategies-Working with large anchor tenants/investors to
understand their procurement needs during both construction and operations stages of investments
and thereby, match this against the capacity of SMEs as in (b) or (c) and support the latter to increase
their linkages and sales to anchor investors in Thanh Hoa province;
3.3 Enhance the Capacity of Commercial Banks on SME lending-This sub-component would
provide technical assistance and PFIs in the form of performance-based grants (PBG), to enhance
banks' capacity to develop the required systems, procedures, products and human resources to
service the SME sector. The Grant funds shall be used exclusively [to reimburse the participating
financial intermediary up to sixty-five percent (65 %) of cost incurred for agreed advisory services,
training, and technical assistance to build capacity for the PFI's SME financial service operations in
Thanh Hoa. The Recipient shall determine the specific use of the funds in accordance with the
parameters detailed in the PBG. At the same time, the component would provide assistance aimed at
building the capacity of target SMEs (through subcomponent 3.1), who would be potential clients of
PFIs, to present credible loan application packages with adequate supporting documentation.


﻿(*Tentative allocation and subject to changes at Appraisal)
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Under Component 2, subloans would be provided by PFIs to SMEs in Thanh Hoa province who are
on the value chains of the large anchor investment projects in Thanh Hoa.
Many large anchor investments are located in the Nghi Son Economic Zone (NSEZ), which is the
largest economic zone in the province, and other industrial zones in Thanh Hoa province. NSEZ is
situated in Thanh Hoa Province roughly located in central Vietnam. NSEZ has a total area of 18,612
ha. It is 40 km away from Thanh Hoa City and borders Nghe An Province and the East Sea. It has
advantages on road, river and railway traffic. The infrastructure in the NSEZ (electricity, water,
traffic, and other services) is gradually built. The deep water port which is designed with 10 quays
and a passing capacity of 10 million tons/year will be suitable for 100,000-ton vessels (there have 2
quays completed for 30,000-ton vessels). It will also be hub for domestic, regional and international
economic exchange. The road and railway system connects economic zones in the region with the
Northern, Central and Southern Key Economic Regions. This is a dynamic economic zone that will
promote the economy of Thanh Hoa, the South Thanh Hoa-North Nghe An and the North Central
regions of Vietnam.
In NSEZ, there are non-tariff and tariff areas. In the tariff area there are functional areas: central
urban area, industrial parks, port and logistic service area, tourist-service area and residential area.
The non-tariff area includes main production-trade types of production and doing outwork,
recycling, assembling; goods trade, service trade and trade promotion.
The projects in NSEZ also includes the development of heavy industries such as oil refineries,
petrochemicals production, steel and manufacturing mechanics, construction materials production (e.
g. cement), thermal power production, consumer goods (e.g. shoes/sneakers), agro-forestry-fishery
products processing, etc.
The Nigh Son Special Economic Zone (NSSEZ) Masterplan seems to fall short of best practices for
several reasons related to the environment:
* Location of tourist areas that are adjacent to heavy industries: access to tourism-designated
island through a container port, tourist beach adjacent to proposed refinery expansion area; proposed
cement clinker conveyor adjacent to proposed golf course; and a marine tourism development area is
proposed in the vicinity of channel dredging and port construction.
*      A number of proposed industrial sites are located in wet areas with possible drainage
problems.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
On the private sector side, Nigh Son refinery and Petroleum Company (NSRP) has adopted
management plans to develop social and environmental plans and monitoring systems, including
local content and resettlement initiatives. The project team aims to work in close collaboration with
NSRP's advisory team to strengthen and inform these initiatives.
The Participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) will be selected against a set of criteria agreed with


﻿the government. PFIs with good track record in compliance with relevant banking regulations, strong
financial performance and financial management capacity, commitment to SME lending, sound
credit risk management procedures, adequate delivery capacity and previous experience in managing
the ODA on-lending programs will be given priority.
0
A capacity assessment of PFIs for the management of subloan safeguard aspects that will be included
under Component 2 will be conducted during the pre-appraisal mission.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Bernard Baratz (GENDR)
Roxanne Hakim (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will provide matching grants and
OP/BP 4.01                              medium and long-term credits to the SMEs
registered in Thanh Hoa province. Sub-loans may
finance the cost of goods including equipment
purchase or leasing, services, civil works (except for
housing), raw materials,operating expenses, technical
assistance, and incremental permanent working
capital for expansion of production or improvement
of services. It is anticipated that SMEs are likely to
be engaged in business (but not limited to) such as
food preparation and catering services, food
processing, transportation, warehouses, construction,
machine repair and metal working operations,
materials processing or assembly, carpentry, small
scale manufacturing, wholesale or retail, import-
export and possibly cleaning services. Based upon
information provided to RSS, an Environment and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) should be
prepared during project preparation laying out the
process of environment and social screening, review
and approval, and any associated consultation and
disclosure of specific safeguard instruments for
subprojects and/or activities based upon the results of
the screening process supported under Component 2.
Any subproject would have to meet government
environmental standards and the World Bank Group
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines would
apply.
Component 3 will support civil works construction
of a Business Linkage Center (BLC). For this project
component, an environmental management plan


﻿(EMP) incorporating best codes of practice for
building construction as well as management of any
site specific issues will be prepared by the Borrower.
WBG EHS apply.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD          Natural habitats are not expected to be adversely
affected or degraded by the project as Economic
Zones (EZs) are located in developed and built up
areas. This will be confirmed during project
preparation.
Nevertheless, the ESMF will include screening for
subproject impacts on natural habitats, and if
potential impacts are expected measures will be
adopted as part of the EA process. In addition,
Category A subprojects will not be supported under
the project because of the limited safeguard capacity
(and associated risk) for potential PFIs in managing
such risky subprojects.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           Natural forests or critical forest areas will not be
found in any area for a proposed SME subproject for
several reasons: (1) SMEs located near or in areas
that have or will be designated by the government as
economic zones for large scale industry will be sites
in accordance with the governments' approved
master plan, so it is unlikely that these plans would
allow major industrial development that would
involve significant conversion or degradation of
critical forest areas, (2) regardless of subproject
location, the ESMF will include "Due Diligence" for
any proposed subproject which includes a
requirement that all environmental permits,
approvals, licenses, etc. be obtained before a
subproject can be considered for financing, and it is
unlikely government authorities would offer an
approval for a subproject site at or near a natural
forest or critical forest area, and finally (3) in the
extremely unlikely event that a proposed subproject
does have all government approvals for a subproject
located at or near a natural forest or critical forest
area, the "Screening" procedures in the ESMF
requires a subproject of this nature to be assigned
Category A, and the ESMF further specifies that
Category A subprojects will not be supported under
the project because of the limited safeguard capacity
(and associated risk) for potential PFIs in managing
such risky subprojects.


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09     No           Land clearance may be required for subprojects
under Component 2. The ESMF will specify all land
clearance will be performed mechanically and/or
manually, pesticides will be forbidden from use. No
procurement of pesticides will be financed through
the project. Moreover, project activities are not likely
to result in increased used of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD         Physical cultural resources are not expected to be
OP/BP 4.11                               adversely affected or degraded by the project as
Economic Zones (EZs) are located in developed and
built up areas. This will be confirmed during project
preparation.
The ESMF will include screening for subproject
impacts on PCRs, and if potential impacts are
expected measures will be adopted as part of the EA
process. The BLC site is not in proximity to any
physical cultural resources. In addition, the ESMF
will include requirements for proper chance find
procedures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD         An evaluation of the status (presence or absence) IP
4.10                                     communities in the project areas will be confirmed
by the social development specialist in the TT based
on site visit and discussions with local officials
responsible for protecting the rights and welfare of
indigenous peoples. The status will be confirmed
during project appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Land will be acquired for the construction of the
BP 4.12                                  business linkage center under Component 3. A
Resettlement Plan will hence be prepared by the
Borrower prior to appraisal.
For potential SME subprojects under Component 2,
there are three possibilities for subproject site
locations involving land acquisition: (a) within
NSEZ, (b) within another economic zone (EZ) or
economic center (EC), and (c) outside any NSEZ/EZ/
EC.
For subprojects involving land acquisition in the
NSEZ, during pre-appraisal the Task Team will
check with the NSEZ to determine if procedures
followed for land acquisition and resettlement were
in compliance with laws, regulations and procedures
required by the Vietnamese national, provincial and
local authorities (due diligence) and would not have


﻿any further requirements.
For subprojects involving land acquisition in the any
other EZ/EC due diligence of the EZ/EC would be
required by the PMU during project implementation.
The due diligence procedures would be described in
the ESMF
For subprojects not located in the NSEZ or any other
EZ the ESMF will indicate that the sub-borrower/
client would have to prepare a Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           No activities will impact the safety of dams.
Projects on International   No           No SME/subprojects will affect any international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     waterway.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Apr-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
A.     Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
ISDS would be prepared: April 2015.
B.     For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS: N/A
C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS
The ESMF would be prepared prior to appraisal and disclosed at the Infoshop in Hanoi and a
Vietnamese language version would be disclosed in Thanh Hoa Province at publicly accessible
location(s).
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andres F. Garcia
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                     Date: 13-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Mona E. Haddad (PMGR)                   Date: 15-Jan-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


