                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC3816

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                           Project ID:     P133018
                            Project Name:     Zhejiang Rural Areas and Small Towns Water and Sanitation Improvement
                                              Project (P133018)
                            Task Team         Gang Qin
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       03-Apr-2014                       Estimated       07-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASCS                              Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (30%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (50%),
                                              Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (20%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (65%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (35%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    440.00                   Total Bank Financing:       200.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  240.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     200.00
                              Total                                                                     440.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve water and sanitation services in
                           selected counties of Zhejiang Province. This will be achieved through the provision of improved
                           water supply and sanitation systems in the selected counties and county level cities.
                           C. Project Description
                           Proposed Project Investment. The total indicative project cost estimate is US$440 million with an
                           IBRD loan of US$200 million. The project is comprised of three components, being:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •        Component 1: Water and Sanitation Improvement in Rural Villages (US$ 118 million). The
                           sub-sectors covered under this component are water supply and sanitation facilities in rural villages
                           and it is expected that approximately 300 villages will be covered.

                           •       Component 2: Water and Sanitation Improvement in Small Towns (US$ 317 million). The
                           sub-sectors covered under this component are also water supply and sanitation; however the focus is
                           expected to be on small towns. Approximately, 30 small towns will be covered under this
                           component.

                           •       Component 3: Implementation Support and Capacity Building (US$ 5 million). Given the
                           weak capacity in rural and small towns, strong support for implementation will be required. In
                           addition, the project will also aim to improve the performance of targeted water companies through
                           the implementation of management information systems, asset management systems, GIS, etc.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Zhejiang Province, with total population of 54.6 million (2012), is located in the east coast of China
                           with an area of 105,391 km2, of which 70.4% is mountainous areas; 23.2% is plains; and the
                           remainder 6.4% is covered by rivers and lakes. Zhejiang has a sub-tropical monsoon climate, with
                           the clear division of four seasons and abundant sunshine. The average annual temperature is 15°C -
                           18°C and the average annual precipitation is 1,200-1,800 mm. The proposed project counties are
                           mainly in the mountainous and hilly regions of the Province.

                           Four counties in the Province have been selected to participate in the project. They are: Anji County,
                           which is located in the northwest of the Province; Fuyang City, which is located in Qiantang River
                           Basin, upstream of Hangzhou; Tiantai County, which is located in mountainous area of central
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Province. The river system in the County is Jiaojiang River system; and Longquan City, which is in
                           south of the Province. The main river is Oujiang River.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed project will be managed by the Provincial Project Management Office (PPMO), which
                           is affiliated with the Zhejiang Provincial Development and Reform Commission (PDRC). In the
                           province, there is good understanding of the Bank’s Safeguards Policies, since several Bank financed
                           projects are currently under implementation. Thus during project identification, training in Bank’s
                           safeguards has been provided to clients. In addition experienced environmental and social
                           consultants will be engaged to help the PPMO to prepare safeguards documents. However, few
                           county level Project Implementation Units (PIUs) have prior experience in implementing World
                           Bank financed projects, therefore regular trainings on Bank’s Safeguards policies and assistance by
                           the Bank task team will be provided during project’s preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Based on the project proposal and preliminary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     screening and scoping during project
                                                                     identification, this policy is triggered, mainly
                                                                     because of the activities under the component 1
                                                                     and 2.

                                                                     The project will have significant benefits in
                                                                     terms of providing improved water and
                                                                     wastewater services for villages and the
                                                                     townships in the selected counties of Zhejiang
                                                                     Province. Investments under Component 1 and
                                                                     2 include civil works for water supply, drainage,
                                                                     wastewater collection, and treatment facilities,
                                                                     etc.

                                                                     Potential negative environmental and social
                                                                     impacts would mainly occur in the construction
                                                                     phase, and they would include soil erosion,
                                                                     noise, dust, and shipping and disposal of
                                                                     construction waste, etc.

                                                                     Category B is proposed mainly because that the
                                                                     impacts are site-specific and few is irreversible,
                                                                     mitigation measures can be designed during
                                                                     project preparation and applied during
                                                                     implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     The following environmental safeguards
                                                                     instruments are proposed: An environmental
                                                                     impact assessment (EIA) and a standalone
                                                                     environmental management plan (EMP) will be
                                                                     prepared to cover the entire project. Social
                                                                     impact should be designed as part of the EIA.
                                                                     Furthermore, an environmental and social
                                                                     management framework (ESMF) is proposed, as
                                                                     an annex to the EIA, for sub-projects that are
                                                                     not known by appraisal.

                                                                     During the preparation of the proposed
                                                                     instruments, WBG’s Environmental, Health and
                                                                     Safety Guideline will be an important reference.
                                                                     A due diligence review will be conducted for
                                                                     existing facilities and projects related to the
                                                                     proposed project.

                                                                     Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                 will be conducted following OP4.01
                                                                 requirements during EIA preparation. At least
                                                                 two rounds of public consultation will be carried
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 out with potentially affected persons and other
                                                                 relevant stakeholders through various methods,
                                                                 e.g., questionnaire surveys, interviews and
                                                                 public meetings as needed. The full draft EIA
                                                                 will be disclosed locally.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Based on the information provided, there are no
                                                                 significant natural habitats located in the
                                                                 proposed project areas. However, since the
                                                                 project components are located in various places
                                                                 and detailed survey will be conducted in the EA
                                                                 process, the EIA consultant is required to do a
                                                                 detailed screening during the EIA preparation to
                                                                 further determine if this policy is triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Based on current information, the proposed
                                                                 project components are not located in forest
                                                                 areas. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The proposed project will not procure pesticides
                                                                 nor will it result in the increased use of
                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Based on current information available, there
                         BP 4.11                                 are no any physical cultural relics found within
                                                                 the proposed project areas. In the EIA process,
                                                                 related information will be checked and
                                                                 confirmed by relevant authorities. In case
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 findings take place during construction, relevant
                                                                 clauses would be included in all construction
                                                                 contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project will support selected counties in
                                                                 Zhejiang Province. The task team visited the
                                                                 corresponding villages in these areas and had
                                                                 meetings with the municipal departments in
                                                                 charge of the minority affairs. The task team
                                                                 concluded there is no community of the Chinese
                                                                 minorities identified by the Chinese government
                                                                 in the project area. All of the populations in the
                                                                 project areas are Han people who are not
                                                                 identified by China government as minority and
                                                                 also Han does not fall in the definition of ethnic
                                                                 minority identified by Bank OP 4.10. Thus, OP
                                                                 4.10 is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Some collective land will be required at the
                         4.12                                    township level for waste treatment plants and
                                                                 temporarily during waste water collection
                                                                                                                                 pipeline installation. Hence, Bank Involuntary
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 will be triggered.
                                                                                                                                 A Resettlement Action Plan is required to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 mitigate any negative impacts caused by
                                                                                                                                 collective land acquisition and temporary land
                                                                                                                                 use in the first two years of the project
                                                                                                                                 programs. Based on the project features,
                                                                                                                                 avoidance to land acquisition, specific to those
                                                                                                                                 valuable cultivated, is prioritized at first.
                                                                                                                                 Training courses on how to select the sites of
                                                                                                                                 waste water treatment plants and the alignments
                                                                                                                                 of the waste water collection pipelines were
                                                                                                                                 provided for the PMO staff and the consulting
                                                                                                                                 team. The task team will review the analysis of
                                                                                                                                 those site selections. The task team also
                                                                                                                                 requested the PMO to mobilize a village
                                                                                                                                 committee based project volunteer supporting
                                                                                                                                 team consisting of the head of the village
                                                                                                                                 committee, the head of the Women associated,
                                                                                                                                 highly respected elder because of his/her merit
                                                                                                                                 and also representative of the villagers. This
                                                                                                                                 team will participate into the project preparation
                                                                                                                                 process and later on the monitoring work during
                                                                                                                                 civil works. Their roles will be documented in
                                                                                                                                 the RAP as a way to enhance local institutional
                                                                                                                                 capacity. A resettlement policy framework will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared to guide the selection of sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects. The RAP and RPF will be prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The proposed project will not directly finance
                                                                                                                                 construction or rehabilitation of any dams.
                                                                                                                                 However, there may be a linkage issue
                                                                                                                                 associated with proposed water supply sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects in Component 2. Therefore, the task
                                                                                                                                 team will check the resources and hire a dam
                                                                                                                                 safety expert to carry out a dam safety
                                                                                                                                 evaluation during the project’s preparation.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not applicable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not applicable
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The EA consultants have been engaged for preparation of environmental safeguards
                             documentation. The TOR for the EIA will be provided to the Bank task team for review. and it is
                             expected that the draft EIA and EMP will be available for local consultation and information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             disclosure one month before project appraisal, which is targeted in April 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Gang Qin

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                              Date: 22-Oct-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                             Date: 23-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
