                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA5951

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jan-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jan-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:         Togo                             Project ID:    P146598
                                                     Parent         P127200
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:    Community Development and Safety Nets Project Additional Financing
                    (P146598)
   Parent Project   TOGO Community Development and Safety Nets Project (P127200)
   Name:
   Task Team       John Van Dyck
   Leader:
   Estimated       16-Dec-2013                       Estimated   07-Mar-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit: AFTSW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):       Other social services (70%), Health (10%), General education sector (10%),
                    General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10 %)
   Theme(s):        Social safety nets (58%), Other human development (42%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        15.70           Total Bank Financing:  12.10
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      3.60
     International Development Association (IDA)                                            12.10
     Total                                                                                  15.70
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a        No
   Repeater
   project?



                                           Page 1 of 7
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The proposed Project Development Objective is to provide poor communities with greater access
   to basic socio-economic infrastructures and social safety nets.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The proposed additional grant would help finance the costs associated with scaling up the PDCplus
by (a) providing financing for community-based school feeding, which until now has been supported
under the Community Development Project (PDC) (P110943) which closed on September 30, 2013;
and (b) increasing support for community infrastructure sub-projects. An incremental increase will
also be allocated to project management to manage the scaled-up activities.

Support for school feeding was not included in the PDCplus as approved on March 22, 2012 due to
lack of resources, leaving a financing gap for school feeding when the PDC closed on September 30,
2013. The PDC supported school feeding beginning in the 2008-2009 school year up to the recently
ended school year (2012-2013). In 2008-2009, the program launched with support for 16,800
children in 84 schools. The program was subsequently scaled up such that by the last 3 months of
the 2012-2013 school year, the total number of beneficiary schools to 256, with 60,934 children.

By providing one diversified meal daily for primary school children across the five regions of the
country, the school-feeding program aims to improve the nutritional well-being of children during
times of food insecurity; improve school enrolment, attendance, and performance; transfer resources
to households under stress. A 2011 evaluation found that the cost of the school feeding program
under PDC was low compared to other sub-Saharan African countries and that it was effective in
attracting and retaining beneficiary children in school, in providing access to school to children who
are older and have not yet enrolled, and in increasingly attracting girls.

As of the beginning of December 2013, the project has launched 90 community infrastructure sub-
projects, of which 38 are completed (the PAD for the original project has an intermediate target of 50
completed by December 2013, and 170 by project closing). 97 income generating activity sub-
projects had been launched by end-September 2013, of which 57 are completed (PAD intermediate
target of 50 by December 2013 and 150 by project closing). 52 labor-intensive works sub-project
have been launched, of which 42 are completed.

The additional support for community infrastructure reflects the Government’s desire to scale up the
impact of the well-performing “Infrastructure construction and rehabilitation” component of the
PDCplus. The community infrastructure activities supported by the PDC and PDCplus have led to
significant increases in access to improved schools, health facilities, and water supply. For example,
the PDC supported the construction of 621 primary school classrooms, 76 water supply points, and
16 health facilities. However, the needs for such infrastructure in Togo remain vast.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)

                                             Page 2 of 7
The project will be implemented in five main regions of Togo (Kara, Plateaux, Maritime, Centrale,
and Savanes).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)
Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The ESMF of the parent project will still be
BP 4.01                                             applicable here, in particular the environmental
                                                    and social screening checklist that will be used to
                                                    screen sub-projects. The Community sub-
                                                    projects will facilitate the construction and
                                                    rehabilitation of social and economic
                                                    infrastructure such as schools, markets, small
                                                    scale water infrastructure, and health centers.
                                                    Both interventions have the propensity to trigger
                                                    small scale and site specific environmental
                                                    impacts that are manageable. At this stage of
                                                    project preparation, the locations of these
                                                    interventions are not known. The ESMF of
                                                    PDCplus has been redisclosed for the additional
                                                    financing.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

Pest Management OP 4.09            No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              The Community sub-projects will facilitate the
4.12                                                rehabilitation and construction of social and
                                                    economic infrastructure such as schools, markets,
                                                    small scale water infrastructure, and health
                                                    centers. These activities could lead to restriction
                                                    of access to assets or sources of livelihood and
                                                    they could also entail some acquisition of land.
                                                    The RPF of PDCplus has been updated and re-
                                                    disclosed for the additional financing. During
                                                    project implementation, the framework could be
                                                    translated into RAPs as necessary.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No




                                            Page 3 of 7
   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The original project, and this additional financing, are classified as environmental category B in
     recognition of the fact that the potential negative environmental impacts are expected to be limited
     and reversible, given the small-scale nature of the community infrastructure supported under the
     project. The AF triggers the same safeguards policies, OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and
     OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The potential adverse impacts would be expected to come
     from the building and the rehabilitation of the infrastructures (schools, health districts, latrines,
     water points, markets, roads, etc.) through component 1, in terms of: disturbance of the
     environment; production of solid and liquid waste; insecurity related to the works; land use, etc.
     Moreover, potential sourcing of sand, water and other building materials could also represent
     sources of negative impacts for the natural environment, which will require restoration actions
     after use. The school feeding activities are expected to have no or negligible negative
     environmental or social impacts.

     In the phase of preparation for construction, the impacts could include removal of trees to clear the
     sites for new constructions. On the whole, the direct and indirect risks of the construction are:
     solid and liquid waste resulting from the building sites; obstruction of the traffic, noise, dust, risks
     of accidents; a possible reduction of vegetation cover; bad management of biomedical waste in the
     health facilities; etc. The new construction or the extension of the existing infrastructures could
     imply acquiring of land which may be already used by other activities (including habitation,
     agricultural production, pasture, etc), which could involve displacement of small numbers of
     people or loss of activities. However, much of the construction is on land areas that have been
     allocated for a specific purpose, such as a school in which case involuntary taking of land would
     not occur.

     To mitigate these potential negative impacts, an Environmental and Social Management
     Framework and a Resettlement Policy Framework were prepared, consulted upon and publicly
     disclosed for the parent project. They have been disclosed in-country and at Infoshop on October
     17 and 29, 2013 respectively. The ESMF addresses all these issues and includes two annexes on
     pesticides management and management of biomedical waste. The screening process of selection
     proposed in the ESMF will be done so that the biophysical characteristics of the areas where the
     project's activities will be carried out are taken into account, and consequently mitigation measures
     are implemented. The project is not financing sub-projects which would be category A, with major
     impacts.

     The Resettlement Policy Framework contains the roadmap for addressing any land acquisition,
     losses of assets or livelihoods and/or restriction of access to resources. If any of these impacts are
     foreseen in the sub-projects as a result of the screening process, a Resettlement Action Plan will be
     prepared in consultation with affected populations and implemented prior to starting any civil

                                                 Page 4 of 7
  works.

  It should be noted that the positive impact of the additional financing is expected to exceed by far
  its negative impact, as the supported interventions are expected to result in (i) improved access to
  basic social goods and services (education, nutrition, health, sanitation, administrative services,
  water) (ii) job creation; (iii) improvement in commercial activities and increase in the revenue of
  selected beneficiaries; and (iv) improved access to roads and linkages with markets.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Due to the nature of the project’s activities, no irreversible or long term impacts are expected as a
  result of this intervention.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  No other project alternatives were considered given that the impacts were considered small and
  reversible.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  For the PDCplus, the Borrower prepared (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF) which includes guidance for dealing with safeguards issues arising from project activities;
  and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to address potential issues that might arise due to
  the need for land acquisition, losses of assets or livelihoods and/or restriction of access to
  resources. In light of the additional financing, the PDCplus ESMF and RPF were re-disclosed in
  country on October 17, 2013 and in the World Bank Infoshop on October 29, 2013.

  As per the ESMF and RPF, Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) as well as
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are to be prepared, as needed, for the civil works. For works
  with negligible impacts, environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will
  apply.

  The Project Implementation Manual incorporates the procedures set forth in the EMSF and RPF in
  the preparation and implementation of the community infrastructure sub-projects. At the stage of
  identification of the sub-project, an environmental focal point is named in the community and the
  proposed sub-project is screened to determine its eligibility and its potential environmental and
  social impacts. Depending on the degree of potential impacts, either an ESMP/RAP is prepared or
  environmental attenuation measures are specified. Approval of the sub-project is carried out by a
  committee including the regional representative of the national environmental agency. The
  environmental and social management clauses are incorporated into the contract documents for the
  sub-project. During implementation, the project’s 5 regional Agencies to Support Community
  Development (AGAIBs) and regional representative of the national environmental agency verify
  the respect of the ESMP/RAP or environmental measures. There is also an Environmental Focal
  Point in the PDC Technical Secretariat, who oversees the screening and sub-project selection
  process to ensure it complies with the safeguards provisions.

  Implementation of the environmental and social safeguards throughout the PDC (the previous
  project which closed on September 30, 2013) and PDCplus have been consistently satisfactory.
  Because of their small scale, standardized nature, and use of existing sites, community
  infrastructure activities under the PDC and PDCplus have typically not required the preparation of


                                             Page 5 of 7
  ESMPs but have relied on environmental and social management clauses which are inserted into
  the contracts of contractors.

  An Environmental and Social Safeguards Audit was carried out in 2013 before the closing of the
  PDC. The Audit found that the usage of previously used sites has reduced significantly the
  negative impacts on biodiversity / forest, soil, water resources, plantations / crops and homes.
  Regarding social safeguards, no complaint has been registered on the aspects related to land. The
  audit recommended additional training in environmental monitoring and supervision for the
  Technical Secretariat of the PDC and the AGAIBs; recruiting consultants to assist the AGAIBs
  with environmental issues as needed if support from Government environmental officials is not
  available; continued involvement of ANGE in the implementation of the PDCplus; creating
  simplified environmental plans for contractors and designating an environmental focal point
  among contractors’ staff in cases where an ESMP/RAP is required; planting trees to serve as wind-
  breaks and erosion control near schools; and more consistent identification and training of
  environmental focus point in communities. On the basis of the audit and its own supervision of a
  sample of sub-projects, the National Agency for Environmental Management (ANGE) certified in
  October 2013 that the PDC had taken into account the potential environmental impacts of its
  community sub-projects in an acceptable manner and in consistency with national legislation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders include direct and indirect project beneficiaries, communities affected by the
  construction and rehabilitation of socio economic infrastructures, relevant government agencies
  and ministries, agencies involved in the execution of the project, the ST/PDC, the AGAIB, civil
  society and the Village Development Committees. These stakeholders were consulted before the
  public disclosure of the ESMF and RPF that had been elaborated for the PDC.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Oct-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Oct-2013
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Togo                                                             17-Oct-2013
  Comments: Togo-Presse No. 9142, Oct. 17, 2013, p. 15
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Oct-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Oct-2013
"In country" Disclosure
  Togo                                                             17-Oct-2013
  Comments: Togo-Presse No. 9142, Oct. 17, 2013, p. 15
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                           Page 6 of 7
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: John Van Dyck
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                         Date: 30-Jan-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                          Date: 30-Jan-2014




                                               Page 7 of 7
