                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1077

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                         Project ID:      P151294
                            Project Name:      Oromia Forested Landscape Carbon Finance Project (P151294)
                            Task Team          Stephen Danyo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Jan-2016
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR

                            Sector(s):         Forestry (90%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Climate change (60%), Land administration and management (20%), Water
                                               resource management (15%), Biodiversity (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     55.00                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                  55.00
                              Total                                                                        55.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           1. The Project Development Objective is to reduce deforestation and net greenhouse gas emissions
                           from land use in targeted large forested landscapes in Oromia.
                           C. Project Description
                           2.      Addressing the drivers of deforestation and forest degradation in Ethiopia will require an
                           integrated landscape perspective that addresses trade-offs and synergies among land uses that include
                         forest, crop, livestock, water, and household energy objectives. The proposed REDD+ pilot project in
                         Oromia (“Oromia Forested Landscape Carbon Finance Project”) would require both direct
                         investments and activities to improve the enabling environment for landscape-level management, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forest resources in particular, by (i) convening carbon finance, knowledge and tools; as well as (ii)
                         strengthening institutional and community capacity to plan, implement and monitor forest and land
                         resources.

                         3.       To support the Oromia Forested Landscape Program, up to $50 million has been pledged as
                         results-based carbon finance payments, channeled through the World Bank’s BioCarbon Fund
                         Initiative for Sustainable Forest Landscapes. These funds would be disbursed in two phases:
                         i.       An Implementation Phase, where potential advance payments could be disbursed against the
                         achievement of agreed-upon outputs and intermediate results. These advance payments would be a
                         percentage of the $50 million carbon finance payments and would be paid for the future expected
                         emission reductions (the financial envelope for this phase still needs to be negotiated with the donors
                         of the BioCarbon Fund);
                         ii.      An Emission Reduction Phase, where payments will be made against verified emission
                         reductions. Any advance payments would be subtracted during this phase and Emission Reductions
                         payments will only be available if more emission reductions are available than what has already been
                         paid as advanced payments. The BioCarbon Fund donors are expected to assume the financial risk of
                         making the advance carbon payments yet not attaining the expected emission reductions.

                         4. The Implementation Phase is proposed to be five years, from 2015 to 2020, to allow sufficient
                         time to mobilize and empower diverse stakeholders involved in landscape management, including
                         forest-dependent communities. The project would attempt to start generating verifiable emissions
                         reductions after three years of project implementation, and the Project could pay for those emissions
                         reductions for five or more years. Emission reductions could continue after the lifetime of the Bank-
                         financed project, and would be expected to be purchased by other donors / buyers.

                         5.       State-wide scope of intervention: A technical study is underway to analyze the drivers of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         deforestation and the strategic options to address those drivers. This study will identify options for
                         activities and the geographical area (large landscapes) where the Implementation Phase should be
                         focused, along with the estimated costs of each activity. Based on the currently available
                         information, the targeted areas of the project would be approximately 40-60 woredas located in and
                         around the Bale and Jimma / Ilubabor forested landscapes, which harbor nearly all high forests, along
                         with significant areas of low forests and high woodlands in the state. The precise boundary of this
                         area will be determined during project preparation but is anticipated to be larger than 1.25 million
                         hectares of forest, allowing for a “jurisdictional” approach to be taken covering at least 40-60
                         woredas. This is the area where investments expected to generate emissions reductions would be
                         promoted, accounted and paid for . At the same time, the project would monitor forest cover change
                         and land use change more generally throughout Oromia, to provide experience needed for putting in
                         place a larger state-wide jurisdictional approach for managing forest carbon. The project would also
                         promote enhancements to the enabling environment state-wide for reducing deforestation such as by
                         land tenure certification and land-use planning.

                         6.        At the moment, the funding available through the Project is not likely sufficient to support all
                         woredas or all forested landscapes in Oromia. It is possible that the proposed project could be the
                         first in a series of projects regionally and nationally that support the government in establishing and
                         implementing a sector-wide approach to investment in sustainable forest landscapes, with strong
                         strategic linkages to the Bank-financed SLMP-2 among other Bank-financed projects.
                         Implementation Phase
Public Disclosure Copy




                         7.       The proposed project would have three components during the implementation phase
                         (2015-2020) that together set the stage for the country and communities to receive further emissions
                         reduction payments from 2020 or earlier if verifiable emissions are produced. The proposed
                         interventions are based on the best available information on the existing causes of deforestation in
                         Oromia, which emphasizes small-scale agricultural expansion and wood collection for fuel as the
                         most important causes at present. Increasing land and agriculture productivity through sustainable
                         land management practices such as agro-forestry, conservation agriculture, low-tillage and water
                         harvesting is expected to reduce smallholders’ needs to farm additional land. Such activities would
                         be coupled with local land use planning, whereby communities would identify and agree to conserve
                         forest areas (particularly in the frontier between cropland and forests). Finally, rights to forest
                         management would be devolved from government to local communities via participatory forest
                         management, which is an approach implemented in Ethiopia with some success, including in
                         Oromia. These interventions will be refined once the causes and agents of deforestation and the land
                         use dynamics are better known.

                         8.      The initial start-up work in the three components would be financed by advance carbon
                         payments. Where possible, existing project resources from associated projects could also be deployed
                         where there is geographical and activity overlap. For example, the Bank/Norway/GEF-financed
                         Sustainable Land Management Project 2 (SLMP-2) covers 39 woredas in Oromia, but none in the
                         Bale eco-region. On the other hand, other initiatives, such as those led by Farm Africa (NGO) and
                         JICA have been supporting PFM in the project area and could contribute to generating ERs.

                         9.       The proposed project is fully in line with and contributes to the national REDD+ framework
                         currently being prepared by the federal government under the leadership of MEF. Monitoring of
                         forest cover and forest cover changes will follow methodologies established at the national level, and
                         the data generated by this pilot project would feed into the national forest cover monitoring system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project would test on the ground the main elements of the national REDD+ strategy, including
                         policies and activities to address deforestation from forest conversion into cropland and wood
                         collection for charcoal making. Finally, the project would adopt the national-level policies on REDD
                         +, including any eventual policy on benefit sharing if compliant with Bank safeguards policy.

                         Component 1. Multi-sector landscape management interventions

                         10.     Sub-component 1.1. Participatory forest management (PFM) for existing and new forest.
                         This sub-component would finance participatory forestry management (PFM) as a strategy to
                         conserve and sustainably use forest resources by giving local communities rights and responsibilities
                         for management, and supporting them in harvesting and adding value to non-timber forest products
                         from existing or new forests. The project would scale up the approach that is being successfully
                         implemented in Oromia. The sub-component would also finance large- and small-scale reforestation
                         and afforestation activities, as well as natural regeneration of deforested or degraded land, building
                         on the experience from the successful Humbo carbon finance project linked to the Bank-financed
                         SLMP-1.

                         11.     Sub-component 1.2. Soil and water conservation and crop and range land management. This
                         sub-component would finance the promotion of agroforestry, agriculture intensification, soil and
                         water conservation and other climate-smart practices that deliver multiple wins and can reduce
                         pressure on forest resources or provide alternative livelihoods or energy sources. Such practices
                         would be demand-driven and could include locally appropriate options such as smallholder
                         agroforestry (i.e., fertilizer trees), low tillage, re-vegetation of communal lands, bunding, terracing,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cover crops, and grazing enclosures. Such interventions will draw from the experience of the Bank-
                         financed SLMP-2, Productive Safety Nets Program (PSNP) and the Agricultural Growth Program
                         (AGP). The main local partner to implement these activities would be the Oromia Bureau of
                         Agriculture which is responsible for implementing SLMP-2, and potentially some NGOs.

                         12.     Sub-component 1.3. Sustainable household energy. To help land users manage firewood
                         demand, this sub-component would finance the promotion of cooking stoves, bio-digesters, and
                         improved efficiency kilns. Innovations appropriate to Ethiopia would be explored during project
                         preparation, such as the use of fast-growing, small-holder managed Gliricidia trees, as appropriate, to
                         fuel small off-grid community-scale gasifier systems – a true integrated energy-food production
                         system.

                         13.     Sub-component 1.4. Private sector innovations. This sub-component would support private
                         sector development at community and SME level. Areas for support would be determined through
                         on-going assessments and could include such growth-oriented sub-sectors as the development of
                         sustainable timber operations, sustainable coffee/agroforestry supply chains (wild forest and shade
                         coffee in particular), sustainable leather/livestock supply chains, biomass fuel processing, and so on.

                         Component 2. Strengthening the state-wide policy framework for sustainable landscape management

                         14.     Sub-component 2.1. Land tenure certification. This sub-component would finance the state-
                         wide expansion of rural land certification and would test tenure certification of forest lands. This
                         would include the delivery of land certificates to individual female and male headed households as
                         well as community-level certificates where applicable, such as in forest lands. The activities would
                         build on lessons and approaches from SLMP-2’s land certification component and the on-going Bank
                         financed land certification technical assistance. Global best practice would also be brought to bear
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from community land tenure experiences, particularly in and around forests.

                         15.     Sub-component 2.2 Participatory land use planning. This sub-component would finance
                         state-wide the finalization of the ongoing land-use planning in Oromia. Watershed planning at
                         various scales, from community to critical watersheds, would also be promoted where appropriate.

                         Component 3. Project management, monitoring and emissions verification

                         16.      This component would finance project management arrangements and mechanisms such as
                         monitoring and evaluation (M&E), third party verification, and implementation planning. The costs
                         of this component will be partially financed in parallel by the Government (Federal and Oromia)
                         through the funds currently financing the REDD+ Readiness process. Financing for Component 3
                         would be complemented by the on-going parallel REDD+ Readiness technical assistance grants at
                         federal level to the extent possible, recognizing that the Oromia project is being implemented at the
                         Oromia state level, and the REDD+ readiness activities are being implemented by MEF.


                         Emissions Reduction Phase

                         17.     Payments would be made for those emissions reductions that have been independently
                         verified. Those funds would only be accessed if the Project is able to demonstrate verified Emission
                         Reductions (ER), based on a robust monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) system and
                         against an agreed reference emissions level (REL). The maintenance and expansion of the activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would also occur through the ER payments. Payments would be made as early as possible once ERs
                         are verified. These payments would be distributed according to a benefit sharing mechanism to be
                         developed and agreed upon by the stakeholders during project preparation. It is envisioned that a
                         significant proportion of the payments would reach communities on the ground.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Implementing Agency Assessment

                         18.      The preparation and implementation of the proposed project would be led by the Oromia
                         Forest and Wildlife Enterprise (OFWE), in close coordination with the Ministry of Environment and
                         Forest (MEF), which houses the national REDD+ Secretariat. OFWE has been leading discussions
                         on REDD+ in the state for years now, with support from technical partners including NGOs such as
                         Farm Africa and SOS Sahel. OFWE houses the Oromia REDD+ Coordination Unit that includes key
                         staff such as the Oromia REDD coordinator, social development officer, and M&E officer.

                         19.      OFWE is a parastatal created in 2007. It manages about 1.75 million ha of land, including
                         1.2 million ha of natural forest in Oromia. OFWE contributed to the advancement of REDD+, by
                         initiating the Bale Mountains REDD+ project, together with civil society partners Farm Africa and
                         SOS Sahel, among others. Twenty-five percent of Oromia’s forest is currently under PFM, and
                         OFWE has partly transferred responsibilities to local institutions such as Forest User Cooperatives.

                         20.      At the federal level, the main government institutions responsible for forest, environment,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         land use and rural development include the new Ministry of Environment and Forest (MEF,
                         established in 2013) and the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). Other important federal ministries for
                         the REDD+ process include the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) and the
                         Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Energy (MoWIE). The administration of land use is in general
                         decentralized to regional Bureaus of Agriculture (BoA), but in Oromia, land use is decentralized to
                         the Oromia Rural Land and Environmental Protection Bureau. In addition, the Federal Government
                         plans to institutionalize MEF at sub-national levels to strengthen forest extension services. At the
                         Woreda (district) level, various sector specialists come together to carry out development planning
                         and projects.

                         21.     In July 2014 MEF and OFWE signed a Memorandum of Understanding for cooperating in
                         the design and implementation of the proposed pilot carbon operation. The MoU spells out roles and
                         responsibilities of each agency.

                         22.      The National REDD+ Steering Committee would guide the overall strategic direction of the
                         proposed pilot carbon operation. In coordination with the national level, the Oromia REDD+
                         Steering Committee would be accountable for providing strategic guidance, and promoting inter-
                         sectoral collaboration within Oromia, and is chaired by the Vice President of Oromia.

                         23.     At the community and farm level, community organizations and NGOs would play important
                           roles in delivery of services including extension support, outreach, awareness raising activities and
                           facilitation of knowledge exchanges. NGOs such as Farm Africa and SOS Sahel have executed
                           successful PFM operations in the Bale area that could be scaled up under the proposed operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           24.     An ongoing study is addressing the optimal arrangements for project implementation.
                           Particular challenge is to promote inter-sectoral collaboration, and to ensure an efficient fund flow
                           mechanism that would allow funds to go to different sectors at the regional level and to communities.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexandra C. Bezeredi (OPSOR)
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
                           Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)
                           Dereje Agonafir Habtewold (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project activities are expected to have
                           BP 4.01                                               significant positive impacts on targeted forested
                                                                                 areas. However, OP 4.01 is triggered as some of
                                                                                 the possible sub- investment activities under
                                                                                 Component 1 could have limited adverse
                                                                                 environmental and social impacts andrisks;
                                                                                 these activities could potentially include
                                                                                 construction or rehabilitation of physical
                                                                                 structures for water catchment management
                                                                                 such as check-dams, water harvesting structures,
                                                                                 small scale water irrigation, access roads, area
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 enclosures, etc.
                                                                                 Therefore, OFWE would need to prepare,
                                                                                 disclose and consult on an Environmental and
                                                                                 Social Management Framework (ESMF) in
                                                                                 compliance with OP 4.01. The ESMF would
                                                                                 provide a framework for managing and
                                                                                 mitigating the environmental and social risk
                                                                                 related to the project activities, and the
                                                                                 preparation of Environmental and Social
                                                                                 Assessments (ESAs) and Environmental and
                                                                                 Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for specific
                                                                                 intervention as needed. The ESMF will include
                                                                                 standard methods and procedures, along with
                                                                                 appropriate institutional arrangements for
                                                                                 screening and reviewing sub-projects and
                                                                                 monitoring the implementation of mitigation
                                                                                 measures to prevent adverse and cumulative
                                                                                 impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes              Consistent with OP 4.01 the project will support
                                                                                 the maintenance, and rehabilitation of forest
                                                                 areas and their function, and local communities
                                                                 will be involved in [design, implementation and
                                                                 monitoring of activities] .Overall, the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 activities are expected to have significant
                                                                 positive impacts on natural habitats. Activities
                                                                 that involve the significant conversion or
                                                                 degradation of critical natural habitats will not
                                                                 be supported.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The project activities are expected to have
                                                                 significant positive impacts on targeted forests
                                                                 in Oromia by reducing deforestation and forest
                                                                 degradation, while contributing to improve the
                                                                 livelihood of forest-dependent communities.
                                                                 Potential impact of the REDD+ activities on
                                                                 natural forests will be assessed through a SESA,
                                                                 that is being undertaken as part of the ongoing
                                                                 REDD Readiness Project. The project’s ESMF
                                                                 will also detail procedures to screen project
                                                                 activities for potential adverse environmental
                                                                 and social impacts, and to take measures to
                                                                 avoid, minimize and mitigate such impacts.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   This policy will be evaluated during project
                                                                 preparation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   REDD+ activities could finance activities in
                         BP 4.11                                 areas potentially containing physical cultural
                                                                 resources (e.g. holy sites such as sacred groves,
                                                                 sacred forests, etc.). The ESMF, EAs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 ESMPs developed will include provisions to
                                                                 screen REDD+ activities for such impacts and
                                                                 to deal with chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The issues relating to OP 4.10 will be defined in
                                                                 detail through Social Assessment and
                                                                 Consultation to reflect the policy requirements.
                                                                 The project documentation will summarize the
                                                                 key findings of the social assessment including
                                                                 the process used to foster free, prior, and
                                                                 informed consultations and broad community
                                                                 support for the project, including the provision
                                                                 of grievance redress, and benefit sharing issues;
                                                                 and the identified mitigation actions will be
                                                                 incorporated in the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The implementation of the project activities
                         4.12                                    may involve acquisition of land and /or
                                                                 restriction of access to legally designated parks,
                                                                 land acquisition, protected areas, or forest
                                                                 management / reforestation areas. Therefore,
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and
                                                                                                                                 Process Framework (PF) will be prepared,
                                                                                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed to ensure that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 appropriate measures are in place to address any
                                                                                                                                 issues which might arise from potential land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition and or restriction of access to legally
                                                                                                                                 designated parks, land acquisition, protected
                                                                                                                                 areas, or forest management / reforestation areas
                                                                                                                                 under the Project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           This policy will be evaluated during project
                                                                                                                                 preparation. There could be a potential small
                                                                                                                                 irrigation. No new construction or rehabilitation
                                                                                                                                 of large dams are anticipated to be financed by
                                                                                                                                 the Project.
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jul-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard related studies would be prepared from October 2014 to August 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Stephen Danyo

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 22-Oct-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                                                                                                   Date: 22-Oct-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
