                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Report No.: ISDSC7912

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data
Public Disclosure Copy
                         Country:            Ethiopia                         Project ID:      P146883
                         Project Name:       ET Productive Safety Nets IV (PSNP 4) (P146883)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Task Team           Camilla Holmemo
                         Leader:
                         Estimated           23-Jun-2014                      Estimated        21-Oct-2014
                         Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                         Managing Unit:      AFTSE                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                         Sector(s):          Other social services (70%), Public administration- Other social services (20%),
                                             General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (1 0%)
                         Theme(s):           Social safety nets (60%), Natural disaster management (15%), Vulnerability
                                             assessment and monitoring (10%), Improving labor markets (15%)
                         Financing (In USD Million)
                         Total Project Cost:   2700.00                      Total Bank Financing:        500.00
                         Financing Gap:         684.00
                           Financing Source                                                             Amount
                           BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            100.00
                           International Development Association (IDA)                                   500.00
                           US Agency for International Development (USAID)                               550.00
                           DENMARK Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA)                                  25.00
                           UK British Department for International Development
                                                                                                         500.00
                           (DFID)
                           EC European Commission                                                         55.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                           CANADA, Govt. of                                                              100.00
                           IRELAND, Govt. of                                                              68.00
                           NETHERLANDS Netherlands Development Association                                68.00
                           World Food Program                                                             50.00
                           Total                                                                        2016.00
                         Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                         Category:
                         Is this a           No
                         Repeater
                         project?

                         B. Project Objectives
                         The Program Development Objective for the program is: Enhanced access to safety nets and disaster
                         risk management systems, livelihoods and nutrition services for vulnerable households in rural
                         Ethiopia.

                         This will be achieved through 1) support for the building of social protection and DRM systems, 2)
                         delivery of safety nets and linkages to livelihoods services to vulnerable rural households, and 3)
                         improved institutional capacity.

                         The project will also contribute to the higher level objectives of (i) improved household food
Public Disclosure Copy




                         security, nutrition and livelihoods, and (ii) enhanced household and community resilience to shocks.
                         This is consistent with the higher level objectives of the ongoing APL series supporting the PSNP.
                         C. Project Description
                         The new phase of the program (PSNP 4) will build on the significant lessons learned in previous
                         phases, documented through bi-annual impact evaluations and a large number of studies and
                         assessments. It also incorporates global experiences, in particular from Latin-America, South- and
                         East-Asia and other countries in Africa. The new program will be integrated within a broader system
                         and policy environment for social protection and disaster risk management. This move to a systems
                         approach, supporting investments to build administrative and management systems, marks a natural
                         progression of the program to date, as it has developed from transitioning Ethiopia's emergency
                         system to a more predictable safety nets program, which will now be aligned under a national
                         system. This will build on lessons from program coordination under the current phase of the
                         program, but significantly move forward the integration and rationalization of programs by
                         supporting the development of a system for effective delivery of social protection and DRM. Other
                         important innovations in PSNP 4 are: integration of the two programs (PSNP and HABP) into a
                         single program that provides an integrated set of safety net services and technical assistance for
                         livelihoods strengthening to clients, and scaling up to a national rural program, in all regions. The
                         program will continue to be implemented through government systems.

                         The scale to a national rural program will happen over time so as to ensure that capacity is built
                         before program implementation begins in each area. Implementation will start with the existing
                         caseload from the current program, followed by a phased introduction of woredas starting with those
                         with greatest vulnerability: 1) the repeat transitory caseload in current PSNP woredas, 2) woredas
                         that have become chronically food insecure since 2005, and 3) woredas that have had a transitory
                         caseload since 2005. The program will also build strategic linkages between the development of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rural safety nets and the urban safety net (under development with the Ministry of Works and Urban)
                         to ensure the use of complementary tools and a consistent approach under the same system.

                         Three components will contribute to the achievement of the overall PSNP development objective.
                         These are:

                         Component 1: Systems Development (USD 240 million total). Support to the social protection and
                         DRM systems will include targeting, registry, capacity development, and management information
                         systems (MIS)

                         Component 2: Productive Safety Nets and Livelihoods Strengthening (USD 2.5 billion total): This
                         will be done through 3 sub-components delivering key services to the targeted households: (a) Safety
                         nets transfers to chronically food insecure households. This sub-component will also include a
                         mechanism to respond to transitory needs and improve disaster risk management, building on the
                         lessons from the contingency budgets and risk financing in the current program. (b) Sustainable
                         community assets and human capital investments; and c) Livelihoods strengthening through
                         increased agricultural production, off-farm income generating activities, and labor/employment
                         linkages

                         Component 3: Institutional and Management Development (USD 260 million total). This component
                         will support sustainable capacity development and institutional strengthening to implement PSNP 4.

                         Component 1: Systems Development:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 will support the strengthening of the social protection and DRM systems and the
                         transition from independent programs to a system of integrated social protection and DRM service
                         delivery. Supporting the transition to a system will entail support the key building blocks, tools and
                         instruments of the systems, including for harmonized planning, targeting, single registry and
                         information management across social protection programs and associated policies. For the DRM
                         system, support will be focused on the development and implementation of appropriate response
                         mechanisms for transitory needs, including early warning triggers and harmonized planning and
                         monitoring.

                         The current community-based PSNP targeting system, which has worked very well particularly in
                         highlands regions, will be retained and supplemented by a PMT-based poverty index. This will form
                         the basis for the development of a unified registry database which will support harmonized targeting
                         across various social protection interventions. Such a registry could bring together beneficiary data
                         across different programs serving the same clients and harmonize PSNP beneficiary targeting with
                         other social protection programming within the country. This will enable the provision of a suite of
                         services (for instance, PSNP transfers as well as fee waivers for health services) to the same
                         beneficiaries, identification of gaps in support, and analysis of the impact of different services. The
                         registry will initially focus on PSNP areas, and expand over time to a true national registry.

                         Harmonized information management will support both the social protection and DRM agendas. It
                         will entail harmonizing M&E systems with common indicators for related programs (e.g. public
                         works and sustainable land management, pastoral community development), and a harmonized M&E
                         data collection and analysis system. In addition, a program-specific MIS will be established, of
                         which the single registry will be one element, to ensure effective knowledge management. A
                         comprehensive public works database will also be a crucial part of the MIS. Establishing such an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MIS system will necessitate targeted capacity building efforts, involving both skills training and
                         investments in information and communication technology.

                         In addition, the next phase of the program must develop clearer triggers and thresholds for
                         intervention, and improve the contribution of the program to DRM systems and tools (e.g. early
                         warning), including support for woreda risk profiles. The transitory response will continue to use the
                         delivery mechanisms for support developed under the regular program transfers. Harmonized
                         information management will enable the use of common triggers for DRM interventions, thereby
                         enabling more rapid and effective responses to shocks.

                         Component 2: Productive Safety Nets and Support to Livelihoods Strengthening

                         Component 2 will deliver a range of client services, including safety nets transfers, sustainable
                         community assets and human capital services, and support for livelihoods strengthening. This will be
                         done through the implementation of three sub-components described below.

                         Sub-component 2a will provide safety nets transfers to targeted households. The program will
                         provide transfers to chronically food insecure households through public works, human capital
                         conditionalities and direct support depending on the household’s labor capacity. The next generation
                         of the program will aim to improve transfers through increased timeliness and predictability; an
                         increased shift to cash and improved cash-food parity (a new food basket with 15 kg of grain and 4
                         kg of pulses has been agreed); further piloting of innovative transfer mechanisms such as electronic
                         payments or vouchers; enhanced role of transfers in helping households move towards sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         graduation, including the provision of a lump-sum payment equal to 6 months of transfers upon
                         graduation; and increased number of months of support for direct support beneficiaries

                         This sub-component will also support effective response mechanisms that provide appropriate and
                         timely resources to transitorily food insecure households in response to shocks. In particular, this
                         component will aim to support the development/improvement of a continuum of response that
                         entails: 1) PSNP 4 covering the chronic caseload (expanded to all rural areas), and 2) A contingency
                         budget at three levels (woreda, regional, federal) to address transitory needs and take preventative
                         action when needed. Outside the program, this will be complemented by a humanitarian response for
                         rapid onset and large scale crisis beyond contingency budget. This will require access to adequate
                         information as well as clear triggers and thresholds for intervention. The single registry can serve as
                         a mechanism that provides the necessary household-level information to enable rapid scale-up using
                         the contingency budget.

                         Subcomponent 2b will support the development of community assets and improved livelihoods
                         through public works and watershed planning. Continuing its successful participatory community
                         planning process, the program will aim to improve public works, building on lessons from the
                         current program as well as international good practices, through increased technical quality of public
                         works, particularly for road and water subprojects, improved planning and M&E; improved
                         appropriateness of public works timing and subprojects in pastoral areas; and more appropriate work
                         norms for women. Financing for administrative costs and capital inputs will be allocated to woredas
                         to provide the necessary complementary inputs as well as technical supervision and monitoring for
                         public works activities.

                         This sub-component will also introduce soft conditionalities to supplement the public works
                         conditionality. This will include awareness raising and skills training for nutrition, financial literacy,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and use of ante-natal services for pregnant women who are moved temporarily from public works to
                         direct support.

                         Subcomponent 2c will support livelihoods strengthening, drawing lessons learned from the
                         implementation of the current HABP, other livelihoods support in Ethiopia, including through the
                         Agriculture Growth Program, and global lessons from CGAP and others. In particular, PSNP 4 will
                         aim to better prepare households for sustainable graduation through: regular receipt of transfers and
                         access to community assets (described above), access to technical livelihoods support, household
                         savings, financial livelihoods support, and implementation of evidence-based graduation
                         mechanisms. Livelihoods strengthening will be supported through three pathways: support to on-
                         farm income generation, off-farm income generating activities, and links to labor/employment. The
                         PSNP will provide technical support to each of the three livelihood pathways, including 1) stronger
                         links to extension for technical support, including mentoring and coaching in business and technical
                         skills training for diversification into off-farm activities/entrepreneurship, and 2) workforce
                         development and linkages to employment.

                         The program will also improve access to appropriate financial services, such as savings for all
                         households, livelihoods transfers and linking households to financial institutions. HABP included
                         savings mobilization by RUSACCOs and savings requirements by MFIs prior to lending, but
                         relatively little focus on savings promotion at household level. The next phase will have a greater
                         focus on household savings as a critical step and on village savings and lending associations
                         (VSLAs) as an important entry point for households into the financial system. In addition, the
                         program will continue to support linkages to credit-providing institutions for households, but will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                         directly deliver credit to clients. It will also introduce livelihoods transfers. These transfers will be
                         predicated on household participation in skills training and savings activities.

                         PSNP 4 will seek to ensure that program graduates do not fall back into food insecurity by improving
                         graduation mechanisms and introducing risk mitigation measures for graduates. Piloting of the
                         Graduation Prediction System (GPS) suggests that evidence-based graduation rates would be 28%
                         lower than the targets set by the system as it currently operates. This finding reveals the need for
                         implementing evidence-based graduation, and for the absolute separation of the target setting process
                         from the assessment of graduation of individual households in the next phase. In addition, measures
                         must be put in place to mitigate the risks of recent graduates, for instance through the continuation of
                         certain types of support (e.g. health fee waivers) beyond graduation, and the ability to re-enter the
                         program if necessary.

                         Component 3 Institutional and Management Development

                         Component 3 will provide institutional support to GoE to improve overall program management. It
                         will support institutional and management strengthening activities focusing on: 1) Program
                         management at all levels; 2) Capacity building; 3) Monitoring and evaluation; 4) Transparency and
                         accountability; and 5) Knowledge Management.

                         Program management and capacity building support will aim to improve the effectiveness of
                         program management and implementation at all levels while supporting the transition to a system
                         (described under Component 1 above) and the expansion of the program to all regions of the country.
                         As the safety net expands geographically and becomes increasingly integrated within evolving social
                         protection and DRM systems, the types of capacity required in terms of human resources, facilities,
                         and institutions, will become more complex. The future safety net will need to incorporate a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         comprehensive capacity development strategy and action plan, and be supported by dedicated
                         capacity development budgets. This could be done through a PSNP Capacity Development Support
                         Facility, built into the management structures of the program.

                         Monitoring and evaluation support will aim to improve the collection and analysis of monitoring and
                         evaluation indicators in order to enable evidence-based decision-making. Strengthened transparency
                         and accountability support, including grievance redress mechanisms, will be developed during the
                         design. PSNP 4 will also strengthen its support to gender development, and a Gender Action Plan
                         will be developed for the program.

                         The World Bank will use Investment Project Financing (IPF) for this operation. A Program for
                         Results (P4R) was considered, but given the significant systems building components and need to
                         coordinate with the 10 other development partners to ensure continued a common approach, it was
                         agreed that a switch to a P4R should not be done at this time. Indicative discussions with the 9 other
                         Development Partners to the program, indicate that they will all continue financing the program in
                         the new phase.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         As in the previous phases of the PSNP, the Public Works programme will continue to be developed
                         by the communities based on a watershed development approach, using the integrated, multi-sector
                         landscape management approach of the government's Community-Based Participatory Watershed
                         Development Guideline (CBPWDG) and Rangeland Management Guideline. These Public Works
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sub-projects, together with activities related to household asset-creation, will comprise an annual
                         programme of several thousand small-scale and micro-scale sub-projects carried out in food-insecure
                         rural areas across all regions of Ethiopia, to be rolled out over time. PW sub-projects will be small-
                         scale, and their impacts will be site-specific and limited. They will include Natural Resource
                         Management sub-projects including soil & water conservation, social infrastructure including
                         community roads, health posts, school renovation and Farmers Training Centres, community water
                         projects and livelihoods-based subprojects such as small-scale irrigation.

                         The condition of the community watershed determines to a large extent the ability of its residents to
                         engage in household asset-building and income-generating activities such as cereal or vegetable
                         production, animal fattening, beekeeping, etc. Thus as the watersheds become developed, community
                         PW Action Plans typically show an increasing emphasis on livelihoods-related subprojects. The
                         design of PSNP IV will facilitate this gradual change of focus.

                         The Climate Smart Initiative (CSI) developed during PSNP III has determined that the PW
                         programme has an important role to play in mitigating the effects of climate change, and reducing the
                         vulnerability of already food insecure communities. Thus climate change requirements are
                         incorporated in the procedure for planning PW under PSNP IV. The requirements for Disaster Risk
                         Management (DRM) in terms of both risk mitigation and adaptation are also incorporated in the new
                         design of PSNP IV.

                         The community PW action plans will be more nutrition-sensitive by incorporating into the
                         community PW planning process subprojects designed to increase access to a more diversified diet,
                         enable production of nutrient rich crops, increases production of complementary food, etc. Nutrition
                         sensitive PWs subprojects will be accompanied by behaviour change communication.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Based on livelihood groups, the rural areas in which the Public Works and livelihoods investments
                         will be implemented have been classified by the Ethiopian Development Research Institute (EDRI)
                         as the “Five Ethiopias” consist of: (a) drought prone highlands; (b) moisture reliable cereals areas;
                         (c) moisture-reliable enset areas; (d) humid moisture-reliable lowlands; and (e) pastoral areas.

                         Each Public Works sub-project will be screened utilizing an Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF), which builds upon the PW ESMF procedure used in PSNP III. Livelihoods
                         investments at household level will be implemented in all of these regions and will be subject to the
                         Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) procedure as outlined in the ESMF.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         A series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and management
                         framework in Ethiopia: The Proclamation on the establishment of Environmental Protection Organs
                         (No. 295/2002); The Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No. 299/2002); and The
                         Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002).
                         The process of screening PW subproject for possible negative environmental and social impacts, and
                         ensuring that appropriate mitigating measures are incorporated in the design as appropriate, is in
                         accordance with Ethiopia's Environmental Impact Assessment Proclamation. The process is
                         documented in the ESMF currently being updated by the Government of Ethiopia and will be
                         disclosed before Appraisal.
                         There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for supporting environmental
                         compliance: the Ministry of Environment and Forestry (MoEF) and Ministry of Agriculture (MoA),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which have decentralized to the regional and wereda levels. There exists capacity within the MoA
                         and MoEF at the federal and decentralized levels to support basic environmental and social safeguard
                         issues. In addition, all the regions in which PSNP 4 will be implemented, apart from Beneshengul-
                         Gumez and Gambella, have institutional capacity for implementing the ESMF either fully established
                         or in the process of being established. However, depending on the frequency of occurrence of Public
                         Works sub-projects involving involuntary loss of assets or access to assets in PSNP 4, some
                         additional capacity-building for the development of Resettlement Action Plans will be required. In
                         the case of Beneshengul-Gumez and Gambella, PSNP 4 will provide capacity-building for
                         implementation of the specific requirements of the ESMF.
                         There are now Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists working in all of the PW units at
                         federal, regional and woreda levels. As a result, during PSNP III, ESMF screening rates reached
                         100% in the highland regions of Amhara, Oromia, Tigray and SNNP. Investment in continuous
                         training of regional and woreda staff and Development Agents s is seen as key to this success and has
                         sustained the technical capacities of each level in the implementation not only of the ESMF but of
                         community-based watershed planning and the development of PW plans. This continuous approach
                         to training and cascading to experts will be critical for PSNP 4.

                         However, capacity in pastoral areas is weak and has directly impacted ESMF implementation. This is
                         partly due to the fact that at the time of the last Public Works Review only two full years of
                         implementation had been completed in those areas. If performance in lowland areas is compared with
                         performance in highland areas after only two full years of implementation, the differences in capacity
                         would appear less significant. Nonetheless, ESMF Screening of PWs in pastoral areas experienced a
                         slow start with very low rates of screening identified by Public Works Reviews in certain areas. In
                         order to address this a pastoral-specific ESMF was developed and rolled out.

                         The Government has responded to concerns that the Community Based Participatory Watershed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development Guideline was developed with highland implementation in mind, by developing a
                         specific Rangeland Management Guideline for lowland areas. This Guideline introduces a number
                         of key differences in the planning approach including specifying the Pastoral Associations (or
                         kebeles) as the lowest planning unit in pure pastoral areas; the involvement of customary leaders in
                         the public works planning process; the introduction of a rangeland approach to planning; and the
                         emphasis given to screening for social tension risks during the application of the ESMF. Moving
                         forward, additional capacity building support will be required for the lowland areas.

                         Since the ESMF Screening process generates the documentation required o monitor ESMF
                         implementation, the initial priority was to ensure that Screening was full operational. The monitoring
                         of the implementation of mitigating measures has been conducted principally through Public Works
                         Reviews. However in PSNP 4 there will be a need for such monitoring to be part of an improved
                         regular M&E system.

                         While the Public Works Reviews have found that most mitigation measures have been implemented,
                         the fact that some water and road projects in highland areas have resulted in negative environmental
                         impacts highlights the need to continue to improve the implementation of ESMF mitigation measures
                         for these types of sub-project. The implementation of mitigation measures in lowland areas has not
                         yet been fully reviewed.
                           Under the ESMF procedures for livelihoods investments, all woredas during PSNP 3 where HABP
                           was being implemented developed Woreda Environmental Profiles and ‘Negative Lists’ limiting the
                           types of activities that could be undertaken under HABP in order to meet compliance with the World
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank safeguard policies. An annual updating and monitoring system is presently being rolled out to
                           ensure that this compliance continues in the future for the Livelihoods Investments component. Any
                           new woredas implementing PSNP 4 livelihoods investments will also be subject to the same
                           procedures.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ian Leslie Campbell (AFTSE)
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                           Laura Campbell (AFTSE)
                           Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Many of the PW subprojects, though intended to
                           BP 4.01                                            impact the environment positively, will have
                                                                              some potential for negative environmental
                                                                              impacts if not designed and implemented
                                                                              following good practice. Thus given that there
                                                                              will be a large number of such projects, OP 4.01
                                                                              is triggered. The Environmental and Social
                                                                              management framework (ESMF) Screening
                                                                              process refers for Special Attention any sub-
                                                                              projects with one or more of the following
                                                                              features: (i) Involves disposal of medical waste,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              (ii) Likely to use pesticides or other agro-
                                                                              chemicals, (iii) Incorporates a dam, (iv)
                                                                              involves land acquisition, or loss of assets or
                                                                              access to assets. For sub-projects with medical
                                                                              waste, a GOE Medical Waste Management
                                                                              Guide for Rural Health Clinics will be applied,
                                                                              and was disclosed under APL II. For sub-
                                                                              projects likely to use pesticides, see OP 4.09
                                                                              below. Sub-projects with a dam are required to
                                                                              be designed by a qualified engineer, and
                                                                              constructed by a qualified contractor under the
                                                                              supervision of a qualified engineer. Dams in
                                                                              excess of 15m are ineligible (see OP 4.37
                                                                              below). For sub-projects involving land
                                                                              acquisition, see OP 4.12 below.

                                                                              After this initial screening, the ESMF procedure
                                                                              further screens the principal features of each
                                                                              sub-project to ascertain whether it is of
                                                                              Environmental Concern. This is then followed
                                                                 by preliminary environmental and social
                                                                 screening to identify any site-specific potential
                                                                 impacts that might warrant an EIA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 The approach to PSNP 4’s ESMF procedures
                                                                 for livelihoods investments is to identify any
                                                                 household level activities which might give rise
                                                                 to negative cumulative environmental or social
                                                                 impacts if carried out at scale in each woreda.
                                                                 This identification is made by drawing up a
                                                                 woreda environmental profile highlighting the
                                                                 strengths and weaknesses of the ecosystem and
                                                                 social issues in that woreda, and matching the
                                                                 strengths and weaknesses to the types of activity
                                                                 that households are likely to wish to undertake.
                                                                 The result of this analysis, in which the PW
                                                                 woreda staff participate, is a list of HABP
                                                                 activities which should not be allowed in order
                                                                 to meet compliance with OP 4.01. The state of
                                                                 the bio-physical and social environment of the
                                                                 woreda and the appropriateness of the negative
                                                                 list is reviewed on an annual basis under the
                                                                 ESMF Monitoring System.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    All sub-projects that might trigger OP 4.04 are
                                                                 eliminated at Screening stage.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    All sub-projects that might trigger OP 4.04 are
                                                                 eliminated at Screening stage.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   This policy is triggered under the assumption
                                                                 that successful small-scale irrigation projects
                                                                 might lead to greater agricultural activity which
                                                                 may require pest control management efforts.
                                                                 For this purpose, the GOE Integrated Pest
                                                                 Management Plan Guide was disclosed under
                                                                 APL II.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   OP 4.11 is triggered, since it applies whenever
                         BP 4.11                                 OP 4.01 applies, and because although deemed
                                                                 unlikely in view of the small scale of the sub-
                                                                 projects, the possibility of ‘chance-finds’ cannot
                                                                 be ruled out. The policy is addressed in the
                                                                 ESMF screening process at three stages: (i) Any
                                                                 sub-project located within a known cultural
                                                                 heritage site is earmarked as a sub-project of
                                                                 Environmental Concern, to be referred to the
                                                                 Regional Environmental Protection Authority,
                                                                 who will decide if an EIA is required, (ii)
                                                                 Assessment for potential disturbance to cultural
                                                                or religious sites is carried out as part of the
                                                                site-specific sub-project Screening, which also
                                                                contributes to a decision whether to earmark a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                sub-project for possible EIA, (iii) Inclusion of
                                                                assessment of potential cultural heritage impacts
                                                                in the EIA of sub-projects, where EIA is found
                                                                to be necessary, and (iv) Monitoring of sub-
                                                                project implementation by DAs and wereda
                                                                staff, in liaison with the Regional Bureau of
                                                                Tourism and Culture.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes   It has been determined that the majority of the
                                                                people in the project area meet the criteria of OP
                                                                4.10 and, therefore, PSNP 4 will trigger this
                                                                safeguard policy. An enhanced Social
                                                                Assessment and Consultation reflecting the
                                                                requirements of OP 4.10 is currently being
                                                                undertaken under a TOR agreed between the
                                                                World Bank and MoA. The PAD will
                                                                summarize the key elements of these
                                                                requirements and the identified mitigating
                                                                measures under the enhanced Social Assessment
                                                                and Consultation will be incorporated in the
                                                                design of PSNP 4.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   PW subprojects involving the physical
                         4.12                                   movement and resettlement of households will
                                                                not be eligible under the PSNP 4. These will be
                                                                eliminated during the screening process.
                                                                However, cases may occur that involve change
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                of land use or restriction of access to communal
                                                                assets at both community and household level.
                                                                Where such loss of assets or access to assets is
                                                                involuntary, the procedures under OP 4.12 will
                                                                be implemented. For this purpose a
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                developed by Government and disclosed before
                                                                Appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes   Any subproject that might incorporate a dam
                                                                more than 10 metres in height will be ineligible
                                                                for the PSNP PW programme, and will be
                                                                specifically eliminated in the first stage of the
                                                                sub-project Screening process. Smaller dams
                                                                will be constructed subject to implementation of
                                                                the FAO dam safety measures in Ethiopia,
                                                                which will form part of the ESMF
                         Projects on International        Yes   This policy is triggered because of the small-
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   scale irrigation projects expected in watersheds
                                                                                                                                 of three international waterways. For PSNP III,
                                                                                                                                 Government and the Bank notified the
                                                                                                                                 concerned countries in accordance with this
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 policy. Further notification will be provided to
                                                                                                                                 cover the period of PSNP 4. This issue will be
                                                                                                                                 addressed in the course of project preparation.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP TBD                                                            Any sub-project either in, or adjoining, a
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed area is ineligible for PSNP funding and
                                                                                                                                 is specifically eliminated by the Screening
                                                                                                                                 process. This procedure is followed in the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF for UN designated disputed areas in
                                                                                                                                 PSNP woredas. Given that these procedures are
                                                                                                                                 already incorporated into the Screening process,
                                                                                                                                 the need for formal triggering of the policy is
                                                                                                                                 currently under discussion.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      PSNP 4 will build upon PSNP III; therefore, PSNP 4 will update the existing safeguards
                                      procedures, incorporate any PSNP 4 design changes that could affect environmental and social
                                      impacts and ensure overall compliance with World Bank safeguard policies. Once updated and
                                      cleared by the Bank, the ESMF will be publicly disclosed both in-country, the required
                                      consultations held, and disclosed at the InfoShop prior to project appraisal.

                                      The Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to comply with OP/BP 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      requirements. Once updated and cleared by the Regional Safeguards Coordinator, the RPF will be
                                      publicly disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to Appraisal.

                                      A Social Assessment and Consultation is underway at time of preparation of this Concept Stage
                                      ISDS. It will analyze social issues and solicit stakeholder views and help make the project
                                      responsive to social development concerns, including seeking to enhance benefits for poor and
                                      vulnerable peoples while minimizing or mitigating risk of adverse impacts. This process will meet
                                      the requirements of OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples as agreed by the World Bank and Government of
                                      Ethiopia. This work is expected to be completed by May 2014.

                                      In order to strengthen the avoidance and mitigation of social impacts, a Pilot Social Accountability
                                      programme is currently underway. By April the findings of this Pilot to date will be utilized to
                                      design appropriate Social Accountability measures for PSNP 4.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Camilla Holmemo

                                 Approved By:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)    Date: 08-May-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz (SM)   Date: 21-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
