                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA4384
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Democratic Republic                     P125509
                                                                               Project ID:
                                               of
                            Project Name:      DRC Catalytic Project to Strengthen the INS (P125509)
                            Task Team       John Y. Ngwafon
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       16-Jul-2012                           Estimated   30-Sep-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: DECDG                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (76%), Vocational training (11%), Tertiary
                                              education (8%), Central government administration (3 %), Sub-national
                                              government administration (2%)
                            Theme(s):         Managing for development results (81%), Administrative and civil service
                                              reform (17%), Decentralization (2%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      11.80           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              Statistics for Results Trust Fund                                                           11.80
                              Total                                                                                       11.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective is to strengthen the capacity of INS to generate and disseminate statistical
                           information.

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                          3. Project Description
                         This approach acknowledges that financing is only one need, and that improving the skills of existing
                         staff, recruiting trained staff, and a better working environment will help to produce more and better
Public Disclosure Copy




                         data that will be more readily available for all users.

                         The project will be financed by a Statistics for Results-Catalytic Fund grant of $11.8 million and will
                         consist of three components, including contingency ($0.68m), with:

                         Component A for Increasing INS technical capacity for $0.86m: the objective of this component is
                         to increase the proportion of the professional staff with formal degrees or on-the-job training in areas
                         related to statistics, demography, economics, and information technology (particularly
                         programming). Two approaches will be used to support this objective: study abroad in degree-
                         granting institutions that are supported by international quality assurance standards and on-the-job
                         training for existing staff whose training is not in core fields.

                         Component B to Improve the non-technical environment for $2.94m: the component will support
                         management and fiduciary training, office furnishings, computer hardware, and software for INS
                         staff. The objective is for INS to develop and implement annual work plans relying upon a
                         strengthened fiduciary team with appropriate technology and with a staff skill mix that is, in
                         conjunction with the outputs of Component A, evolving towards what is needed for a statistical
                         office.
                         The buildings used by INS technical departments in the Limete neighborhood of Kinshasa are
                         dilapidated, unsafe, and inadequate for computer-based work. To address this, the project will
                         rehabilitate one or more buildings on the site. This will be done through two project-financed
                         activities. In its first year, the project will finance an architectural site evaluation to explore
                         rehabilitation options. Once a choice is made, the project will finance the rehabilitation of the
                         building(s) selected. This complements the focus by UNFPA and AFDB on provincial INS offices
                         and does not overlap with UNFPA’s work on office space for the Census Bureau. The site is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         officially assigned to INS and the documentation is in the project file. In order to provide locals for
                         the BCR and the INS departments affected by the rehabilitation, the project will support rental and
                         operation costing for a building where these units will temporarily move for three years.

                         Component C to support the statistical production and dissemination for $7.32m: this component will
                         support the development of critical statistical data that meet the following criteria: broad impact,
                         currently severely outdated, and infrequent in nature. It will also provide for the development and
                         implementation of archiving and dissemination policies for statistical information in order to increase
                         access, use, and quality of the information produced. It will focus on the Mapping phase of the
                         Population and Housing Census; the Enterprise census and cover activities to Improving access to
                         statistical information.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will primarily be undertaken in Kinshasa. Data collection financed under the project will
                         affect the entire country. Training financed under the project will affect primarily Kinshasa-based
                         staff, although provincial staff will also benefit from training.
                         Safeguards aspects are limited to the INS compound in Limete, a neighborhood of Kinshasa. More
                         details are in Section II.



                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Paul Jonathan Martin (AFTSN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Abdoul Wahabi Seini (AFTSG)
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project will finance construction works for an
                            BP 4.01                                              INS building. An EMP has been prepared,
                                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed in June 2013.
                                                                                 Environmental impacts are expected to be minor
                                                                                 to moderate, and localized.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              The project does not incorporate activities that
                                                                                 would trigger this policy.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              There are no activities related to forests in the
                                                                                 project.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No              There are no pest management activities planned
                                                                                 in the project.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No              The project does not incorporate activities that
                            BP 4.11                                              would trigger this policy.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes             Indigenous peoples are in the project area. They
                                                                                 will be included in the census mapping operation
                                                                                 and a special methodology will be designed to be
                                                                                 all inclusive and to address the specifics of the
                                                                                 approach necessary to reach and interact with
                                                                                 these groups, with the aim of ensuring that they
                                                                                 are properly included in the census. A plan will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 be prepared during project implementation.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              The project does not incorporate activities that
                            4.12                                                 would trigger this policy.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              There are no dam-related activities in the project.

                            Projects on International        No                  There are no activities related to international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waters in the project.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  There are no activities in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Project impacts are not expected to be large scale, significant or irreversible; potentially adverse
                              impacts will be minor and site specific. Impacts will be limited to the rehabilitation of one single-
                              story building inside a walled property (estimated at 125m x 100m), a compound owned and used
                              by INS as offices. An architectural evaluation will be undertaken with project funds to define


                                                                         Page 3 of 6
                           thescope of work, which is expected to cost about USD 500,000 including the architectural
                           evaluation. The environmental screening has been disclosed in-country (20 June 2012) and at the
                           InfoShop (3 July 2012).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will not finance (i) land acquisition, (ii) involuntary resettlement, or (iii) restriction of
                           access to resources or livelihoods and will provide no financing for any activity that would result
                           in (i) land acquisition, (ii) involuntary resettlement, or (iii) restriction of access to resources or
                           livelihoods. The planned works will be done within an enclosed site that is owned by government
                           with no claims or encroachments on the land.
                           The social safeguards risks of the project are generic and not location specific. The risks are
                           related to the potential exclusion of some segments of the population during the census mapping
                           operation; that preclusion could potentially induce social disturbances. To mitigate potential
                           exclusion risks, the methodology of the census is designed to be all inclusive, and it will establish
                           a mechanism for addressing attrition; to ensure the statistical representation of the entire
                           population of DRC; irrespective of gender, age, ethnicity, religion or civil status. Indigenous
                           people as well as vulnerable groups will be incorporated into the census roster, and the the project
                           includes preparation of a plan to communicate to IPs and other vulnerable groups to ensure they
                           understand and participate in the census.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No major impacts are anticipated. The project is rehabilitating office space for the INS, which
                           should not lead to significantly increased future activities in the area or long term impact. After
                           rehabilitation, INS will go about its normal business which is collecting, processing and analyzing
                           statistical data.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An environmental screening of the project has been carried out, including an environmental
                           management plan with a snag list. The snag list will be part of the contract document. Potential
                           needs for supervision, if any, will be ensured by the supervision consultant. The Ministry of
                           Environment, through the Groupe d'Etudes Environementales du Congo (GEEC); has the capacity
                           to address potential safeguards issues encountered by the project. The GEEC ensures safeguards
                           compliance for all investments in DRC. The project is not expected to induce any major
                           environmental impacts that would trigger a full environmental impact assessment (EIA), beyond a
                           screening.
                           To mitigate potential exclusion risks during census mapping, the methodology of the census is
                           designed to be all inclusive, and it will establish a mechanism for addressing attrition; to ensure
                           the statistical representation of the entire population of DRC; irrespective of gender, age, ethnicity,
                           religion or civil status. Indigenous people as well as vulnerable groups will be incorporated into
                           the census roster. Cartography agents will be specifically trained to locate and interview small
                           population groups in sensitive areas and in the forest. For this, the Government will receive
                           assistance from UNFPA and its experts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project will not negatively affect other properties or people. The environmental impacts are
                           limited by the compound wall, which is unbroken (aside from the entrance doors) and rises to


                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                           some 10 feet. The environmental screening, including the environmental management plan and
                           the snag list, will be disclosed in country and at the Bank prior to Appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           20-Jun-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        03-Jul-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                         20-Jun-2012
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           30-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        15-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                         31-Jul-2014
                           Comments: The Social Safeguard Plan will be prepared during implementation. The Bureau of
                                         the Census is preparing specific instructions manuel for field staff for the census
                                         mapping. They will include specific instructions on how to reach and interview
                                         special small groups of indigenous people or other vulnerable populations notably in
                                         the forest areas. These will serve as a basis for the Plan.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: John Y. Ngwafon
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 01-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Albert G. Zeufack (SM)                         Date: 02-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
