                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR6782
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mongolia                                     Project ID:           P108768
                            Project Name:       Mongolia Mining Sector Technical Assistance Project (P108768)
                            Task Team           Ekaterina Mikhaylova
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           22-Apr-2008                                  Estimated   26-Jun-2008
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      SEGOM                                        Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Central government administration (80%), Other Mining and Extractive
                                                Industries (20%)
                            Theme:              Other public sector governance (33%), Regulation and competition policy
                                                (33%), Public expenditure, financial management and procurem ent (17%), Tax
                                                policy and administration (17%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        10.30           Total Bank Financing:                                             9.30
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     1.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                            9.30
                              Total                                                                                                 10.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed project development objectives are (i) to support the institutional development and


                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
                         strengthening of the main institutions administering the mining
                         sector to improve sector governance; and (ii) to build the capacity of the gove
                         rnment to develop policy and operational responses to maximize the development i
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mpacts of mineral revenues and to minimize potential economic and political risk
                         s.

                          If successfully implemented, the project will assist the Government of Mongolia to achieve the
                         following outcomes:
                          -       improved quality and effectiveness of governance in the mining sector;
                          -       maximize the development impact of mining revenues and minimize the impacts of the risks
                         and factors contributing to the resource curse;
                          -       develop the mining sector by attracting additional exploration and mining investment from
                         good quality investors;
                          -       improved environmental and social performance of mining operations, both large and small
                         scale;
                          -       increased rural incomes and enhanced environmental and social outcomes from ASM
                         activities;
                          -       more financial resources available for government to promote economic development,
                         develop key infrastructure, provide social services, reduce poverty and rai
                         se incomes;
                          -       improved investment climate resulting from legal, regulatory and fiscal reforms, including
                         the development of a Draft Standard Investment Agreement;
                          -       improved transparency and effectiveness in the management of mineral tenements.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed project development objectives are (i) to support the institutional development and
                         strengthening of the main institutions administering the mining
                         sector to improve sector governance; and (ii) to build the capacity of the gove
                         rnment to develop policy and operational responses to maximize the development i
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mpacts of mineral revenues and to minimize potential economic and political risk
                         s.

                          If successfully implemented, the project will assist the Government of Mongolia to achieve the
                         following outcomes:
                          -       improved quality and effectiveness of governance in the mining sector;
                          -       maximize the development impact of mining revenues and minimize the impacts of the risks
                         and factors contributing to the resource curse;
                          -       develop the mining sector by attracting additional exploration and mining investment from
                         good quality investors;
                          -       improved environmental and social performance of mining operations, both large and small
                         scale;
                          -       increased rural incomes and enhanced environmental and social outcomes from ASM
                         activities;
                          -       more financial resources available for government to promote economic development,
                         develop key infrastructure, provide social services, reduce poverty and rai
                         se incomes;
                          -       improved investment climate resulting from legal, regulatory and fiscal reforms, including
                         the development of a Draft Standard Investment Agreement;
                          -       improved transparency and effectiveness in the management of mineral tenements.


                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project is seen as the first phase of long-term engagement (in the order of 10 years) to support
                         the Government in this key sector. The project development objective for this project is to assist the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government to establish key pieces of the policy, fiscal, legal, regulatory and institutional framework
                         for the mining and extractive sector that meets the needs of the public sector, industry, and civil
                         society.

                         The project consists of four components: (a) Strengthening the Capacity to Manage Mining
                         Revenues and Develop Economic and Sector Policies, (b) Improving Regulatory Capacity to Manage
                         Mining Sector Development, (c) Developing the Capacity for Management of StateEquity, and (d)
                         Project Management.

                         Part 1: Strengthening the Capacity to Manage Mining and Extractive Sector Revenues and Develop
                         Economic and Sector Policies. Strengthening the capacity of Ministry of Finance (MOF), Ministry of
                         Mines (MoM), Ministry of Industry and Trade (MIT), General Department of Taxation (GDT),
                         Mineral Resource Authority of Mongolia (MRAM) and Erdenes MGL LLC, as the case may be, in
                         order to enable them to: (i) refine the economic and sector policy framework applicable to the mining
                         sector; (ii) provide strategic advice on high level mining policy, investment strategies, mining
                         development financing and optimal processes for engagement of strategic investors in the extractive
                         industries sector; (iii) improve financial planning and forecasting; (iv) develop model contracts and
                         investment agreements to foster the development of extractive
                         industries; (v) design a dissemination strategy to communicate to the general public and the
                         investment community the policies applicable to extractive industries and the public and private
                         initiatives for the sector; (vi) review the existing governmental institutional structure for the mineral
                         sector, and provide recommendations for rationalization and consolidation for the sector management
                         functions; (vii) assess/review the tax regimes currently applicable to the extractive industries
                         (including double taxation treaties); and (viii) training and human resources capacity building
                         through formal and on-the-job training programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Part 2: Improving Regulatory Capacity to Manage Mining and Extractive Sector Development.
                         Strengthening the regulatory capacity of MoM, MIT, MEGD, and MRAM, as the case may be, in
                         order to enable them to: (i) (A) improve the existing legal framework for the mining sector through
                         the development of best practices related to mineral licensing, environmental protection, social
                         impact management and occupational health and safety; and (B) effectively implement, and improve
                         compliance with, the extractive industries regulations; (ii) complete the establishment and operation
                         of a fully computerized mineral licensing system; and (iii) support MRAM's Geology Department
                         and Geological Information Center.

                         Part 3: Developing the Capacity for Management of State Equity in the Mining and Extractive
                         Sectors. Strengthening MOF, MoM, MIT, Erdenes MGL LLC and State Privatization Committee
                         (SPC)'s institutional capacity in order to develop an appropriate institutional framework for the
                         management of the Recipient's participating interests in the mining sector, through: (A) the alignment
                         and development of Erdenes MGL LLC in accordance with the National Development Strategy; (B)
                         the design of the legal structure, financial and fiduciary arrangements for the establishment of a
                         holding company, consistent with the OECD Principles of Corporate Governance; (C) the provision
                         of training to Erdenes MGL LLC's directors (including independent directors) and officers on
                         international best practices in corporate financial management and reporting
                         requirements; (D) the assistance to Erdenes MGL LLC to prepare for listing on the Mongolian Stock


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Exchange; (E) the provision of advice to Erdenes MGL LLC on investment strategies and project
                         financing; and (F) training of Erdenes MGL LLC's staff on project evaluation, feasibility studies, and
                         financial modeling and (G) provision of technical assistance to Erdenes MGL LLC in improving its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social management systems.

                         Part 4: Project Management. Strengthening the capacity of the PIU for the effective financial,
                         technical and administrative management of the Project, including management of procurement
                         aspects, audits, monitoring and evaluation, and the Project's reporting requirements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         At appraisal, there was no specific location identified as this is a technical assistance project. TA will
                         benefit all major mining areas.
                         During restructuring, a specific area of Tavan Tolgoi coalfield is identified (Tsogttsetsii Soum in the
                         Omnugovi Aimag), including operation by Erdenes Tavan Tolgoi, a pasture land area with herder
                         winter shelters, a small coal mine ran by local government, and a number of businesses that operate
                         in the area (mostly mining logistics businesses).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes              A Resettlement Policy Framework for ETT will
                          4.12                                                  be prepared during the extension period and
                                                                                public consultation to validate the
                                                                                recommendations will be undertaken.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                          Projects on International        No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                          7.60




                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                As technical assistance, the project does not finance any direct exploration or exploitation of
                              mineral resources and does not haveany direct investments. The project does not include any direct
                              investment or civil works and is focusing on analytical and regulatory interventions. However, the
                              project is being implemented in a sector that is known to be controversial with respect to
                              environmental and social issues. The environmental problems associated with mining in Mongolia
                              relate primarily to pollution management and physical disruption of pasture lands and water
                              resources by both artisanal and larger mining operations. Many ongoing operations are not
                              managed in an optimal way leading to environmental damage and production losses. In addition,
                              despite the fact that the sector'sfinancial contribution to the economy is substantial, little has been
                              done to systematically assess and address the costs of possibleenvironmental damage from the
                              sector's ongoing and planned activities. This is mostly due to paucity of available data,
                              uncertaintyabout the long-term impacts of mining activities, lack of coordination across
                              responsible agencies, and a general lack of awareness of the fact that many of the negative impacts
                              frequent in Mongolia could be offset by utilizing better production methods.

                              There are both opportunities and risks for local communities affected by both large-scale mining
                              and artisanal and small scale mining activities. Opportunities relate to the benefits from mining,
                              which typically consist of direct and indirect employment, mining related financial transfers, and
                              improved access of mining communities to services including, in particular, health and education
                              services. Risks relate to environmental harm, loss of pasture for grazing, loss of traditional
                              livelihoods, social disruption, increased crime, domestic violence, and cultural harm. A gender
                              bias also generally exists whereby the bulk of the benefits accrue to men whereasthe bulk of the
                              risks fall upon women and children. Youth tend to be disadvantaged in that mining development
Public Disclosure Copy




                              raise expectations ofemployment, but in practice there are relatively few job opportunities
                              available.Despite the shift to a free market economy and passing of equity legislation, distortions
                              in the labor market remain.

                              At restructuring, to ensure the project's consistency with theWorld Bank's requirements, the Bank
                              reviewed compliance with safeguards. A series of key environmental and social issues were
                              identified which will be addressed within the restructured Project.
                              (a) In 2010, the project financed a pre-feasibility study for East Tsankhi mine - a project of
                              Erdenes Tavan Tolgoi (ETT), a state-owned mining company under the Erdenes MGL holding
                              company, which continues to be in operation. The study assessed the geological potential of the
                              coalfield and technical issues to start up the operation; the study was also in part intended to define
                              targets for the planned (at that time) initial public offering for ETT. It is noted that the study
                              qualifies as pre-feasibility and falls short of being a bankable study. It clearly recommends ETT to
                              proceed with an EIA as soon as possible as well as carry out public consultation, in particular to
                              understand impact on herders, and asses in detail impacts on water. With hindsight, safeguard
                              policies should have been applied to the study; as such the restructured project discloses
                              the shortcoming in ISDS (see sections below) and in the Restructuring Paper.
                              (b) After the study funded by MSISTAP was completed, ETT completed an Environmental Impact
                              Assessment (EIA) in accordance with Mongolian law and the former Ministry of Environmentand
                              Tourism formally approved the EIA Report for East Tsankhi in 2011. Prior to commencement of


                                                                          Page 5 of 9
                          mining operations in 2011, additionalstudies including a detailed mine and ancillary infrastructure
                          designs were completed by the company, funded by ETT through internal funding and debt
                          arrangements unrelated to the World Bank funding. Based on the review of documentation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          interviews that was undertaken as part of this safeguards compliance review, it was concluded that
                          while the general legal requirements for EIAs in Mongolia were followed, there were a number of
                          shortcomings that need to be addressed. The key three areas of shortcomings are: (i) lack of
                          assessment of the critical cumulative impacts related to the development of coal resources in the
                          sub-region; (ii) lack of informat ion on disclosure and consultation; and (iii) limited capacity
                          within ETT (and local level) to manage environmental and social
                          risks of mine development.
                          (c) The social safeguards review noted that existing Mongolian standards and practices on
                          resettlement and land acquisition are not in compliance with World Bank standards. There are no
                          standard documents, procedures or guidance on these matters, and the investors and local
                          population are left to negotiate between themselves. There is no involvement from the soum
                          authorities apart from assigning new land for the resettled party. The resettlement in East Tsankhi
                          was generally implemented following domestic laws and regulations, but the procedures were not
                          up to par with Bank safeguard standards.
                          (d) The social review concluded that no indigenous people group was found in the project soum.

                           In view of the above issues, OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) will be triggered at the time of
                           this restructuring. OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and Category B (partial assessment)
                           classification assigned at appraisal remain relevant for both the earlier envisaged technical advice
                           to improve enabling environmentfor future investments in the mining sector, as well as for
                           additional work to be completed in view of the East Tsankhi study and the need to assist the
                           government to remedy shortcomings of the original EIA and EMS. The remaining project funds
                           are fully committedand no deposit level is taking place and none is planned for the remainder of
                           the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                             The overall project is a Technical Assistance and as such does not have direct investments.
                           However, the success of the project activities is expected to lead to increased mining sector
                           activities due to improved licensing procedures, better legal and regulatory regime and increased
                           capacity of the government officials and Erdenes MGL to manage mining sector development.
                           The downstream mining activities will be expected to follow better standards and higher level of
                           transparency but still may have such long term impacts as an increase in the level of local crimes
                           committed, damage to land, reduced access to water, air pollution and health issues, social services
                           and infrastructure overwhelmed by an increase in the local population, and social conflicts due to
                           the imbalances in the benefits shared from the mining operation. At the same time positive impacts
                           are expected to include higher revenues, higher level of employment, improved access to
                           infrastructure and improved capacity for sustainable mining practices among stakeholders.

                          The pre-feasibility study for East Tsankhi coalfield prepared for ETT in 2010 under MSISTAP
                          was used to inform resource potential and as such supported development of the site. The East
                          Tsankhi project (independently from MSISTAP) prepared mine designs and detailed assessments
                          for infrastructure to start operation, and followed Mongolian laws and regulations as mentioned in
                          the section 1 above.The restructured project will, among other things, assist Erdenes Tavan Tolgoi
                          as part of the TA to improve environmental and social safeguards management of resulting
                          operation thus making a positive impact on future operations.


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             At appraisal, the Bank conducted an overall review of the status of environmental and social
                           issues, and policies in the mining sector to identify institutional and regulatory gaps that should be
                           addressed to strengthen existing compliance monitoring with regulations, and to investigate
                           whether additional resources and standardized procedures might be needed to mitigate any
                           identified risks. Based on the findings of the completed review, in the context of the Project
                           particular attention is given to (i) institutional strengthening actions to deal with environmental
                           and social impacts associated with the growth and development of the mining sector; (ii) measures
                           to overcome policy, institutional and budgetary constraints that result in limited enforcement and
                           implementation capacity; and (iii) ways to improve public participation and monitoring
                           processes, (iv) mine closure regulations, and (v) mining specific environmental regulations.

                           In the context of assisting the Government to build and strengthen the regulatory framework and
                           capacity to manage mining sector exploration and development, the project (i) supports MRAM
                           capacity building efforts to regulate, manage, and audit mineral developments, including inter alia
                           environmental and occupational health and safety aspects; and (ii) helps address the capacity,
                           regulatory and institutional needs of line ministries and agencies whose mandate relates to the
                           mining social and environment/natural resources management nexus.

                           The project is also undertaking a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of the
                           mining sector as part of Component 2. SESA aims to diagnose the key environmental and social
                           problems and opportunities associated with the rapid growth of Mongolia's mining sector, identify
                           the policy, legal, regulatory, and institutional adjustments and capacity-building actions needed to
                           minimize the adverse environmental and social impacts of mining operations and associated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           infrastructure development, while enhancing the positive impacts; and propose specific measures
                           that GoM can implement to improve the environmental and social sustainability of mining in
                           Mongolia. The scope of the SESA was developed in a consultative manner with the Government,
                           CSOs and private sector. It is in the contracting stage pending approval of MSISTAP restructuring.

                           This strategic and consultative guidance of SESA will, inter alia, inform further EIArelated work
                           by ETT as well as other mines to comply with their legal and regulatory obligations. SESA will
                           include GIS mapping of cumulative impacts from mining and related infrastructure which will
                           contribute to ETT assessments. SESA is expected to be completed by November 2014. As part of
                           the project restructuring in 2013, an Action Plan to bring MSISTAP in compliance with the Bank
                           guidelines was agreed with the Recipient which include the following:

                           (i) The Recipient will undertake a cumulative impact assessment of the East Tsankhi coal mine
                           project including its associated facilities (e.g., coal washing, transportation) focusing on the most
                           critical potential issues such as groundwater, biodiversity, and livelihood of local communities and
                           herders in the region. The Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA) will be financed under Mining
                           Infrastructure (MINIS) Project given other activities on mining infrastructure in that geographic
                           area and is expected to be completed by November 2014.
                           (ii) The Recipient will update ETT's Environmental Management Plan and its Environmental
                           Management System (EMS) by May 2014.


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           (iii) The Recipient to prepare an RPF and RAP for the resettlement and land acquisition to be done
                           for East ETT by March 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The above instruments will be subject to prior review and approval by the Bank to ensure their
                           compliance with the Bank's requirements and will be disclosed locally in Mongolia and in the
                           Bank Infoshop. The EMS, RPF/RAP will be funded directly by MSISTAP; while CIA will be
                           supported
                           under the ongoing MINIS project. This is due to the fact that MSISTAP is in its final phase with
                           all of remaining funds committed and there are direct synergies with the MINIS project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The project will carry out consultations and public disclosure in the process of preparing the
                           SESA as well as for the safeguards issues triggered by ETT project, which include preparation of
                           RPF and RAP, update of EMS for ETT, and preparation of the cumulative impact assessment for
                           Tavan Tolgoi area.
                           The project will carry out consultations and public disclosure in the process of preparing the SESA
                           as well as for the safeguards issues triggered by ETT project, which include resettlement review
                           and preparation of RPF and RAP, preparation of the remedial action plan, update of EMS for ETT,
                           and preparation of the cumulative impact assessment for Tavan Tolgoi area.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       07-Apr-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    07-Apr-2008
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                          07-Apr-2008
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       31-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    31-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Ekaterina Mikhaylova
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 26-Nov-2013
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (SM)                  Date: 27-Nov-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
