                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8020
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Central African Republic          Project ID:    P149884
                            Project Name:     EMERGENCY PUBLIC SERVICES RESPONSE PROJECT (P149884)
                            Task Team         Kolie Ousmane Maurice Meg
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated   24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTMW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (60%), Central government administration
                                              (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (70%), Other public sector governance
                                              (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:               30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                               13.11
                              IDA recommitted as a Credit                                                              6.10
                              IDA recommitted as a Grant                                                              10.79
                              Total                                                                                   30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                         The project development objective is to re-establish an operational government payroll and related
                         financial management systems.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project has two components: (i) payment of current salaries and (ii) technical assistance to core
                         directorates in the Ministries of Finance and Civil Service. To this end, in a sequenced manner, the
                         project will (i) update HR and payroll databases with the view to lay the ground for an improved civil
                         servant’s management system; including the integration of the civil service files and payroll into a
                         single computerized database; (ii) finance current salaries of civil servants upon production of
                         presence certificate on the job; (iii) strengthen the revenue-generating Directorates as to enable the
                         government to gain additional fiscal space; and (iv) re-establish basics control over the expenditure
                         chain and cash management.

                         Proceeds of the project will not be used to pay salaries arrears, pensions, military and other security
                         and defense forces. This category will be covered by Government’s own resources as well as by
                         resources made available by other development partners. The project components are designed with a
                         view to (i) complementing each other, (ii) strengthening of the country’s public financial
                         management system and; (iii) establishing synergies with support provided by other multilateral and
                         bilateral partners.

                         Project Components

                         Component 1: Payment of current salaries (US$27.5 million). This component aims to pay civil
                         service salaries in civilian sectors (excluding the security forces and police). Payment of salary and
                         pension arrears will be covered by Government resources when the fiscal space permits. This
                         component includes two subcomponents: (a) update of the HR and payroll databases; and (b)
                         payment of the current salaries to eligible civil servants. The payment of salaries will be made to
                         staff if they have re-authenticated themselves as being validly on the payroll while continuing to
                         update the payroll database and strengthening the system. This will be done by the production of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         presence certificate, “Attestation de presence” for each staff. These certificates aim to ascertain that
                         the staff is still in the country and is available to resume work in its line ministry (particularly health,
                         education and finance) either in Bangui or at identified locations depending on the security situation.
                         A process will be established to handle disputed cases, but these will not prevent the payment of staff
                         validly on the payroll. To ensure success of the presence certificate procedure, a communication
                         campaign will be conducted in the appropriate media. In order to speed up implementation, the
                         payroll clean-up is being processed prior to Board approval with UNDP which has prior experience
                         of the systems in CAR. Given the emergency, Government intends to pay two months of salary to
                         calm the fragile situation using resources already disbursed by ECCAS (mainly from Angola and
                         Republic of Congo). Based on the scenario whereby existing donor commitments would be honored
                         (from ECCAS, IMF, WB, UNDP, and France) the authorities should have enough resources,
                         including the present operation, to cover civilian and military payroll for a period of at least nine
                         months. It is expected that, the sound basic internal control procedures in the payroll process will
                         encourage other donors, to cover additional months of salaries and recurrent costs through budget
                         and investment support.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: update of the HR and payroll databases (US$500,000). This subcomponent aims
                         to update HR records and payroll databases. This will allow for (i) elimination of ghost workers and,
                         (ii) reclassification of retired civil servants in the appropriate pension database. In the next steps, the
                         update will incorporate new civil servants, such as the primary teachers “vacataires” (previously

                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                         financed by the Bank-funded education project under way before the crisis). The verification process
                         will contribute to update wage arrears accumulated over years. The secure ID card for civil servants
                         distributed in 2007 and the banking payroll initiated in 2009 will facilitate the updating of databases.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will be implemented by UNDP which will assist government departments in the
                         update of the databases with the view to lay the ground work for more ambitious civil service
                         reforms and modernization of the systems. A clear communication strategy will also be formulated
                         and rolled out to inform civil servants to the procedures and steps for updating the HR and payroll
                         databases.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: payment of the salaries of eligible civil servants excluding the military and police
                         (US$27 million). This subcomponent supports the definition of eligibility criteria and the payment
                         procedures that will be channeled from the Central Bank to commercial banks to the extent possible
                         given the limited coverage of the banking network in the country. UNDP in collaboration with the
                         relevant Directorates of the Ministry of Finance will assist in the payment process. The General
                         Inspectorate of the Ministry of Finance, which has some experience and reasonable capacity, will
                         verify the continued physical presence of staff in the workplace on a sample basis. With the
                         resources allocated, the project would finance four months of civil servant salaries in non-security
                         sectors.

                         Component 2: Technical assistance to core directorates in the Ministries of Finance and Civil service
                         (US$1.5 million).

                         This component aims to equip core Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Ministry of Public Service
                         directorates with a minimum capacity for a better revenues collection including treasury
                         management, budget execution and transparency. The Bank will seek additional resources through
                         Trust Fund to scale up the impact of these activities and to resume the PFM and civil service reforms
                         agenda as to enhance the sustainability of the operation and progressively move from emergency
                         support towards the state building agenda.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The component includes three subcomponents: (a) Technical Assistance in a targeted number of
                         MoF Directorates (Customs, Taxes, Treasury and Public Accounts, Budget and Information Systems)
                         and HR Directorate in the Ministry of civil service, (b) equipment support for strengthening the
                         institutional capacity of the Directorates of customs and taxes, and (c) support to the PFM reform
                         unit

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Technical assistance for the Directorates of Customs, Taxation, Treasury and HR
                         (US$750,000). The purpose of this subcomponent is to have a targeted number of Directorates in the
                         Ministry of Finance in good standing to undertake basic functions related to the effective and
                         transparent management of public funds. This subcomponent will leverage reforms initiated as part
                         of Bank’s previous operations in the areas of budget preparation, and reporting, and treasury
                         management. The selection of the Directorates is made to complement the ongoing technical
                         assistance from other donors (France, EU, and AfDB). The Bank focus as mentioned would be on
                         the revenue-generating Directorates and Public Treasury with a view to improving revenue
                         mobilization, cash management and reinforcing budget preparation and execution procedures so as to
                         restore budget discipline. Technical assistance provided to the HR Directorate will kick off the work
                         towards sustainable Civil Service Reform. This subcomponent will be implemented over 18 months
                         by a consulting firm and will include on the job training on new procedures, systems and techniques.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Equipment of the Directorates of Customs, Taxation and Treasury (US

                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                         $500,000). The purpose of this subcomponent is to equip the above-mentioned Directorates with IT
                         equipment that will contribute to monitoring revenues. More specifically, the Ges’Co application
                         software will be restored with the objective of increasing transparency in public finances. In addition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project will provide institutional support to CS REF so as to equip this entity with the expertise-
                         appropriate skills needed to oversee the country’s economic and PFM programs. The sub-component
                         will also initiate the strengthening of these directorates.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Support to PFM reform unit (Cellule de Suivi des Réformes Economiques et
                         Financières) and project operating costs (US$ 250,000). The purpose of this subcomponent is to
                         provide institutional support to CS REF as to properly oversee the implementation of the government
                         economic program and the joint fiduciary framework including the proposed project coordination.
                         The audit of the project will also be financed under this component.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         A phased approach will be adopted starting in Bangui and moving progressively, as security
                         improves, into provinces.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes              Some of the civil servants will be delivering
                                                                               services (e.g. health and education) in areas where
                                                                               Indigenous Peoples (Baaka) are present.
                                                                               Therefore OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) is
                                                                               triggered and an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                               Framework (IPPF) will be prepared, consulted
                                                                               upon and disclosed during project
                                                                               implementation, drawing on frameworks prepared
                                                                               in the last several years for the Health System
                                                                               Support and the Education for All-Fast Track
                                                                               Initiative (EFA-FTI) Catalytic Fund Preparation
                                                                               projects. The Operations Manual will include
                                                                               guidance on implementing the policy in a manner
                                                                               that is culturally appropriate and which involves
                                                                               outreach to and free, prior and informed



                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                                                                                consultations with indigenous communities on
                                                                                services to their communities.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Some of the civil servants will be delivering services (e.g. health and education) in areas where
                              Indigenous Peoples (Baaka) are present. Therefore OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) is triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared, consulted upon and
                              disclosed during project implementation, drawing on frameworks prepared in the last several years
                              for the Health System Support and the Education for All-Fast Track Initiative (EFA-FTI) Catalytic
                              Fund Preparation projects. The Operations Manual will include guidance on implementing the
                              policy in a manner that is culturally appropriate and which involves outreach to and free, prior and
                              informed consultations with indigenous communities on services to their communities.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                        01-Jun-2014
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                     01-Jun-2014
                            "In country" Disclosure

                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                        Page 5 of 6
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Kolie Ousmane Maurice Meg
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 09-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Renaud Seligmann (SM)                          Date: 11-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
