                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5984
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Serbia                             Project ID:    P129539
                            Project Name:      Second Serbia Health Project (P129539)
                            Task Team          Timothy A. Johnston
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Oct-2013                        Estimated   27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (91%), Public administration- Health (9%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         40.00               Total Bank Financing: 40.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       40.00
                              Total                                                                                       40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to contribute to improving the efficiency and quality of the public health system of the
                           Republic of Serbia through the strengthening of: (i) health financing, purchasing, and maintenance
                           systems; and (ii) quality improvement systems and management of selected priority non-
                           communicable diseases.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         Component 1: Improving Health Financing. This component will support reforms to improve the
                         quality, efficiency, and transparency of financing for primary care and hospitals. The component will
                         finance technical assistance, training, goods and equipment to support the design and implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of incentives and oversee results; finance initial piloting of a quality improvement grants scheme to
                         primary care facilities; and support upgrades of information technology capacity to improve financial
                         reporting and performance monitoring at central, hospital, and primary levels. This component will
                         also support TA to enable the necessary modifications to by-laws and regulations needed for the
                         implementation of finance reforms; to make recommendations on governance arrangements to
                         strengthen management autonomy and accountability at hospital and primary care levels; and to
                         address cross-cutting issues, such as strengthening the referral system between primary and hospital
                         care.

                         Component 2: Efficient Purchasing of Pharmaceuticals and Medical Products. Activities under this
                         component will be organized around the following main areas: support for centralized procurement
                         of drugs and supplies through framework contracts; strengthening of Health Technology Assessment
                         (HTA); and improving systems for medical equipment maintenance. Activities in this area will
                         support TA, training and equipment, including a piloting of a multi-vender medical equipment
                         maintenance contact.

                         Component 3: Strengthening Quality of Service Delivery. This component aims to improve standards
                         of quality and efficiency of care in the Serbian health sector through two main approaches: (i)
                         Strengthening quality improvement systems, and (ii) Modernizing cancer treatment at selected
                         tertiary facilities. This component will strengthen cross-cutting systems of performance management
                         and information technology that are pertinent across both sub-components, and will finance goods,
                         technical assistance, training and equipment.

                         Component 4: Monitoring, Evaluation, and Project Management. This component will support
                         routine Project management, including fiduciary tasks, monitoring and evaluation, audits of Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial statements. It will finance Project operating costs, including translation, interpretation,
                         equipment, supervision costs (transportation and per diem), staffing costs of the PCU, M&E, studies
                         and surveys, and incremental costs at the MoH. Monitoring the implementation of the proposed
                         reforms, including potential unintended consequences, will be supported under this component.
                         Financing for the five-yearly National Health Survey is also planned for 2017/18. Study tours in
                         countries where similar reforms are at a well advanced stage of implementation and where significant
                         results have been achieved may be envisaged, particularly in the areas of hospital rationalization and
                         primary health care financing.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in health centers and hospitals throughout Serbia. Linear
                         accelerators for treatment of cancer generate low level radio radioactivity. They use electricity to
                         generate either high-energy x-rays or accelerated electrons that can be precisely targeted on
                         cancerous tissue. When not in operation, no harmful radiation is generated, although the treatment
                         room itself requires shielding of the walls, doors, and ceiling to prevent escape of scattered radiation
                         during the radiotherapy treatment. The solution is similar to the arrangements used to protect staff
                         using diagnostic x-ray equipment, although the higher energy of therapy beams requires a radiation
                         vault (bunker) with thick concrete walls (2.5 m) to provide adequate radiation shielding. Fourteen
                         high-energy linear accelerators are currently installed in Serbia, with age ranging from 4 to 10 years.
                         The typical life time for this kind of technology in Western Europe can exceed 12 years, but


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         reliability of equipment is compromised by poor maintenance, resulting in frequent disruption of
                         therapeutic activity and relevant increase of waiting lists. Final information on the sites where these
                         equipment would be replaced or upgraded with new equipment is not yet confirmed. Preliminary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         information indicates that existing bunkers are mostly adequate, although they will require
                         upgrading, without change of the building footprint. In case of construction of new facilities, these
                         will be executed within the existing hospital buildings, or their yards. So the two likely scenarios
                         under the Project are: (i) replacement of old accelerator(s) on existing site(s), with only minor civil
                         works for installation; and (ii) construction of new bunker(s) to house a new or larger accelerator.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nikola Ille (ECSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Project is rated environmental category B.
                         BP 4.01                                               Most of the Project Components are
                                                                               environmentally neutral; however Component 3
                                                                               will include installation of the medical equipment
                                                                               into already existing, purpose-built facilities
                                                                               (bunkers) that will be modified, to suit
                                                                               specifications of the new equipment.
                                                                               Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                               is being prepared for the Project. The related civil
                                                                               works activities will be undertaken within
                                                                               existing hospitals and medical centers throughout
                                                                               Serbia, and are not expected to have any
                                                                               significant negative environmental impact. The
                                                                               issues related to this type of activities include
                                                                               noise, dust, vibrations, and management of
                                                                               construction waste during civil engineering
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               activities - which could be successfully managed
                                                                               and mitigated by application of good engineering
                                                                               practices. Specific issues that will also be taken
                                                                               care of relate to management of the site (as
                                                                               hospitals must continue operating during the
                                                                               execution of works), and health and safety of
                                                                               population. In some cases, the presence of
                                                                               asbestos, lead or other medical or possibly
                                                                               hazardous waste (if found during rehabilitation
                                                                               works), may require specific handling procedures,
                                                                               which will be defined in site-specific EMPs that
                                                                               are to be prepared for each facility when the
                                                                               locations become known. This includes the
                                                                               extremely small potential risk of residual
                                                                               radioactivity adhering to walls of existing
                                                                               bunkers, which will assessed before any civil
                                                                               works relating to existing bunkers. The potential
                                                                               for negative impact will exist during operation of
                                                                               the accelerator equipment, in case that Serbian


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                        standard for ionizing radiation and nuclear safety
                                                                        is not adequately applied. The Project will, as a
                                                                        part of the design and permitting process, ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        for each piece of equipment that relevant
                                                                        standards are applied and design is certified by
                                                                        the Institute of Occupational Health of Serbia.
                                                                        Additionally, the Word Bank EHS Guidelines and
                                                                        ILO Code of Practice “Radiation Protection of
                                                                        Workers (Ionizing Radiation”)” will apply to all
                                                                        sites under Project Component 3. As a rule,
                                                                        whenever the Serbian and World Bank standards
                                                                        and guidance documents differ on environment,
                                                                        health and safety issues, the more stringent ones
                                                                        will be applied.
                                                                        As required by the EMF, the implementing
                                                                        groups in the Ministry of Health will ensure that
                                                                        construction contracts will include clauses that
                                                                        will require contractors to comply with the
                                                                        construction safety rules in Serbia, health
                                                                        regulations and safeguards standards of Serbia, as
                                                                        well as of the Bank. The Project may fund
                                                                        construction of new facilities (bunkers) to house
                                                                        linear accelerators. These facilities will be
                                                                        constructed within the existing hospital buildings
                                                                        (without change of footprint), or in adjacent
                                                                        buildings – within the existing hospital
                                                                        compounds.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           No works within or near protected habitats are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        anticipated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           No works within or near protected forests are
                                                                        anticipated.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           Not relevant.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           During project preparation it will be confirmed
                         BP 4.11                                        whether any of the buildings chosen for
                                                                        rehabilitation are designated cultural property. As
                                                                        provided for in the EMF, in these cases the site-
                                                                        specific EMPs will include clauses related to
                                                                        heritage protection and conservation. The civil
                                                                        engineering works will have to be reviewed and
                                                                        approved by competent national cultural heritage
                                                                        institutions.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           Not relevant.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           The measures implemented at the project sites
                         4.12                                           include rehabilitation of the existing structures



                                                                Page 4 of 7
                                                                                 and equipment and do not require land acquisition
                                                                                 nor resettlement, nor will it lead to loss of access
                                                                                 or income. Accordingly, no social safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 issues related to land acquisition or resettlement
                                                                                 issues are foreseen.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Not relevant.

                            Projects on International        No                  Not relevant.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not relevant.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Implementation of the project-funded activities is not expected to have any significant negative
                              environmental impact. The issues related to this type of activities include noise, dust, vibrations,
                              and management of construction waste during civil engineering activities - which could be
                              successfully managed and mitigated by application of good engineering practices. Specific issues
                              that will also be taken care of relate to management of the site (as hospitals must continue
                              operating during the execution of works), and health and safety of population. In some cases, the
                              presence of asbestos, lead or other medical or possibly hazardous waste (if found during
                              rehabilitation works), may require specific handling procedures, which will be defined in site-
                              specific EMPs that are to be prepared for each facility when the locations become known. This
                              includes the extremely small potential risk of residual radioactivity adhering to walls of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                              bunkers, which will assessed before any civil works relating to existing bunkers.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There will be no long-term negative environmental impacts if project activities are executed as
                              designed. The minor temporary negative effects (noise, vibrations, dust, construction-related
                              waste) are of limited duration and can be successfully mitigated by application of good
                              engineering practices and application of site-specific EMPs, which will be based on
                              Environmental Framework Document and tailored for each specific site.
                              The potential for negative impact will exist during operation of the accelerator equipment, in case
                              that Serbian standard for ionizing radiation and nuclear safety is not adequately applied. The
                              Project will, as a part of the design and permitting process, ensure for each piece of equipment that
                              relevant standards are applied and design is certified by the Institute of Occupational Health of
                              Serbia. Additionally, the Word Bank EHS Guidelines and ILO Code of Practice “Radiation
                              Protection of Workers (Ionizing Radiation”)” will apply to all sites under Project Component 3. As
                              a rule, whenever the Serbian and World Bank standards and guidance documents differ on
                              environment, health and safety issues, the more stringent ones will be applied. Comparison
                              between WB and national legislation shows that standards are compliant, as they both incorporate
                              international best practice.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) including a sample Environmental
                           Management Plan (EMP)/Checklist was prepared for the Project. Site specific EMPs/Checklists
                           will be prepared during the subsequent phases, when the locations of investments are finalized.
                           EMPs will become part of the bidding documents and resulting contracts.
                           Monitoring and reporting on contractor’s compliance with site-specific EMPs on the existing
                           Project will be undertaken on a monthly basis by the supervising engineer/environmental specialist
                           and reports sent to the Project Implementation Team. Reporting from PIT to the Bank will be
                           undertaken at least twice per year, and more frequently in case of particular issues or problems.
                           Review of the environmental compliance monthly reports and reality check on sample sub-
                           projects will be undertaken by the Bank’s safeguards specialist at least once per year, during the
                           regular implementation support missions. While implementing the currently ongoing DILS
                           Project, the Project’s implementation team has developed an understanding and capacity to
                           successfully deal with the environmentally-related activities, which was documented during
                           Bank’s regular implementation support missions. The same team is expected to continue work on
                           this Project. The requirements for the environmentally-related activities under the Project will
                           include: (i) preparation of draft site-specific EMPs by the Project Implementation Team; (ii)
                           review and approval of site-specific EMPs by the Bank’s team; (iii) inclusion of site-specific EMP
                           as a part of the Bidding Document, and subsequent contract; (iv) execution of EMP-related
                           measures by the respective contractor(s); (v) monitoring and reporting of compliance with EMP-
                           related measures by supervising engineer/environmental specialist (to the Project Implementation
                           Team); (vi) reporting on compliance with EMP to the Bank (by the Project Implementation Team).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders are: Ministry of Health; Ministry of Energy and Environmental Protection;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Institute for Occupational Health of Serbia; Medical centers throughout Serbia.
                           Potentially affected people are medical staff and patients in hospitals where the equipment is being
                           replaced. The preparation of an EMF and its public disclosure in-country has been completed, and
                           is fully compliant with OP/BP 4.01. According to national legislation there are no additional
                           requirements for the preparation of EMPs and/or their disclosure.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        31-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     31-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Timothy A. Johnston
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                             Date: 31-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Daniel Dulitzky (SM)                            Date: 16-Jan-2014




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
