INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO76
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Senegal                    Project ID:   P150351
Project Name:    Senegal Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P150351)
Task Team        Matar Fall
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Apr-2015                Estimated      15-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Water supply (50%), Sanitation (50%)
Theme(s):        Water resource management (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      70.00             Total Bank Financing:    70.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      70.00
Total                                                            70.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective is to improve access to reliable water and sanitation
services in selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner.
C. Project Description
The proposed project would comprise three components: (i) urban water supply; (ii) urban sanitation;
and (iii) institutional support.


﻿Component A - Urban water supply (USD 50.00 M).
This component will be implemented by SONES, the holding company of the urban water sector. It
would help to: (i) increase the water production for the Dakar region by 30,000 m3/day from ground
water boreholes located 70 km from the capital city, (ii) expand the water storage capacity by the
O
U       construction of two reservoirs of (2X10,000 m3) capacity at Thibs, (iii) construct a 5km water
transmission main from the city of Mbour to the touristic zone of Mbodi ne, (iv) rehabilitate the
water distribution system of the city of Ngekhokh to be incorporated to the concession of SONES
and, (v) expand access to piped water by installing 20,000 household connections in the urban water
perimeter.
Component B - Urban sanitation (USD 17.25 M)
This component would be implemented by ONAS, the urban sanitation utility. It would help to: (i)
construct a collective sewerage system in the city of Joal-Fadiouth including pipe networks, water
pumping stations, a wastewater treatment plant, 2.000 household sewerage connections and 8 public
sanitation facilities, (ii) expand access to sanitation services by installing 2,000 additional household
sewerage connections in the perimeter covered by ONAS and (iii), update the Greater Dakar
sanitation master plan.
Component C - Institutional support (USD 2.75 M).
This component will be implemented by PEPAM (the millennium water and sanitation coordination
unit) PCU of the project. The component would support: (i) the preparation/implementation of the
second generation reforms in the urban water and sanitation sector, (ii) the implementation of
ongoing reforms in the rural water sub-sector, (iii) additional technical studies, (iv) social and
environmental safeguards, (v) the PPP transaction of the desalination plant project, and (vi) operating
costs of the Project Coordination Unit.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
For urban water supply, the project will focus on the regions of Dakar and Thibs, and particularly the
areas of Tasset, Mbour, Nguekokh, and Mdodiane. As regard to sanitation, the project will mainly
focus on the city of Joal-Fadiouth. However, specific areas of intervention in the said cities will be
determined by technical studies. The social connections programs (for water and sanitation) which
have no significant safeguard impact will be implemented in all urban areas covered by SONES and
ONAS. The sanitation component aims at mitigating the problem of wastewater discharge in the
environment. The nature of the technical solution proposed (extended stabilization ponds or lagoons)
characterized by aerobic conditions and the use of plant as biofilters at shallow depth should
minimize major risks and impacts (e.g. odors and sludge removal and disposal mainly).
Environmental and social impacts of the project are thus moderate.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Borrower has reasonable capacity in implementing environmental and social safeguard measures
in water and sanitation projects. In that respect, the Borrower is successfully implementing the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (EMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) of the
ongoing IDA funded Water and Sanitation Millennium Project (WSMP) including similar activities
than the proposed project. Recent supervision missions of the WSMP concluded that the
implementation of the EMP was appropriate and the Safeguard rating is "Satisfactory". While the
same institutional framework used for the WSMP will be adopted for the proposed project (the PCU
monitoring the overall implementation of the EMP, while implementing agencies would be


﻿responsible for implementing their applicable portions of the EMP) any capacity strengthening
measure deemed necessary to improve the safeguard function in this operation will be taken.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
Salamata Bal (GSURR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is classified B because of the expected
OP/BP 4.01                              moderate magnitude of the negative impacts that
would result from or risks from its activities. Instead,
and apart from risks during exploitation, the overall
impact of the project is substantially positive due to
improvement of sanitation and living conditions in
the intervention areas. The potential sites of the civil
works in Joal are known but those of the investments
in the other cities are not; then, to comply with the
Bank policies and the Senegalese environmental
regulation, three instruments will be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at the
Bank Infoshop prior appraisal: (i) an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a
resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and (iii) an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of the
wastewater treatment plant in Joal. Further, it will be
agreed with the Borrower at appraisal that the
preparation of sub-projects specific EAs/RAPs is a
condition of disbursement for each sub-project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The project will not finance activities that affect
natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The project will not finance activities related to
forest exploitation, harvesting, direct or indirect
forest degradation, and increased access to forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project will not finance acquisition, transport,
distribution, storage or use of pesticides or similar
chemicals that could threaten environmental and
human health.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        This policy is triggered because of the nature of civil
OP/BP 4.11                              works that will be financed under the first two
components. The project intervention areas have
been inhabited for centuries therefore likely to host
underground artifacts. To prevent the destruction
during implementation, a chance find procedure will
be included in the ESMF and detailed in subsequent
EIA/ESMP.


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The project will include rights of way for the water
BP 4.12                                    distribution networks, and minimal land acquisition
for water production, storage and distribution and
sanitation facilities. Therefore, the Borrower will
prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that
will be consulted upon and disclosed prior to
appraisal as a free-standing document along with the
ESMF. During project implementation, the screening
process will determine whether land will be acquired
and whether a sub-project specific Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) is required.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The project will not finance dam works or activities
associated to existing dam.
Projects on International     No           The project will not finance activities that will
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       interfere with international watercourses; either in
terms of water withdraw or discharge of pollutants.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project intervention areas are not under dispute.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the sanitation
component in Joal are being prepared and expected to be completed by end of February 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s):     ame: Matar Fall
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)               Date: 09-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)              Date: 09-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


