                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC4318

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Colombia                        Project ID:      P145353
                            Project Name:      Improving Access & Quality of Upper Secondary Education (P145353)
                            Task Team          Martha Laverde
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Apr-2014                     Estimated        10-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSHE                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (90%), Tertiary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (10%), Education for the knowledge economy (90%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       120.00              Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     20.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
                              Total                                                                       120.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           iThe Project Development Objective is to support the Government in designing and implementing a
                           new upper secondary education model based on modern competencies, increasing upper secondary
                           enrollment and graduation, and promoting the transition to tertiary education in an equitable way,
                           while strengthening the capacity of the targeted territorial entities and their respective upper
                           secondary schools.
                           C. Project Description
                         The total Project amount is US$120 million, of which US$100 million would be financed by the
                         Bank and US$20 million by the Government. The Project would be designed using a results-based
                         approach with disbursements links to agreed indicators. The Project would be implemented at both
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the national and subnational level. The MEN would be responsible for national level guidelines,
                         technical assistance, and monitoring and evaluation processes. The subnational territorial entities
                         would be responsible for adapting national guidelines to the regional context and implementing the
                         region-specific plans. Of the 94 certified territorial entities, a sub-set would be included in Project
                         implementation. They would be selected based on educational needs, institutional capacity and
                         political will. The Project would aim for a mix of low and middle developed territorial entities to
                         provide lessons for an eventual roll-out of the model. The Project would achieve its development
                         objective through implementation of three components:

                         Component 1. Designing a new model for upper secondary education, and programs to improve
                         enrolment, retention, and equitable transition to higher education: (Total: US$7 million, estimated).
                         The objective of this Component is to design, based on the new competences: (i) a new upper
                         secondary model, (ii) improved teaching methods, (iii) a new school evaluation and accreditation
                         system, (iv) a revised learning achievement test (SABER 11), and (v) programs and frameworks for
                         increased retention and a smoother transition from upper secondary to tertiary education.

                         A. Subcomponent 1.1: New upper secondary model based on fundamental competences: Curriculum
                         for upper secondary that increases relevance and value for students by focusing on three fundamental
                         competence groups: generic, academic and exploratory. develop improved teacher-training programs
                         for both current and aspiring teachers design a new school accreditation system; and revise the
                         learning achievement test (SABER 11), based on the revised competences.

                         B. Subcomponent 1.2: Programs for retention and transition: Design mechanisms to ease transition
                         between grades (from 9th to 10th and from 10th to 11th), from upper secondary to tertiary education.
                         It will also fund the implementation of a system to help first-year tertiary education students navigate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         their new learning environments.

                         C. Subcomponent 1.3: Public policy building and management: Support for the design of public
                         policies (norms, laws, processes) to implement the Upper Secondary Modernization Strategy and
                         financing of relevant research.

                         • Key outcomes for this Component would be:
                         i. A revised upper secondary model based on three fundamental competence groups: generic,
                         academic and exploratory.
                         ii. An updated learning achievement test (SABER 11) based on revised competences.
                         iii. Improved teacher-training programs for both current and aspiring teachers, based on revised
                         model and competences.
                         iv. A new school accreditation system.
                         v. New mechanisms for upper secondary retention and transition from secondary to tertiary
                         education.

                         Component 2: Implementing a new model for upper secondary education, and programs to improve
                         enrollment, retention, and equitable transition to higher education. (Total: US$86 million, estimated).
                         Component 2 will promote the design and implementation, through Subsidiary Agreements (SAs), of
                         results-based programs to increase upper secondary enrolment and graduation, and improve
                         transition to higher education in targeted territorial entities.

                         • Key outcomes for this Component would be:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i. Territorial entities have implemented the new upper secondary model based on fundamental
                         competences.
                         ii. Territorial entities have implemented the new incentive program for retention and transition to
                         tertiary education.
                         iii. Territorial entities have implemented student mentoring models.

                         Component 3. Strengthening institutional capacity, management, monitoring and evaluation strategy
                         of the Project (Total: 7 million): The objectives of this Component are: (i) to strengthen the
                         institutional capacity of targeted subnational entities and schools to improve education outcomes; (ii)
                         to plan and implement the Project, together with overall progress monitoring; and (iii) to design and
                         develop a monitoring and evaluation system for the Project.

                         A. Subcomponent 3.1: Strengthening subnational territorial entities, school management and tertiary
                         education institutions: Training programs and education policy planning to enhance the capacity of
                         regional secretariats of education, school management practices, and tertiary education capacity.

                         B. Subcomponent 3.2: Project management, monitoring and impact evaluation. Support for overall
                         Project coordination, supervision, and evaluation by: (i) strengthening the capacity of MEN to
                         provide technical assistance to the territorial entities supporting the achievement of Project DLIs; (ii)
                         strengthening the capacity of the Project Coordination Team to comply with its responsibilities for
                         managing the Project; (iii) carrying out project-related studies and audits; and (iv) designing and
                         implementing a Project-related monitoring and evaluation plan.

                         • Key outcomes for this Component would be:
                         i. Territorial entities have implemented their institutional capacity strengthening plans.
                         ii. An impact evaluation has been designed and carried out.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Components 1 and 2 would be implemented through disbursement linked to measure results, referred
                         to as Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs). A set of DLIs will be established for these Components
                         of the Project, which will be related to specific disbursement amounts. Once DLIs target are met,
                         disbursements will be made against eligible expenditures (Eligible Expenditure Program, EEP)
                         belonging to the Government’s budget, which are those related to Project’s activities in terms of
                         purpose and type of expenditure. In principle, comprehensive EEPs have been identified: for
                         Component 1 the budgetary line “Education Quality Improvement Program” and for Component 2,
                         the budgetary line “National Transfers to the Territorial Entities”. Components 1 and 3 will be
                         implemented by MEN whereas Component 2 will be largely implemented by the targeted sub-
                         national territorial entities, who would be selected based on their needs and education outcomes and
                         results, with disadvantaged entities being prioritized. Since the completion of some activities of the
                         Component 1 will be a necessary pre-requisite to implement Component 2, the specific targets of
                         DLIs for Component 2 will be agreed in the context of the SA at the beginning of year 2 of the
                         Project. Component 3 is largely TA to be managed by the Ministry of Education and would thus
                         follow traditional disbursement methods.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Indigenous peoples, afro-Colombians and the socioeconomically disadvantaged population are
                           among the main beneficiaries of the Project. The average age for the indigenous and afro-Colombian
                           population is lower than the national average; the distribution is especially skewed towards the
                           bottom of the pyramid, thus making the indigenous and afro-Colombian school and college-aged
Public Disclosure Copy




                           cohorts larger relative to the rest of the age groups. The school attendance levels for these two groups
                           are lower than the national average: In 2005, whereas nationwide school attendance for 12-17 year
                           olds was 77.8%, the figure was 58.8% and 77.1% for indigenous peoples and afro-Colombians
                           respectively. Attendance is equally low for 18-24 year olds, with only 16.9% of the indigenous
                           population and 23.7% of afro-Colombians currently attending school or HEIs, compared to 27.1%
                           nationwide.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The MEN has ample experience working with the Bank and is very familiar with the Bank's policies.
                           In previous projects, such as the Colombia Rural Education Project (APL Phase II) (P082908), the
                           MEN has shown strong institutional capacity for the implementation of safeguard policies for the
                           protection of afro-Colombians and indigenous peoples, including targeted ethnic education plans and
                           curricula tailored to each group's needs. The MEN’s interest in promoting education equity for ethnic
                           minorities is reflected in the National Decennial Education Plan 2006-2016 (Plan Nacional Decenal
                           de Educación 2006-2016), designed by the MEN, which places emphasis on the importance of
                           increasing investment on targeted programs and affirmative action for these groups.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               This policy is not triggered as the nature and
                           BP 4.01                                               scope of the Project activities are not expected
                                                                                 to generate adverse environmental impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               This policy is not triggered since no impact is
                                                                                 expected on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                 Project will not finance activities that affect
                                                                                 forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               This policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                                 will not finance the purchase or use of
                                                                                 pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               The policy is not triggered because there are no
                           BP 4.11                                               Project activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                                 management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The policy is triggered because indigenous
                                                                                 peoples (and afro-Colombians) are present in
                                                                                 the Project area and could benefit from targeted
                                                                                 activities within the Project.

                                                                                 The social assessment will identify measures to
                                                                                                                                 improve access, retention and outcomes for
                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples and afro-Colombians,
                                                                                                                                 focusing on the differences in (i) barriers to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 access (for both upper secondary and higher
                                                                                                                                 education), retention and completion and (ii) life
                                                                                                                                 paths after graduation or dropping out.

                                                                                                                                 Based on the social assessment, an IPP will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared, which will focus on further
                                                                                                                                 strengthening the Borrower's safeguards
                                                                                                                                 capacity where it is necessary and laying out the
                                                                                                                                 measures and policies that should be expanded
                                                                                                                                 or discontinued.

                                                                                                                                 The IPP will be consulted with relevant national
                                                                                                                                 indigenous and afro-Colombian organizations
                                                                                                                                 and will incorporate their feedback and
                                                                                                                                 recommendations accordingly and in line with
                                                                                                                                 the Project's scope. The IPP will be disclosed
                                                                                                                                 prior to appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered because the Project
                                 4.12                                                                                            activities will not require the involuntary taking
                                                                                                                                 of land that would result in the impacts covered
                                                                                                                                 under OP 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                                                                                 will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will it support
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the operation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered because the Project
                                 7.60                                                                                            will not affect disputed areas as defined under
                                                                                                                                 the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The IPP “Colombia: Política y estrategias para la atención de la población indígena y
                                      afrodescendiente” will be prepared between now and November 29, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Martha Laverde




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Approved By:
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)   Date: 15-Nov-2013
                         Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Reema Nayar (SM)        Date: 13-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
