                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA3857
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                             Project ID:    P132623
                            Project Name:     Sustainable Livelihoods and Adaptation to Climate Change (P132623)
                            Task Team         Priti Kumar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         10-Mar-2014                       Estimated   27-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDC                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          8.00                 Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                        8.00
                              Total                                                                                    8.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve adaptive capacity of the rural poor, to
                           climate variability and change affecting farm based livelihoods, through community-based
                           interventions.


                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The project components and activities to be financed are described below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 – Component 1 – Planning, Service Provision and Implementation of Climate Change
                         Adaptation: The objective of this component is to support risk assessment, planning, service
                         provision and implementation of climate adaptation interventions. The key activities include: (a)
                         community-led adaptation assessment, participatory planning, of climate adaptation interventions in
                         cooperation with resource persons and entities; (b) creating the enabling services for delivering
                         strategic climate change adaptation investments through partnerships with research institutions,
                         thematic resource organization or private sector providers; and (c) community-based implementation
                         of off-the-shelf and other specialized interventions utilizing the community adaptation grants to poor
                         rural households (SHGs/Federations) upon approval of a community adaptation plan. The climate
                         adaptation interventions will be locale-specific, focus on climate risk management and involve
                         interventions both at the household level and/or community level. Funds for implementation of
                         climate adaptation interventions will be provided by the SLACC project, by NRLP’s Community
                         Investment Support, as well as through convergence with other Government programs (such as
                         MKSP, MGNREGS). The key outputs of this component are: (i) community based climate
                         adaptation measures are implemented by atleast 200 community institutions financed by the
                         community adaptation fund; (ii) enhanced community capacity for planning and implementing
                         climate adaptation plans in 200 community institutions; and (iii) consortium of research and other
                         partner organizations formed. The key outcomes of this component are: (i)strengthened awareness of
                         adaptation and climate change processes at the local level and (ii) strengthened adaptive capacities to
                         reduce vulnerabilities and risks to climate-induced losses.

                         Component 2 – Scaling and Mainstreaming Community Based Climate Adaptation: The objective of
                         this component are to build core operational capacity and relevant knowledge base/networks for
                         broader scaling and mainstreaming of climate adaptation interventions. The key activities include: (a)
                         training and capacity building of NRLP national and state staff and creation of a cadre of CRPs in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         non-SLACC areas; (b) building a knowledge support system for climate adaptation, including policy
                         inputs and programmatic guidelines for scaling-up of the community-based climate adaptation
                         approach within the NRLM. The key outcomes of this component are: (i) strengthened operational
                         and adaptive capacity of national and state officials and representatives for integrating climate
                         adaptation into livelihood support activities; (ii) evidence of climate change mainstreaming into
                         national and state livelihood program frameworks.

                         Component 3 – Project Management and Impact Evaluation: SLACC will augment the management
                         units within the NRLM and SRLM institutional structure to enable coordinated functioning and
                         efficient implementation of SLACC. The activities that the project will invest in include: (a)
                         establishment of climate adaptation units staffed with full-time professionals within the NMMU and
                         the SMMUs of the participating states; (b) appointment of state-level implementation teams for
                         providing field implementation support to CRPs and community institutions; (c) establishment of a
                         monitoring system and evaluation arrangements (baseline, mid-term and end-of-term). The key
                         outputs of this activity are: climate adaptation units in NMMU and SMMU, delivery of services by
                         state level implementation teams as per agreed Terms of Reference, and evaluation reports (baseline,
                         mid-term and end-of-term). The key outcome of this component is efficient and effective
                         management of SLACC components.




                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The SLACC project will be implemented in 2 states of the NRLP reaching about 200 villages
Public Disclosure Copy




                         corresponding to approximately 8-10 blocks. The states of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh have been
                         identified for implementation of the project based on the readiness of the SMMU, existing capacity
                         and experience in sustainable agriculture, the agro-ecological profile of the state, and anticipated
                         climate change risks. The key beneficiaries of the SLACC project will be the institutions of the rural-
                         poor supported by the NRLM – including, self-help groups of women and their federations, common
                         interest/producer groups such as farmers’ groups, livestock rearers’ groups, and their higher order
                         collectives such as producer companies. These institutions represent the rural-poor, the majority of
                         whom directly depend on climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, livestock and fisheries and
                         have limited adaptive capacity. Also, as these institutions are women-led, it will help SLACC to
                         focus on the distinct vulnerabilities and adaptive capacity of women.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)
                         Varun Singh (SASDS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project activities are likely to contribute to
                          BP 4.01                                             better environmental quality and individual
                                                                              activities may have small-scale impacts or may be
                                                                              environmentally benign, without significant and/
                                                                              or irreversible impacts. However clustered groups
                                                                              of such activities can have a collective
                                                                              detrimental impact on surrounding ecosystems,
                                                                              environmental resources and habitats, including
                                                                              soil erosion, poor water availability and quality,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              depletion of groundwater, decreasing fodder
                                                                              availability etc. These issues need to be properly
                                                                              managed and capacities need to be strengthened
                                                                              to implement due diligence measures along with
                                                                              effective supervision and monitoring. Since the
                                                                              SLACC is anchored in the existing institutional
                                                                              set up of National Rural Livelihoods Program
                                                                              (NRLP), and complementary to its livelihood
                                                                              interventions, the Environmental Management
                                                                              Framework (EMF) of NRLP has been adapted for
                                                                              the SLACC.
                                                                              The EMF has been updated and revised to meet
                                                                              the distinct requirements of SLACC and will be
                                                                              disclosed through the websites of the Ministry of
                                                                              Rural Development and all the state departments
                                                                              of rural development, and on the Bank Infoshop.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             Activities within critical natural habitats (wildlife
                                                                              sanctuaries and national parks) will not be
                                                                              supported under the project. The policy is


                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                                triggered to ensure avoidance of degradation in
                                                                                prime habitats and inclusion of mitigatory
                                                                                measures for sustainable management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes             Activities within the critical natural habitats
                                                                                (wildlife sanctuaries and national parks) will not
                                                                                be supported under the project. The policy is
                                                                                triggered to ensure avoidance of degradation in
                                                                                prime habitats and inclusion of mitigatory
                                                                                measures for sustainable management.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             Some of the agriculture livelihoods activities
                                                                                could involve collective procurement and
                                                                                distribution of chemical pesticides. It is thus
                                                                                important that the EMF address this safeguard
                                                                                and therefore the policy has been triggered
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes             Both demonstration and expansion villages are
                                                                                likely to have the presence of tribal people.
                                                                                Hence, this OP has been triggered to ensure
                                                                                compliance with the policy provisions on
                                                                                informed consultations, broad community
                                                                                support, culturally appropriate information and
                                                                                benefit sharing.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment: The project would provide finances to institutions of the poor against livelihood and
                              vulnerability plans as well as introduce special initiatives for livelihood enhancement such as
                              sustainable agriculture, community-managed dairy, etc. The project activities are likely to
                              contribute to better environmental quality, but insufficient diligence could result in: (i) land
                              degradation including soil erosion, (ii) poor water availability and quality, depletion of
                              groundwater, (iii) improper use of agro-chemicals (imbalanced use of fertilizers, unsafe use of
                              hazardous pesticides), (iv) decreasing fodder availability, and (v) degradation of forests
                              (unsustainable extraction of forest produce, shifting agriculture, grazing). These impacts could be
                              wide-scale by cumulative effect, though potential significant and/or irreversible impacts are not


                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                          envisaged. The Safeguards Policies on Pest Management (OP 4.09), Forests (OP4.36) and Natural
                          Habitats (OP4.04) have been triggered recognizing the importance of integrating sustainable
                          management practices in forest-dependent and agriculture-based livelihoods, with possibility of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          use of pesticides. Activities within critical natural habitats (wildlife sanctuaries and national parks)
                          will not be supported. The safeguard policy on Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) has not been
                          triggered as the project funds are unlikely to be used for community-level civil works such as
                          small dams, embankments, etc. Project funds would not support activities involving excavations,
                          etc., that may impact physical cultural resources and hence, OP 4.11 is not triggered. As no
                          international waterways and disputed areas are involved OP 7.50 and 7.60 are not triggered.

                           Social. The project aims to improve adaptive capacity of the rural poor, to climate variability and
                           change and secure and sustain the livelihoods of the poor through community-based interventions
                           on agriculture, land and water, fodder, livestock, fisher and other financial and institutional
                           measures etc. The key beneficiaries and partners will be representative institutions of the rural
                           poor such as farmers’ groups, livestock rearers’ groups, and their higher order collectives such as
                           producer companies. Also, as these institutions are women-led, it will help SLACC to focus on the
                           distinct vulnerabilities and adaptive capacity of women. So overall, the project would provide
                           significant and direct socioeconomic benefits to the rural poor households. The key social
                           safeguard issue is to ensure that tribal people as well as other traditionally excluded social and
                           livelihood groups such as the scheduled castes, migrant workers, marginal farmers and other
                           vulnerable groups in remote and dispersed rural habitations get identified and systematically
                           included in the implementation processes, community level planning and capacity building
                           activities, funding for adaptation measures and finally benefits.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No severe or long term impacts are expected due to SLACC funded activities. Agriculture,
                           livestock, minor forest produce and fisheries are the predominant sectors in which rural poor
                           households are involved. Also the possibility of scale-up beyond local areas is low, so the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental due diligence put in place for specific areas will be sufficient with regard to long-
                           term impacts. The long term social impacts are assessed to be beneficial in the form of increased
                           livelihood security and sustainability, and increased capacity to undertake collective action.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No large-scale or significant adverse and non-reversible environmental and/or social impacts are
                           anticipated in the project. The EMF provides a strong tool for safeguarding the environment with a
                           view towards sustainable livelihoods and also emphasizes generate green and sustainable jobs.
                           Site-specifics EMPs will identify issues with respect to the local natural resources impacted by
                           livelihood choices, indicate actions for mitigation and better environmental management and
                           identify resources for implementation. The NRLP Social Management Framework reinforces the
                           NRLP focus on poorest of the poor household, and recommends specific interventions for
                           inclusion of the tribal and non-tribal beneficiaries in community institutions (SHGs, Federations),
                           as well as livelihood financing and promotion interventions.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Given that the SLACC is complementary to the larger National Rural Livelihoods Project, with the
                           same institutional set-up, the existing Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been
                           simplified/adapted for the SLACC project. The EMF will help strengthen environmental


                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                           management systems of these institutions so as to ensure sustainability of the livelihood
                           enhancements undertaken. The screening tool included in the EMF will be used to determine an
                           appropriate level of environmental assessment. Screening includes verification against an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental requirements (negative) list designed to ensure compliance with all safeguard
                           policies and a determination of the extent of EA required. Following screening and assessment,
                           measures to control environmental risks and enhance benefits. The EMF also provides for training
                           and capacity building in its application to various stakeholders and for an environmental agency
                           contracted under the project to supervise the implementation and its continuing refinement. A
                           third-party external environmental audit will be undertaken after 18 months of implementation,
                           which will assess cumulative impacts and identify ways of strengthening implementation of the
                           EMF.
                           The key social safeguard policy requirement is to ensure equitable and culturally-compatible
                           benefits to tribal people in the project areas (OP 4.10). The Social Management Framework (SMF)
                           for the NRLP has been adapted to the SLACC project. The SMF provides for i) priority targeting
                           and mobilization of tribal and other poorest social groups; ii) informed consultations to ensure
                           continuing community support for project interventions; iii) regular and culturally appropriate
                           information sharing; iv) inclusion of tribals as community resource persons; v) capacity building
                           of tribal SHGs, federations. Project implementation in Tribal areas would be monitored through
                           regular field visits and monitoring reports. The SMF also includes the institutional arrangements
                           and capacity-building activities for project staff, community institutions and partners at all levels.

                           The EMF and SMF prepared for the SLACC project will be disclosed before Appraisal through
                           the websites of the Ministry of Rural Development and all the state departments of rural
                           development, and on the Bank Infoshop.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key beneficiaries will be the institutions of the rural-poor supported by the NRLM –
                           including, self-help groups of women and their federations, common interest/producer groups such
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as farmers’ groups, livestock rearers’ groups, and their higher order collectives such as producer
                           companies. These institutions represent the rural-poor, the majority of whom directly depend on
                           climate-sensitive sectors such as agriculture, livestock and fisheries and have limited adaptive
                           capacity. Also, as these institutions are women-led, it will help SLACC to focus on the distinct
                           vulnerabilities and adaptive capacity of women.
                           A consultation workshop on the safeguards aspects of the project is planned for during the
                           appraisal discussions in the states of Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            07-Mar-2014
                           Comments: The EMF and IPDF has been disclosed in the websites of the Ministry of Rural
                                         Development and the websites of the State Rural Livelihood Missions, State
                                         Departments of Rural Development, Bihar and Madhya Pradesh.


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            07-Mar-2014
                           Comments: No comments
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            07-Mar-2014
                           Comments: No separate Pest Management Plan; requirements for this policy are subsumed
                                         within the EMF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples



                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Priti Kumar
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 03-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (SM)                    Date: 04-Mar-2014




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
