                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC1229

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Morocco                        Project ID:     P131256
                            Project Name:     Noor II and III Concentrated Solar Power Project (P131256)
                            Task Team         Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         06-Jun-2014                    Estimated       18-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSEE                          Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (95%), Public administration- Energy and mining
                                              (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:   3307.81                  Total Bank Financing:       350.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:         428.90
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                 490.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                    350.00
                              African Development Bank                                                 252.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                    218.00
                              EC European Commission                                                   123.43
                              EC European Investment Bank                                              480.00
                              FRANCE French Agency for Development                                      68.57
                              GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
                                                                                                       896.91
                              (KFW)
                              Total                                                                   2878.91
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?
                         B. Project Objectives
                         The project development objectives (PDO) of the Noor II and III projects are (i) to scale-up
                         generation of solar-based electricity in Morocco through an increase of the Noor "Solar Complex"
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity; (ii) pilot solar tower technology in Morocco; and (ii) to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions
                         and local environmental pollutants.

                         The project will also contribute to Morocco’s long term objective of reducing its dependency on
                         fossil fuels, to the global public good of mitigating climate change through acceleration of global
                         deployment of Concentrated Solar Power (CSP), and to accelerating the momentum towards
                         European Union- Middle East and North Africa renewable energy integration.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project is designed to support the development of the second phase of the Noor Solar
                         Complex (500 MW). The first phase, the Noor I Project of 160 MW, is under construction. This
                         phase will consist of two distinct plants: (a) a 150-200 MW parabolic trough CSP plant (Noor II);
                         and (b) a 100-150 MW tower CSP plant (Noor III). Both plants would be constructed on lots adjacent
                         to Noor I that have already been acquired by the Moroccan Agency for Solar Energy (MASEN). No
                         new land acquisition will be required for Noor II and III. Noor II and III have the same associated
                         facilities as Noor I (the water pipeline linking the Mansour Eddahbi dam reservoir with the Noor
                         Solar Complex, the already existing 60 KV line, and the 220 kV Ouarzazate Errachidia transmission
                         line) except for the 220 kV Ouarzazate - Tazarte transmission line. The project will entail limited
                         additional land acquisition in the context of associated facilities to the Noor Solar Complex that
                         remain to be built, namely the Ouarzazate - Tazarte transmission line and the water pipeline from the
                         Mansour Eddahbi Dam to the site of the Noor Solar Complex. The safeguards documentation for the
                         transmission line still has to be finalized, while the safeguards documentation for the water pipeline
                         has been disclosed at the World Bank’s infoshop on 19th of March 2014.

                         The Project is expected to consist of the following components: (a) the support for a formation of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) between MASEN and a competitively selected private partner(s) to
                         develop CSP plant(s) under the second phase of the Noor Solar Complex; and (b) help reduce the
                         fiscal impact of this subsidy by lowering the Government of Morocco’s cost of capital through a
                         financing mechanism to improve the long-term sustainability of the fiscal investment.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is to be located in the Ghessat council and at the «Tamzaghten Izerki» village, about 10
                         km north east of Ouarzazate city, a town of approximately 50,000 inhabitants situated in south-
                         central Morocco, at about 160 km south-east of Marrakesh. The site is well suited for solar projects,
                         especially for the development of CSP, for the following reasons:

                         The site disposes of excellent solar resources. On-site measurement stations have allowed data
                         collection since 2010, including solar insolation, indicating that the site’s direct normal irradiation
                         (DNI) is significantly higher than typical site qualification limits and used in the preliminary
                         modeling. This conclusion is based on: (a) comparisons of the Noor Solar Complex site data with
                         insolation data from the Andasol site in Granada, Spain and the Solar Energy Generating Systems
                         (SEGS) site in the Mojave Desert, California, United States; and (b) an analysis of 30 years of
                         satellite data. These analyses indicate that 2010 was an atypical year.
                           The site disposes of sufficient water resources. Although the area around Ouarzazate is a desert
                           environment, a reservoir of the Mansour Eddahbi dam, with a capacity of 480 Mm3 is located
                           approximately at 4 km from the CSP Noor Solar Complex site. Water use for Noor II and III is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           limited by the fact that the projects are required to use dry-cooling only. The Noor Complex’s impact
                           on the overall water resources in the region is minimal. Its water consumption has been estimated at
                           approximately 0.8 percent of the regular annual volume of the Mansour Eddahbi dam and 0.5 percent
                           of the overall water resources available in the region once the construction of the Tiouine dam further
                           north is completed. It should be noted that the Tiouine dam is not directly linked with the Noor Solar
                           Complex site, and only the Mansour Eddahbi dam can provide water directly to the site.

                           The site is easily accessible. The site is accessible via paved road originating from the National
                           Highway 10 (“Route Nationale No.10”) or RN10 that runs from the port city of Agadir, at
                           approximately 350 km to the site, through to the city of Ouarzazate. The Agadir port is located at a
                           relatively short distance and for the Noor I project is being used to import and transport heavy
                           equipment from abroad to avoid the Atlas Mountains. The use of the Casablanca port requires
                           crossing the Atlas Mountains.

                           The site is close to the power grid. The existing grid and planned reinforcements by the Office
                           National de l'Electricité et de l'Eau Potable (ONEE) will allow evacuation of the full capacity of the
                           power plants at peak output conditions. Furthermore, Noor II and III power plants will be fitted with
                           thermal energy storage capabilities allowing the optimization of peak outputs to meet the network
                           carrying capacity within reasonable limits.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           10.      During the preparation of the Ouarzazate Phase I Project, which is now called the Noor I
                           Project, the World Bank team conducted several missions to strengthen MASEN's capacity on
                           safeguards policies and provided hands-on training. Although MASEN is staffed with high quality
                           personnel who have acquired significant experience, MASEN's capacity on safeguard policies for
                           Noor II and III is expected to be strengthened for satisfactory implementation of the second phase of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Noor Complex. Preparation and supervision of Noor II/III will see the provision of a dedicated
                           social safeguard consultant to MASEN's team to support compliance and coordination with external
                           stakeholders.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Emmanuel Ngollo (AFTSG)
                           Andrea Liverani (MNSSU)
                           Taoufiq Bennouna (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project has potential adverse environmental
                           BP 4.01                                              risks in its area of influence due to water
                                                                                consumption (mirror washing) and risk of toxic
                                                                                fluid leaks. The FESIA (Framework
                                                                                Environmental and Social Impact Assessment)
                                                                                prepared under the Ouarzazate Phase I (now the
                                                                                “Noor I”) Project is being updated to cover the
                                                                 environmental and social safeguards issues for
                                                                 the Noor II and Noor III Projects, as both
                                                                 concern the same site and the same type of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 infrastructure (except for the solar tower) to be
                                                                 developed on the site.
                                                                 As this project is a scale-up activity to the solar
                                                                 thermal plant under construction, cumulative
                                                                 environmental impacts especially on the
                                                                 ecosystems and soil/groundwater should be
                                                                 assessed in the updated FESIA and ESIAs for
                                                                 each power plant.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Project phase II (Noor II and III) is adjacent to
                                                                 the phase I on the existing site dedicated for the
                                                                 construction of the Noor Solar Complex where
                                                                 no natural habitat was affected and the OP 4.04
                                                                 was not triggered. As no new expansion of the
                                                                 site is foreseen at this stage for Noor II and III,
                                                                 there is no need to trigger this policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    There are no forests located near or on the site
                                                                 as the terrain is marked by a desert environment.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    TSince there is no agricultural area involved nor
                                                                 any patch of weed requiring the use of
                                                                 chemicals, this policy will not be triggered
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    There are no physical cultural resources on the
                         BP 4.11                                 site of the Noor Solar Complex.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no indigenous people on the site of
                                                                 the Noor Solar Complex.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   OP 4.12 was triggered for Noor I and will
                         4.12                                    continue to be triggered for Noor II/III. The
                                                                 large part of the land acquisition needed for the
                                                                 project (mainly for the actual Solar Complex)
                                                                 was carried out during phase I. The 10,000 ha of
                                                                 land acquired for the site consisted entirely of
                                                                 communal land. Although the sale was based on
                                                                 a willing buyer willing seller agreement, the
                                                                 Bank required a Land Acquisition Plan (LAP) to
                                                                 be prepared and disclosed. During phase II,
                                                                 particular attention will be given to monitoring
                                                                 of land acquisition for Associated Facilities with
                                                                 a view to ensuring due process and minimizing
                                                                 impacts on local vulnerable populations.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes   The needs of raw water for the Noor I cooling
                                                                 system and ancillary use for the site will be
                                                                 satisfied and dependent upon the pumping of
                                                                 water from the existing Mansour Eddahbi dam
                                                                 reservoir; The cooling for the Noor II & III
                                                                                                                                 projects will be dry cooling and therefore does
                                                                                                                                 not require water from the dam reservoir. The
                                                                                                                                 project’s performance will be dependent upon
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the performance of the existing dam or the
                                                                                                                                 failure or misuse of the dam may result in
                                                                                                                                 damage to the project. The Mansour Eddahbi
                                                                                                                                 dam is subject to the regular monitoring
                                                                                                                                 requirements under Moroccan law. MASEN
                                                                                                                                 will follow the monitoring process of the dam.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             TThere are no international waterways nearby
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            or associated with the Noor Solar Complex.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The site is not located in a disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-May-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The FESIA (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework) prepared under the
                                      Ouarzazate Phase I Project, now known as the Noor I Project, is being updated to cover the
                                      environmental and social safeguards issues for the Noor II and Noor III Project, as both concern
                                      the same site and the same type of infrastructure to be developed on the site. A specific
                                      Environmental Impact Assessment will be developed for each power plant (Noor II and Noor III)
                                      when the specific details of these CSP plant will be known after the finalization of the bidding
                                      process. At this stage no additional documentation is expected to be required in relation to OP
                                      4.12. The already disclosed LAP covers the land acquisition aspects for the Noor II and III site.
                                      The FESIA will confirm and further detail the start of construction of the Ouarzazate - Tazarte
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      line, which is currently not expected until late 2014, and for which a Resettlement Action Plan
                                      (RAP) will need to be produced, cleared and disclosed ahead of work construction.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 16-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                                                                                          Date: 16-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
