                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC8056

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Peru                              Project ID:       P147342
                            Project Name:       Peru: Investments for Environmentally Sustainable Development (P147342)
                            Task Team           Ernesto Sanchez-Triana
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Jun-2015                       Estimated         07-Aug-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GENDR                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Public administration- Energy and mining (21%), Public administration-
                                                Transportation (14%), Public administration- Water, sanitatio n and flood
                                                protection (11%), Urban Transport (28%), General industry and trade sector
                                                (26%)
                            Theme(s):           Other public sector governance (5%), Municipal governance and institution
                                                building (11%), Other urban development (35%), Environment al policies and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                institutions (21%), Pollution management and environmental health (28%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     75.00                       Total Bank Financing:          35.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        40.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           35.00
                              Total                                                                           75.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance environmental management through (i)
                           increase the quality, availability and reliability of environmental data to decision makers and civil
                         society; (ii) improve mechanisms to identify and address environmental priorities at the regional and
                         national levels, and, (iii) improve mechanisms for opening up decision making on environmental
                         aspects to public scrutiny.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The ultimate goal of the proposed operation is to strengthen environmental management systems in
                         Peru, particularly the national, regional and local governments’ capacity for environmental
                         management, with the long-term purpose of enabling: (i) the creation of an institutional and policy
                         framework that will ensure environmental sustainability of key economic sectors, thus enhancing the
                         country’s competitiveness; (ii) a national system of environmental information to support decision
                         making in investment and production activities; and (iii) targeted investments to bolster the demand
                         side of good environmental governance that reduces social conflicts.

                         These goals will be met through an approach that combines five components: (i) investments in
                         environmental information systems to support policy making and formulation, and production
                         decisions in key economic sectors; (ii) investments in strengthening constituencies that can articulate
                         demand for improved environmental governance; (iii) investments in building capacity of national,
                         regional and selected local environmental management agencies, streamlining the environmental
                         regulatory framework and a system of environmental certification to create a medium and long term
                         sustainability framework for productive investments; (iv) investments in strengthening
                         environmental management in regional governments aligned with national regulations and standards;
                         and, (v) support for project implementation. Project components are summarized below.

                         Component 1. Investments in the National Environmental Information System

                         The main objective of this component is to set up a transparent system for environmental
                         management in which the environmental dimension of policy decisions, investment and production
                         activities, and public participation is based on hard and scientifically based data. The component will
                         have three key elements, as described below:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       National Environmental Information System (SINIA). This sub-component will support
                         investments in information systems for water quality, air, and soil management. The sub-component
                         will enable the expansion of the air monitoring network in the most polluted urban areas; expansion
                         of the water quality monitoring network; and design and implementation of systems for soil
                         monitoring. The information systems to be established through this sub-component will facilitate the
                         formation of an electronic depository of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIAs), linked to the EIA
                         system, which will enable free and unrestricted access to this online information. The systems will
                         further facilitate the articulation of different state entities in real time and at the least cost. The sub-
                         component will also include the mapping of environmental quality of soils, water and air in priority
                         areas to guide the processes of environmental evaluation and control.

                         2.      Reference Laboratories and Environmental Quality Control Assurance. This sub-component
                         will support the development of a reference laboratory and a quality control assurance system for the
                         accreditation and certification of laboratories that provide environmental analysis services in Peru.

                         3.       Continuous Improvement of Environmental Management. This sub-component will support
                         policy improvements through the incorporation of new information, based on experiences, new
                         scientific knowledge or exogenous changes in the context in which environmental policy is
                         implemented. The sub-component will include investments in the establishment of mechanisms and
                         procedures to systematically evaluate monitoring data and to assess the impact of environmental
                         management measures. In addition, the sub-component will support the development of procedures
                         to periodically adjust management programs in response to feedback from monitoring plans and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other impact assessment data.

                         Component 2. Investments in Fostering Demand for Good Environmental Governance

                         The main objective of this component is to set up a participatory system for environmental
                         management by which stakeholders have access to channels to voice their opinions on the
                         implementation of policies, investment and production activities that may have effects on the
                         environment. The following sub-components would comprise this component:

                         1.      Strengthening Civil Society. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs). This can be a key
                         mechanism for providing voice to those who are vulnerable to environmental damage (e.g. the poor,
                         children, and subsistence farmers). This sub-component will support an institutional assessment of
                         the context in which these organizations operate in Peru onmatters related to the environment, and it
                         will support measures to strengthen their role. Specific measures will be determined after the
                         assessment is completed, but it will likely involve supporting the regional environmental
                         commissions (CARs), promoting environmental education, ensuring adequate representation of civil
                         society at environmental planning and decision-making fora, timely notification of new regulations
                         and policies, access to information, and others. These measures would be culturally appropriate to
                         ensure that they are inclusive and foster participation of rural communities, indigenous peoples and
                         other vulnerable groups.

                         2.     Investments in Managing Change, Enhancing Transparency and Environmental Awareness.
                         The sub-component will focus on: (i) increasing public environmental awareness; (ii) strengthening
                         accountability associated with governmental policies to reduce environmental degradation; and (iii)
                         improving environmental performance as a result of community and market pressures generated by
                         information disclosure. This sub-component will disseminate the information collected by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental information system on topics including wastewater discharges, industrial pollution
                         emissions; and other environmental impacts from investment projects.

                         Component 3. Building Capacity of National, Regional and Selected Local Environmental
                         Management Agencies

                         The main objective of this component is to bolster institutional capacity of environmental
                         management agencies to strengthen the EIA system, streamline the environmental regulatory
                         framework and establish a system of environmental certification to create a medium and long-term
                         sustainability framework for productive investments. This component will comprise the following
                         main elements:

                         1.       System for Environmental Certification of Investments. The system will be based on the
                         recent modifications to the National Environmental Impact Assessment System (SEIA), including the
                         establishment of the National Service of Environmental Certification for Sustainable Investments
                         (SENACE). Activities under this sub-component would include: updating sectoral environmental
                         regulations, updating and complementing environmental management instruments (including
                         environmental quality standards-ECAs), mechanisms to prevent and resolve environmental conflicts,
                         and harmonization of processes and procedures for EIA across sectors. An application (app) for
                         registries of consultants and other relevant software will be also included. This sub-component would
                         also finance investments in the formulation of guidelines, protocols and quality control procedures,
                         based on a review of existing guidelines and procedures, with the aim of optimizing service quality
                         and efficiency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.       Enhanced Environmental Impact Assessment Capacity. This sub-component will support the
                         acquisition of improved skills in environmental impact assessment through technical assistance, on-
                         the-job training, and behavioral change programs aimed at staff in the Ministry of Environment
                         (MINAM), SENACE, eight sectoral ministries and regional governments. This will include South-
                         South exchange with acknowledged leading countries in environmental assessment.

                         3.       Support for the setting-up of SENACE. This sub-component may supportthe recently created
                         SENACE by providing for the acquisition or construction of a building, equipment and vehicles. It
                         would also finance an investment in an IT platform to implement the one window for environmental
                         certification where specialists could work online and simultaneously in the review of impact
                         assessment studies. Environmental applications (apps) on communication and security will be also
                         developed.

                         Component 4. Organizational Strengthening

                         1.      Establishment of environmental priorities at the regional level. This sub-component would
                         support development of capacities to estimate the cost of environmental degradation at the national
                         and regional levels to inform priority setting, as well as the preparation of public surveys on
                         environmental quality. To this end, this sub-component will include investments in estimations of
                         environmental degradation, benefit-cost analysis of alternative interventions, and a process to build
                         consensus to address environmental priorities.

                         2.      Investments for environmental decentralization. This sub-component would enable
                         alignment of national, regional and local environmental management systems with the legal and
                         regulatory framework. This will require investments that satisfy the needs of each region through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of regional plans in line with national requirements and standards, which would
                         include updating regional environmental regulations; formulation of guides, guidelines, protocols and
                         other instruments; and, training, exchange and learning tours on new environmental management
                         mechanisms.

                         Component 5. Project Implementation

                         MINAM will have overall responsibility for project implementation. Mechanisms for intersectoral
                         coordination and project implementation will be defined during project preparation.

                         One option is to establish mechanisms that provide policy guidance, monitor project implementation
                         and results, and provide overall operational support during project implementation in MINAM.
                         Another option is to establish a Project Coordination and Implementation Unit (PCIU) that is
                         responsible for important administrative functions, including progress monitoring and reporting for
                         project components, quality control, developing and implementing procurement plans, conducting
                         financial audits, and preparing financial reports in compliance with Peruvian laws and the provisions
                         of the credit. Such a PCIU could convene regular stakeholder meetings to chart progress,
                         troubleshooting when impediments arise, liaising with the regional governments and other involved
                         agencies, gathering information, and reporting regularly to the Bank and other stakeholders. A
                         thirdoption would be to establish an inter-institutional and inter-sectoral coordinating organization
                           for the project. This organization would ensure cooperation among the sectoral, regional and
                           technical organizations that are critical for project success such as the Water National Authority
                           (ANA), the Environmental Evaluation and Fiscalization Agency (OEFA), regional governments and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           other stakeholders.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will support a series of investments to strengthen environmental management systems in
                           Peru, at the national, regional and local levels. These investments will target identified environmental
                           priorities, including air quality in urban areas, indoor air pollution, water and sanitation, deforestation
                           and overfishing. The project would also bolster the capacity of environmental authorities to design,
                           assess, implement, and monitor and evaluate interventions to address such environmental priorities.
                           In addition, by supporting increased quality, availability and reliability of environmental data and
                           strengthening constituencies that can articulate demand for improved environmental governance, the
                           project would enhance accountability associated with governmental policies to reduce environmental
                           degradation, promote improved policy making, and give a voice to groups potentially affected by
                           environmental degradation, thus contributing to minimize social conflict. As a result, the project is
                           anticipated to have positive environmental effects.

                           The main physical works that may be supported by this project comprise the infrastructure works for
                           the construction or acquisition of a building for the recently-created SENACE and, the infrastructure
                           works for the reference laboratory. The project would also support the expansion of the air, soil and
                           water quality monitoring networks. The precise location of these works is unknown, and it will be
                           determined based on further analysis of the existing infrastructure and the identification of priority
                           areas to be monitored.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The agency in charge of preparing and implementing the operation happens to be the highest
                           environmental authority in Peru - MINAM. This Ministry coordinates core areas of environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management, including environmental licensing, the review process of EIAs for large projects, and
                           its overarching coordinating role with key sectors and regions on environmental issues. Therefore,
                           MINAM has the institutional capacity required for the safeguards policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (GENDR)
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The proposed Project consists essentially of
                           BP 4.01                                                investments to strengthen Peru’s environmental
                                                                                  management framework. The Project is
                                                                                  expected to have a positive impact on the
                                                                                  environment as it seeks to: (i) increase the
                                                                                  quality, availability and reliability of
                                                                                  environmental data; (ii) improve mechanisms to
                                                                                  identify and address environmental priorities at
                                                                                  the regional and national levels; and (iii)
                                                            improve mechanisms for opening up decision
                                                            making on environmental aspects to public
                                                            scrutiny. Notwithstanding these positive
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            impacts, the proposed Project may include the
                                                            acquisition or construction of a building for
                                                            SENACE and the establishment of
                                                            infrastructure for the reference laboratory. The
                                                            project would also support the expansion of the
                                                            soil, water quality and air monitoring networks.
                                                            Thus, a Category B is proposed and MINAM
                                                            will prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                            Management Framework (ESMF), including
                                                            social and environmental assessments, to
                                                            provide guidance on potential issues that could
                                                            arise during Project implementation. The ESMF
                                                            would also assess and provide guidance on
                                                            handling and disposal of chemical reagents and
                                                            samples. Potentially adverse social and
                                                            environmental impacts are expected to be small,
                                                            as they will be avoided or minimized through
                                                            appropriate preventive and mitigation measures,
                                                            as well as through adequate project design. The
                                                            ESMF will be submitted for the Bank’s
                                                            approval, consulted with key stakeholders
                                                            before appraisal, and disseminated locally
                                                            through MINAM and other relevant websites.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   This policy is not triggered as the project is not
                                                            anticipated to result in the loss or degradation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            any Critical Natural Habitats. However, the
                                                            ESMF will include screening criteria to ensure
                                                            that no investments which support the
                                                            significant conversion of critical natural habitats
                                                            will be supported.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                            not finance any investment of: (a) projects that
                                                            have or may have impacts on the health and
                                                            quality of forests; (b) projects that affect the
                                                            rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                                            dependence upon or interaction with forests;
                                                            and (c) projects that aim to bring about changes
                                                            in the management, protection, or utilization of
                                                            natural forests or plantations, whether they are
                                                            publicly, privately, or communally owned.
                                                            However, the ESMF will include screening
                                                            criteria to ensure that investments which could
                                                            have significant potential impacts on forests will
                                                            not be supported by the project.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                                                                                 not finance the procurement or significant use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides..
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           This policy will be triggered because of
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         potential chance finds of physical cultural
                                                                                                                                 resources - especially those of archaeological
                                                                                                                                 significance - that could be found during
                                                                                                                                 installation of air quality monitoring networks
                                                                                                                                 or minor remodeling works. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 include specific screening provisions for
                                                                                                                                 evaluating potential impacts on cultural
                                                                                                                                 resources and guidance on chance finds
                                                                                                                                 procedures.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Project implementation will not affect
                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples, so the policy is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           The project may require to acquire land for the
                                 4.12                                                                                            building of SENACE and the reference
                                                                                                                                 laboratory and, require small areas for the
                                                                                                                                 installation of air quality or hydro-meteorology
                                                                                                                                 stations. The project will review the procedures
                                                                                                                                 used by MINAM and SENACE to gain access
                                                                                                                                 to these areas in order to determine if the project
                                                                                                                                 triggers OP 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                                                                                                                 not finance any dams nor will it rely on the
                                                                                                                                 operations of existing dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not work in any disputed areas as defined under
                                                                                                                                 the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Apr-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF will be produced from August to November, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ernesto Sanchez-Triana

                                 Approved By:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)    Date: 06-Aug-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Emilia Battaglini (SM)   Date: 24-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
