                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6209
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           South Sudan                        Project ID:    P144139
                            Project Name:      Statistical Capacity Building Project (P144139)
                            Task Team          Thomas Danielewitz
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Nov-2013                        Estimated   15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTP2                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (40%), Poverty strategy, analysis
                                              and monitoring (30%), Other public sector governance (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       9.00           Total Bank Financing:                     9.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  9.00
                              Total                                                                                        9.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to strengthen the capacity of statistics producers in South
                           Sudan to produce and disseminate official statistics.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project has five components constituting a total investment of US$9 million. Each component is

                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         summarized below.

                         Component A: Legal Reforms and Institutional Development. Activities under this component are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aimed at strengthening the legal and institutional framework for statistics in South Sudan, including
                         improving governance and accountability of statistics producers, improving producer-producer
                         cooperation and strengthening the dialogue between official statistics producers and the user
                         community. The component will also support the National Bureau of Statistics of South Sudan
                         (NBS) to become the apex organization in a national statistical system (NSS) consisting of multiple
                         data producing agencies, a diverse community of users and several financiers of statistics. This will
                         require an assessment of NBS’ current organizational structure and implementation of changes to
                         align the organization with its corporate objectives.

                         Component B: Human Resource Development and Training. The lack of skills needed to manage and
                         operate an effective and efficient statistical service has been identified as a major constraint for NBS
                         and other data producers. To address this, an assessment of training needs will be carried out across
                         data producing agencies in South Sudan with the aim of compiling a training plan for staff and
                         managers working in the agencies of the NSS. NBS will seek to deepen and broaden the academic
                         collaboration with Juba University, whereby Juba University will deliver some of the training needed
                         and NBS will offer placement opportunities for University of Juba students to gain professional
                         experience from working in the statistical service. Internationally recognized universities and
                         statistical training institutions in the region will also be engaged to deliver some of the training
                         needed. To supplement classroom training, international experts will be engaged to deliver on-the-
                         job training in various technical fields and a mentoring program for middle and senior management
                         will be developed and implemented.

                         Component C: Information and Communication Technology and Statistical Infrastructure
                         Development. The purpose of activities under component C is to build the information and
                         communications technology and statistical infrastructure needed in the statistical business processes.
                         This includes creating and maintaining sampling frames for surveys, registers to supplement or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilitate statistical operations, standards, concepts, definitions and protocols for statistical
                         operations, database development and development of the necessary ICT infrastructure including
                         hardware, software, networks, web-sites and audio-visual equipment. The component also finances
                         the development of plans and drawings for a new headquarter building for NBS. This component
                         may also feature activities related to preparing for the planned 2015 Population and Housing Census.

                         Component D: Data Development and Dissemination. Component D contains the main data
                         generating activities supported by the project. The project will support data collection, processing
                         and dissemination of statistical products. These include: i) production of poverty maps based on the
                         last census, the geographical information system (GIS) and the latest household surveys, ii)
                         strengthening of national accounts and economic statistics more generally by developing the
                         compilation frameworks and production processes for macroeconomic data in close consultation with
                         IMF, and iii) a small number of key socio-economic statistical surveys. The proposed surveys to be
                         financed under the project currently include: Labor Force Survey 2013-14, National Household
                         Budget Survey 2014-15 and the Integrated Business Survey 2014-15. The exact timing, scope,
                         content and other details will be discussed and agreed prior to each survey. This component may also
                         feature activities related to the planned 2015 Population and Housing Census.

                         Component E: Project Management. This component will finance project planning and budgeting,
                         management, monitoring and evaluation activities. NBS has formed an NSDS Coordination Team

                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                           (NCT) drawing its members from the staff of NBS. The NCT will report to the Chairman of NBS.
                           The NCT will be reinforced with short and extended-term consultants in areas of need. These
                           specialists will help ensure compliance with procurement, disbursement and financial management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           policies and procedures, as well as train staff in NBS on fiduciary practices. Within the first two year
                           of project implementation it is expected that all project management functions will be handled by
                           NBS staff.

                           The above-mentioned project activities will be financed through Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                           of US$9 million. The project will be implemented by the National Bureau of Statistics of South
                           Sudan in the period 2014 - 2019.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                            6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project does not involve any works or activities with environmental impacts, nor does it
                              involve land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access to resources or

                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                           livelihoods. The project is focused on improving systems for statistics. The field work to capture
                           data on individual households will involve relevant government agencies and local authorities.
                           Should there be a need to obtain data from individual households, the project will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultations with communities to ensure they are informed about the purposes of the data-
                           gathering.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           NA
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           NA
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           NA
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           NA
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Thomas Danielewitz
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 18-Jun-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (SM)         Date: 18-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Page 5 of 5
