                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2365

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ukraine                         Project ID:       P132386
                            Project Name:      Urban Infrastructure Project 2 (P132386)
                            Task Team          Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Jan-2014                     Estimated         27-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSUW                           Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (35%), Sanitation (30%), Solid waste management (20%), Sub-
                                               national government administration (15%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%), Urban services and
                                               housing for the poor (20%), Other urban development (20%), M unicipal
                                               governance and institution building (20%), Other public sector governance
                                               (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    350.00                     Total Bank Financing:        300.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       300.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                        50.00
                              Total                                                                       350.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO of UIP2 is to improve the quality and efficiency of selected municipal services in targeted
                           cities.
                         This objective will be achieved through a combination of investments in infrastructure and capacity
                         building.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         To build on the on-going Urban Infrastructure Project (UIP) and the World Bank’s long-term
                         engagement in the municipal services sector, the Government of Ukraine has requested a follow up
                         project. The proposed UIP2 project will support improvement in high-priority municipal services, on
                         a demand-driven basis, in selected municipalities. Although municipalities are responsible for
                         delivery of several types of infrastructure and social services, this project will focus on infrastructure
                         services. Based on the demand expressed thus far, it is anticipated that the project will invest
                         primarily in water and wastewater services, but will also support pilot investments in solid waste
                         management, public lighting, and public spaces or parks.

                         The project will be implemented in 8 cities of different sizes. The cities under consideration are Kiev,
                         Kharkov, Donetsk, Zhytomyr, Kirovograd, Uzhgorod, Kolomya and Kramatorsk. Their population
                         ranges from 60,000 to about three million with the total population of the eight cities amounting to
                         about six million. These cities were identified based on: (i) a commitment to increase tariffs so as to
                         ensure the sustainability of investments; (ii) their willingness to take proactive steps to improve
                         customer service and operational efficiency; (iii) high potential for development impact; (iv) high
                         degree of readiness for subproject investment; and (v) the economic viability of the proposed
                         investments.

                         Component 1: Urban Infrastructure Improvement (estimated US$ 280 Million)
                         This component will finance the rehabilitation and upgrading of municipal infrastructure in water,
                         wastewater, solid waste and other municipal services. The following investments are envisaged:

                         • Rehabilitation and expansion of water systems;
                         • Rehabilitation and upgrading of the existing wastewater and sludge treatment facilities;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         • Equipment for water quality testing laboratories;
                         • Equipment for operations and maintenance as well as spare parts;
                         • Preparation of detailed designs and tender documents and construction supervision; and
                         • Pilot projects in areas such as solid waste management.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (estimated US$ 10 Million)
                         This component aims to improve the capacity and efficiency of participating municipalities and
                         municipal utilities to operate and manage their infrastructure systems. It would support the state’s
                         effort in: (a) developing policies and inter-sectoral instruments for water and wastewater
                         management and planning; (b) strengthening water and wastewater management capacity at both the
                         local and national level; (c) strengthening local government social accountability measures based on
                         the recommendations of the World Bank Social Accountability study; d) developing policies for
                         solid waste management to improve municipal services delivery and strengthen governance. This
                         component will be implemented in close coordination with the Danube Water Program. More
                         specifically, this component will support:

                         • Development of key policies and instruments for water and wastewater management and planning
                           - Review and update of national water, wastewater, and solid waste policies/strategies;
                           - Development of service delivery Business Plans in targeted cities;
                           - Assistance to target municipalities in developing medium- and long-term infrastructure
                         investment plans (Priority Investment Planning), with realistic budgets;
                           - Introduction of better information systems, performance indicators, and benchmarking; and
                           - Review of the current methodology and standards for testing the quality of water and wastewater
Public Disclosure Copy




                         discharges.

                         • Strengthening water and wastewater management capacity
                           - Improving transparency and customer-responsiveness through: (i) improving utilities/
                         municipalities’ capacity to handle customer complaints; (ii) introducing systems for public
                         participation and feedback, for example, citizen report cards, satisfaction surveys, or public
                         hearings, as well as innovative information campaigns; and (iii) other tools to provide feedback to
                         utilities on their performance.
                           - Technical training in: administration, revenue generation, billing and collection,tariff settings,
                         financial management, customer responsiveness, and the preparation of feasibility studies, etc.

                         • Developing policies for solid waste management to build municipal capacity and strengthen
                         governance
                           - Preparation of investment plans in the sector;
                           - Development of environmental management plans;
                           - Preparation of communication plans to enhance public awareness and participation; and
                           - Ground and surface water pollution prevention plans.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (estimated US$ 10 Million)
                         This component will involve institutional support and capacity development for project management
                         and implementation at the central and regional levels in the targeted cities. Support will include:
                         training, staffing, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). Feasibility studies for potential sub-projects
                         will also be covered under this component, as will the annual project financial and technical audits of
                         district vodokanals.

                         CTF funding to complement WB loan. Ukraine is eligible for the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has an approved Action Plan which refers to CTF co-financing of the UIP2 for $25-50 million. This
                         financing will address energy efficiency and reduce GHG emissions in landfills, water and
                         wastewater networks, and treatment plants. The combined funding will enable short-, medium-, and
                         long-term investment planning by utilities and replace the current ad hoc emergency response. CTF
                         funding will include: (a) replacement of water and wastewater pumping equipment; (b) installation of
                         automated control systems; (c) sludge thickening equipment; and (d) landfill gas capture.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The activities under UIP-2 will be implemented in Kiev, Kharkov, Donetsk, Zhytomyr, Ternopil,
                         Kirovograd, Uzhgorod, and Kramatorsk. Physical impacts of interventions in water supply and
                         sanitation sector will be similar to those under UIP-1 (rehabilitation of water supply and waste water
                         treatment networks/systems) and will be almost entirely rehabilitation of existing schemes, with only
                         the possibility of minor extensions in some locations, e.g. to reach a few recently constructed
                         buildings. Pilot solid waste management will be implemented in Kharkov oblast. Potential impacts
                         under Solid Waste Management component of the project will be identified during project
                         preparation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Overall responsibility for project implementation rests with the Central Project Management Unit
                           (CPMU) housed within the Ministry of Regional Development, Construction, Housing, and
                           Communal Services (MoRD). The CPMU for UIP-1 will also oversee project implementation for
                           UIP-2, and be responsible for coordination and communication with local implementing units—or
Public Disclosure Copy




                           RPMUs (Regional Project Management Units)—in each of the targeted cities. The capacity of
                           Regional Project Management Units will be enhanced (i.e. a designated environmental specialists
                           hired) to allow adequate preparation of safeguards documentation for all sub-projects. Vodokanals
                           and municipalities will be the ‘on-the-ground’ implementing entities of the Project with full day-to-
                           day implementation responsibility. The CPMU office in Kiev as well as the RPMUs other cities will
                           provide technical assistance to the vodokanals and municipalities. An international consulting firm
                           was hired to prepare environmental and social safeguard documents. The CPMU has a designated
                           qualified environmental specialist, who will oversee and support the preparation of all safeguard
                           documentation as well as day-to-day supervision of project implementation. Lessons learned under
                           the ongoing UIP-1 and environmental documentation (project EMP and recommendations to utilities
                           on preparation of site-specific EMPs) will be applied to achieve efficient preparation and start-up of
                           the project activities.
                           Environmental sections of the Operations Manual developed for UIP-1 will be updated to be used for
                           the purposes of UIP-2.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                           Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Environmental assessment for sub-projects in
                           BP 4.01                                              specific municipalities will be done as part of
                                                                                preparation of design documentation.
                                                                                Environmental impacts of works in water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                supply and sanitation sector will be mitigated by
                                                                                good construction and housekeeping practices
                                                                                prescribed by ESMF. A designated site-specific
                                                                                ESMP will be prepared for SWM sub-project to
                                                                                reflect the impacts which may be caused by
                                                                                interventions in SWM sector. Potential
                                                                                environmental impacts and proposed mitigation
                                                                                measures will be outlined in these safeguard
                                                                                documents. The ESMF and ESMP will be
                                                                                disclosed and public consultations organized by
                                                                                the client.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Previous experience of the Bank suggests that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            these types of projects typically have minor
                                                                                                                                 issues with denial of access for unregistered
                                                                                                                                 land users, therefore an RPF will be prepared as
                                                                                                                                 a precaution. The need for resettlement will be
                                                                                                                                 evident at later stages of project design upon
                                                                                                                                 final selection of the project cites. The Social
                                                                                                                                 assessment will be done for each of the sites to
                                                                                                                                 figure out whether OP/BP4.12 is triggered. In
                                                                                                                                 case the policy is triggered the team will prepare
                                                                                                                                 a detailed or abbreviated Resettlement Action
                                                                                                                                 Plans (RAPs). RPF and RAPs will be duly
                                                                                                                                 disclosed and public consultations with local
                                                                                                                                 communities organized by the client.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           Some of the sub-projects will be implemented
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            on the international waterways. The Team is
                                                                                                                                 likely to seek an exception to the notification
                                                                                                                                 requirement on the basis that the project will
                                                                                                                                 fund rehabilitation rather than new construction,
                                                                                                                                 but the decision on this will be taken when the
                                                                                                                                 ongoing assessments and feasibility studies have
                                                                                                                                 been completed so the nature of the proposed
                                                                                                                                 works is clear.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Draft - December 25, 2013
                                      Final - January 15, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 19-Dec-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Sumila Gulyani (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 23-Dec-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
