                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC5462

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Republic of               Project ID:       P133731
                            Project Name:      Statistics Capacity Building Project (P133731)
                            Task Team          Franck M. Adoho
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Apr-2014                      Estimated         19-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTP5                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Central government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (60%), Macroeconomic
                                               management (25%), Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     25.00                     Total Bank Financing:           5.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   5.00
                              Total                                                                        25.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14.       The development objectives of this project are threefold: 1) improve the quality, the
                           timeliness of statistical information, 2) make data accessible to users and 3) promote the demand for
                           statistics.
                           15.       The project will ensure sustainability of reliable and timely statistics service delivery
                           through: human resources capacity development, improvement of the institutional organization and
                           the development of adequate infrastructures for statistical information production and dissemination.
                         C. Project Description
                         14.     The Project is structured into five components as follows.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improving the institutional and organizational framework of the National Statistical
                         System (NSS).

                         This component aims at reinforcing the National Institute of Statistics (NIS) for the coordination of
                         the National Statistical System (NSS) activities as well as the collaboration between different actors
                         of the NSS. This will be done through:
                         i)       the development of procedure manuals for statistical activities and resources management
                         and,
                         ii)      the organization of periodic seminars between the NIS and others NSS counterparts
                         The World Bank will also support the restoration or the creation of institutions that are part the
                         statistical information system in diverse economic and social sectors (education, health, agriculture,
                         trade, services, manufactures…). For each institution, the work program and the methodological
                         framework should be elaborated; the profile of the staffs, the materials and the cost should be
                         defined.

                         Component 2: Strengthening human, material and financial capabilities.
                         Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening human capabilities
                         i)       Reform the local schools, review the training programs to adjust for the needs of the
                         country, ;
                         ii)      Attract and retain well trained and experienced professors;
                         iii)     Develop training programs to prepare Congolese candidates for the competition to the
                         regional statistical schools;
                         iv)      Identify/design and support career development training programs for the SSN staff.
                         Sub-component 2.2: Supporting the material and financial capabilities
                         i)       It addresses the issues of the lack of working equipment in statistic’s offices. This includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                         providing statistical software, IT and other equipment and upgrading the website of the NIS;
                         ii)      It finances Consultants fees, trainings, costs related to reforming the local statistical schools,
                         travels, per diem and hotels, communication and information activities; and other technical
                         assistance.

                         Component 3: Improving the production and dissemination of statistics
                         Sub-component 3.1: Improving the production of statistics
                         The World Bank will support the SSN (mainly the National Institute of Statistics) to produce timely
                         and reliable statistics, such as survey and routine data. In order to achieve this, it will support the
                         following activities:
                         i)       The elaboration of statistics yearbooks at central, sectorial and regional levels;
                         ii)      The acquisition of software for national accounts elaboration and survey data analysis, and
                         training of staff on the use of these software;
                         iii)     The elaboration of national accounts and satellites accounts using the 1993 National
                         Accounting System;
                         iv)      The Production and dissemination of economic monitoring notes and the harmonized
                         consumer price index;
                         v)       The training on, sampling techniques, surveys design, implementation, data analysis and
                         archiving;
                         vi)      The updating enumeration areas and sampling frames;
                           vii)     The support harmonization of statistical activities: nomenclatures, codes, definitions,
                           concepts;
                           viii)    The poverty assessment using Ecom 2011, analysis and dissemination of the DHS 2011 data;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ix)      The production of analytical works to analyze government policies and shocks.
                           Sub-component 3.2: Improving the dissemination of statistics
                           It provides support to communication activities of the NSS and the elaboration of the communication
                           plan of the NIS. The project will support some communication activities for diverse clients
                           (government, enterprises, selected NGOs, population, parliament, and the media…).
                           The following items will finance under this component: (i) consultants fees (ii) production,
                           multiplication and dissemination costs of statistical yearbooks, studies and reports (iii)
                           communication and information activities and; (iv) other technical assistance.

                           Component 4: Promote and Develop of the use of statistics

                           Under this component the project will support activities that promote the use of statistics to support
                           policy decision as well as the teaching of statistics in secondary schools. The project will also
                           support the Poverty Observatory (located in the NSI) by initiating and releasing collaborative
                           analytical works on many thematic as an independent agency for a greater public scrutiny. Technical
                           discussions, forums and workshops will be delivered under this component to stimulate open debates
                           on development issues.
                           The component will finance: (i) training; (ii) technical assistance and studies; and (e) travel,
                           workshops and seminars.

                           Component 5: Project management

                           This component will support project management to ensure that the management unit is operational
                           and implements the project effectively. The project management team includes World Bank staff and
                           the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at the NIS, which will be responsible for the day-to-day
                           coordination and management of the implementation of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The component will finance: (i) equipment and operating costs related to the project; (ii) independent
                           monitoring and evaluation; (iii) training; (iv) technical assistance and studies; (v) travel, per diem,
                           hotel, workshops and seminars for the PCU staff and counterparts and; (iv) external audit.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This project is classified as Category C. No civil works or activities will be undertaken with adverse
                           environmental or direct social impacts in terms of safeguards. The project does not require any land
                           acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement nor does it provide financing for activities that result
                           in restriction of access to resources or livelihoods.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not applicable

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No safeguard-related studies is needed for this project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Franck M. Adoho

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 14-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Albert G. Zeufack (SM)                                                                                               Date: 20-Mar-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
