                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC5437

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Yemen, Republic of             Project ID:      P145361
                            Project Name:      North-South Corridor Highway Project (P145361)
                            Task Team          Andreas Schliessler
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Mar-2014                    Estimated        29-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSTI                          Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Regional
                                               integration (20%), Export development and competitiveness (20 %), Conflict
                                               prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    570.00                   Total Bank Financing:        150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        100.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               150.00
                              SAUDI ARABIA Saudi Fund for Development                                   320.00
                              Total                                                                     570.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is improved transport connectivity between Aden and Taiz.

                           This objective will be achieved through (i) the construction of 55 km of new highway between Aden
                           and Noubat Dokaim, to complement the the 85 km being constructed between Noubat Dokaim and
                         Taiz; and (ii) establishing appropriate institutional arrangements for the management, operation and
                         maintenance of the highway.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Yemen Corridor Highway Project would achieve the above mentioned objective though the
                         implementation of two components:

                         Component 1: Highway construction (US$ 138 million). This component will include mainly civil
                         works for the construction of a sub-section of 55 km of a double carriageway highway between Aden
                         and Noubat Dokaim. This sub-section will complement the 85 km sub-section to be built with
                         funding from the Saudi Fund for development. It will also include consulting services for the
                         supervision of construction works for the same section, and technical audits to ensure quality of
                         construction.

                         Component 2: Institutional Support and Strengthening (US$ 12.0 million). This component will be
                         comprised of several subcomponents:
                         •      Preparation activities for other sections of the Saada – Aden Yemen International Corridor
                         Highway which are to be built through future projects, as follows:

                         a)      Preparation of Environmental and Social Safeguards studies (ESIA, EMP, RAP) and
                         implementation support, for the following sections of the highway: (i) Taiz – Sana’a (Section 2); (ii)
                         Sana’a - Amran (part of Section 3);
                         b)      Update of existing design and feasibility studies for the section between Taiz and Sana’a
                         (Section 2) and between Sana’a and Amran (part of Section 3).

                         •       Road safety. This will include a review of the existing design of the Aden – Taiz highway
                         section with the specific purpose of detecting and remedying any potential deficiencies in terms of
                         road safety.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Definition of asset management arrangements for the overall Saada-Aden Yemen
                         International Corridor Highway (SAYICH). This subcomponent will include activities required for
                         the establishment of mechanisms for the effective management and maintenance of the new corridor.
                         Although the project will only cover the highway between Aden and Taiz, it will be necessary to
                         establish suitable arrangements for managing and maintaining the entire future road corridor asset,
                         which will eventually connect Aden in the South to the Saudi border in the North. This
                         subcomponent will be developed with an eye to include small and medium-sized local firms as much
                         as possible.

                         •       Communications campaign. This will include the design and execution of the MPWH’s
                         information and communications campaign, for the purposes of building public and stakeholder
                         support for the International Corridor Highway Program.

                         •        Training and capacity building. This subcomponent will also include resources to fund
                         various types of training and capacity building for staff of MPWH, apart from the resources for road
                         safety training and asset management described above.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The whole Saada – Aden Yemen International Corridor Highway (SAYICH) Program will include
                           three main sections:

                           •       Section 1: Aden – Lahj – Taiz (140 km)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •       Section 2: Taiz – Ibb – Dhamar – Sana’a (214 km)
                           •       Section 3: Sana’a – Amran – Saada (Albain border) (358 km)

                           The first 140 km of the highway will traverse three governorates, including Aden, Lahj and Taiz. The
                           proposed IDA credit will finance 55km between Aden and Noubat Dokaim of Section 1. The
                           remaining part of Section 1 from Noubat Dokaim to Taiz will be financed by the Saudi Fund for
                           Development.

                           For Section 1, the necessary land acquisition and resettlement is concentrated in several pockets
                           along the planned highway, while there are also long stretches in desert areas which are not affected
                           by either land acquisition or resettlement.

                           The terrain is mostly flat between the coastal town of Aden and Lahj, but further north it becomes
                           slightly more hilly and it becomes mountainous north of Noubat Dokaim towards Taiz. Very few
                           watercourses traverse the project area. Settlements along the alignment may need shielding from the
                           effects of fast traffic on the new road.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Public Works and Highways (MPWH) will be responsible for project preparation
                           and implementation. It has worked with the Bank on various Bank-financed projects, including two
                           ongoing transport projects: Rural Access Project, and Road Assets Maintenance Project. The MPWH
                           has created different PIUs for the management of each of the projects.

                           Although the various PIUs have recruited environmental and social safeguards specialists, their
                           capacity will require strengthening, based on the experience of implementation of previous projects.
                           An assessment of safeguards capacity will need to be carried out as part of the ESIA and RAP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation and capacity building activities will need to be carried out accordingly as an integrated
                           part of the project preparation and implementation.

                           With regard to the resettlement and land acquisition, the GoY is in the process of formally
                           establishing the Land Acquisition Committee which will have the overall responsibility for land
                           acquisition and resettlement for the highway sections between Aden and Taiz. The Committee is
                           being established in line with Yemeni law and includes representatives of the Ministries of (i) Public
                           Works and Highways, (ii) Finance, (iii) Local Administration, and (iv) Planning and International
                           Cooperation. In addition, it includes representatives of local authorities and also the Governor of the
                           respective Governorate.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nina Bhatt (MNSSD)
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                           Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           Policy will be triggered. Environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         Social Assessment and Environmental and
                                                                                                                                 Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       TBD                           ESIA will determine whether the project
                                                                                                                                 implementation will result in loss, conversion or
                                                                                                                                 degradation of natural habitats or critical natural
                                                                                                                                 habitats or not.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            Policy does not apply as the project will not be
                                                                                                                                 implemented in any forested areas.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                                                                 procure any pesticides nor will it induce an
                                                                                                                                 increase in the current non-existent to low levels
                                                                                                                                 of pesticide use.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           The ESIA will confirm if the project will affect
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Policy is not triggered as indigenous people as
                                                                                                                                 defined in the policy are not present in project
                                                                                                                                 areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Land acquisition and resettlement impacts will
                                 4.12                                                                                            not be avoidable. A Resettlement Action Plan
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                                                                 include construction of dams as defined by the
                                                                                                                                 policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            undertake any activities in the catchment areas
                                                                                                                                 of international waterways and shared aquifers.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Policy is not triggered as project activities will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not be implemented in any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment will be carried out for the entire section between
                                      Aden and Taiz (140 km). This includes the 85 km section which is being funded by the Saudi
                                      Fund for Development. A draft Environmental and Social Management Plan and a draft
                                      Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared and disclosed prior to project appraisal which is
                                      planned for early March 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Andreas Schliessler

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)      Date: 03-Oct-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Veevers-Carter (SM)   Date: 05-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
