                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC1947

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Gambia, The                       Project ID:       P133079
                            Project Name:       READ: Results for Education Achievement and Development Project (P133079)
                            Task Team           Nathalie Lahire
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           20-Aug-2013                       Estimated         27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTEW                             Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Primary education (50%), Secondary education (30%), Tertiary education
                                                (10%), General education sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Education for all (70%), Education for the knowledge economy (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     34.60                       Total Bank Financing:          11.70
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              16.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                       11.70
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                        6.90
                              Total                                                                           34.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           38. The main challenge in education is to further improve teacher quality and performance. In light
                           of this challenge, the proposed project is zeroing in on the teaching and learning in the classroom.
                           The main focus of the next phase of support would be to improvethe quality of teaching, including
                           developing the pedagogical skills of teachers. This is a challenging area in which to make changes,
                           as teaching practices are notoriously resistant to change, and difficult to monitor. It is important to
                         go further than simply monitoring attendance and performance management as these are likely to
                         have limited impact on learning if teachers do not have the skills to teach effectively.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         39. Proposed Development Objective (PDO): To improve the quality of teaching and increase access
                         to basic education for hard to reach children.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project is a US$19.6 million (IDA 12.7 M and GPE 6.9M). Specific Investment Grant
                         which will support the implementation of the Government Strategic Plan (2013-2018) currently
                         under preparation. The Project comprises two components: (1) a results-based component; and (2) a
                         Technical Assistance (TA) component which would finance essential advisory, technical, and
                         capacity-building support. Under the results based component, the proposed project will disburse
                         against selected key education budget line items referred to as Eligible Expenditure Programs
                         (EEPs), up to agreed limits. The event and amount of credit disbursements will be based on the
                         achievement of all pre-specified results for a given year, referred to as disbursement-linked indicators
                         (DLIs), determined in partnership with the Government and related to the reforms and activities
                         under the Gambian Strategic Plan (2013-2022).

                         Component 1: The Result Based Financing (about 80-90% of total financing)
                         The Results Based Financing component will comprise two subcomponents.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Increase access to basic education to hard to reach areas
                         The Access sub-component will focus on the hard to reach children, which includes those that have
                         never been to school, those at risk of dropping out, as well as those that have never attended, and
                         special needs children. The objective will be met through (i) the construction of multigrade schools
                         in remote areas, (ii) continued support for donkey carts that provide transportation in remote areas to
                         reduce distance to school, (iii) continued provision of equipment and support to children with special
                         needs after conducting a disability survey (United Nations Children’s Fund - UNICEF) to assess the
                         prevalence of children with disabilities and better determine the scale of interventions, (iv) provision
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of sanitary packets to girls in upper basic schools, (v) scaling up of Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT)
                         program to Imams in Majalis (Daaras) to release their students from begging and provide then with
                         an opportunity to learn literacy and numeracy within their premises. A study to identify barriers to
                         participation and retention in schools is being conducted under the World Bank administered
                         Education Plan Development Grant, which will reveal more precise interventions to reach the out of
                         school children. The results will become available during 2013 and will further refine the design of
                         the project.

                         Actions include: (i) increased availability of schools near remote communities, (ii) increased number
                         of children benefiting from donkey carts to access school, (iii) increased number of children
                         benefiting from numeracy and literacy in Majalis, (iv) reduced average distance to school, (v)
                         increased number of special needs children benefiting from special equipment to facilitate learning,
                         and (vi) support for a capitation grant to schools to substitute for formal and informal fees. The
                         proposed actions are to be promoted through the use of DLIs: multigrade school construction,
                         donkey carts, CCT grants, equipment for special needs children, sanitary packets, and school
                         capitation grants will be Eligible Expenditure Programs. Some tentative DLIs are included in Annex
                         3.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Improve quality of teaching and learning
                         The Quality sub-component aims at improving quality of teaching and learning through: (i)
                         continuous implementation of assessments of learning outcomes (standardized and classroom based),
                         with a focus on utilization of the results for improved teaching and learning and involvement of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         parents, (ii) focus on reading through the scaling up of existing interventions, refinement of reading
                         strategies in lower grades, development of teaching materials and lesson plans, teacher training with
                         a focus on practice and skills, and introduction of reading modules in initial teacher training, (iii)
                         hardship allowances for teachers in remote areas, (iv) setting up a quality assurance system in tertiary
                         education, and (v) collecting regular data on student and teacher absenteeism using the mobile phone
                         system introduced on a pilot basis under the current program, (vi) access to high bandwidth learning
                         network. The timing is right for systematic connectivity of schools with broadband, with new
                         international bandwidth becoming available from ACE cable (10 Gbps extendible to 40 Gbps). A
                         phased approach will connect the 149 upper basic and senior secondary public schools over a period
                         of three years, and (vii) systematic in-service teacher training using the systems set up under the
                         current programs.

                         Outcomes include: (i) improved teacher training program that focuses on relevant subject content
                         knowledge, pedagogical skills with a focus on reading, competencies to integrate ICT into teaching,
                         and professional attitudes and values and concluded with a Teacher Professional Examination, (ii)
                         needs based in-service professional development programs for teachers, increased use of classroom
                         based assessment, (iii) an increase in teacher observations that indicate good teaching practices, (iv)
                         an increased number of students and NAT low performers benefiting from additional support classes,
                         (v) a reduction of student absenteeism in NAT, an increased examination of student reading skills,
                         (vi) regular data collection on student/teacher absenteeism using the mobile phone system and shared
                         with parents and communities, (vii) and an increased number of schools that have been satisfactorily
                         connected to broadband, and (viii) the setting up of a quality assurance unit in higher education.

                         50.     The proposed actions are to be promoted through the use of DLIs. The Eligible Expenditure
                         programs will include: preparation and delivery of in-service professional development training for
                         teachers, development and administration of NATs, provision of hardship allowances, access to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         broadband connectivity, and equipment of the Higher Education quality assurance unit.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (about 10-20% of total financing)

                         The Technical Assistance component will comprise the following activities and will contribute to
                         implementing the activities under component 1:
                         Developing the evidence base for improved access and reading performance: Through the evaluation
                         of the CCT program for Majalis (Daaras) and an impact evaluation of reading interventions in the
                         early grades.
                         Improving the quality of teaching and learning through (i) developing and utilizing a standardized
                         classroom observation tool focusing student and teacher practices; (ii) enhancing the initial teacher
                         education program to make it more relevant to the realities of the classroom, and to incorporate
                         specific inputs on teaching of reading, and ICT competencies . Building on the work underway in the
                         Gambia College, the program will support a comprehensive review and enhancement of the
                         curriculum and practice of initial teacher education. In this regard, the Technical Assistance will
                         support (iii) a review of existing content, assessments and standards, (iv) redesigning the program to
                         focus more strongly on relevant subject content knowledge, pedagogical skills, ICT competencies to
                         integrate ICT into teaching, and professional attitudes and values, (v) development of a Teacher
                         Professional Examination, which will provide a rigorous assessment at the end of initial teacher
                         training. The teacher professional examination will be prepared and administered by a third party/
                           external body.
                           Capacity building at system level for improved governance and monitoring including (i)
                           strengthening data systems by linking the Education Management Information System (EMIS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           school level data, Human Resources (HR) data, learning outcomes results, and other data from the
                           regions for a more comprehensive system analysis, (ii) developing a strong communication strategy
                           (community radio, documentary), (iii) Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and operating costs to
                           manage the program, (iv) building MoBSE and Regional office statistical capacity, (v) providing
                           short term management training to middle and upper level managers.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project location will be nationwide, although Subcomponent 1.1 will focus on hard to reach areas.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           There is limited Borrower environmental and social safeguard capacity, in spite of the
                           implementation of several projects in the sector , in recent years. This, for the most part, stems from
                           the limited coordination among project implementers (MOBSE) and the National Environmental
                           Agency (NEA), in particular, in carrying out projects environmental and social function. This
                           concerns mainly the monitoring of the implementation of mitigation measures and compliance
                           monitoring, a role that should be devolved to the NEA.

                           These and other constraints to implementing the project safeguard requirements will be assessed and
                           addressed in the context of the preparation on the Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The project is set out to strengthen,
                           as necessary, relevant stakeholders’ capacity to meet its safeguard requirements. In other words, the
                           project shall implement any capacity strengthening measures that will be identified in environmental
                           and social instruments applicable to this operation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Amadou Konare (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered because of the potential
                           BP 4.01                                               environmental impacts resulting from project
                                                                                 activities. However, those impacts are expected
                                                                                 to be minimal, site-specific and manageable to
                                                                                 an accepted level. Due to the difficulty inherent
                                                                                 in defining what the real environmental impacts
                                                                                 of envisioned sub-projects are, and determining
                                                                                 what mitigation measures to put in place, an
                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) will be developed. The
                                                                                 ESMF will formulate standard methods and
                                                                                 procedures, along with institutional
                                                                                 arrangements for screening, review, approval
                                                                                 and implementation and monitoring of specific
                                                                                 EMPs, including the preparation of
                                                                 environmental clauses to be inserted in
                                                                 contractors’ bidding documents.
                                                                 The ESMF will be disclosed in-country and at
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Bank InfoShop, upon review and clearance by
                                                                 the Bank, prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   It is unknown at this stage whether Natural
                                                                 habitats may be affected by project activities.
                                                                 Impacts on Natural Habitats and their required
                                                                 mitigation measures will be discussed in the
                                                                 context of the preparation of the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project does not involve forestry.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project does not involve the use of
                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Though it is unknown at this stage which sites
                         BP 4.11                                 of the project intervention area may contain
                                                                 PCR, it will be prudent to use caution when
                                                                 implementing school infrastructure
                                                                 constructions. It would be important that
                                                                 dispositions are taken, to ensure that impacts
                                                                 onPhysical Cultural Resources (PCR) are
                                                                 assessed in the context of the preparation of the
                                                                 ESMF and mitigation measures commensurate
                                                                 to those impacts, including proper handling of
                                                                 chance finds, are implemented in the design,
                                                                 screening, implementation, monitoring of
                                                                 project activities, in accordance with national
                                                                 and Bank policies and procedures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                 area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project interventions will avoid where
                         4.12                                    possible adverse impacts on people, land and
                                                                 other economic resources and livelihoods. In
                                                                 situations where this cannot be avoided, the
                                                                 Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy
                                                                 Framework (RPF) to address the needs of
                                                                 persons who will be affected by loss of
                                                                 economic activities, access to resources, land
                                                                 acquisition and/or involuntary resettlement.

                                                                 The RPF will be disclosed in-country and at
                                                                 Bank InfoShop, upon review and clearance by
                                                                 ASPEN, prior to appraisal. In addition, where
                                                                 applicable, site-specific Resettlement Action
                                                                 Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement
                                                                 Action Plans (ARAPs) will be prepared and
                                                                                                                                 disclosed prior to school infrastructure
                                                                                                                                 construction.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF by June 2013
                                      RPF by June 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Nathalie Lahire

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 03-Mar-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                                                                                            Date: 04-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
