INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA1075
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Moldova                    Project ID:  P148125
Parent       P115634
Project ID:
Project Name: Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project Additional Financing (P148125)
Parent Project Disaster and Climate Risk Management Project (P115634)
Name:
Task Team       Anatol Gobjila
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Dec-2014                Estimated    29-Jan-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (100%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (85%), Climate change (15%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      2.00             Total Bank Financing:    2.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 2.00
Total                                                                       2.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 4


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The Project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the State Hydrometeorological
Service's ability to forecast severe weather and improve Moldova's capacity to prepare for and
respond to natural disasters.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The proposed additional financing would help finance the costs associated with a cost overrun across
all components and a resulting financing gap. The major changes proposed are: (i) an increase in the
cost of components to reflect the allocation of physical and price contingencies from the parent
project, and the allocation of proceeds from the proposed additional financing; (ii) minor changes to
the results framework aimed at streamlining the indicators and increasing their meaningfulness; and
(iii) an extension to the closing date.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The majority of activities supported by the Additional Financing are to be carried out in Chisinau.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes          The Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is
OP/BP 4.01                            triggered, same as for the parent project for including
small civil works. The same environmental management
framework will apply for the Additional Financing as
for the parent project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09  No
Physical Cultural Resources No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
Page 2 of 4


﻿Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas  No
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
All safeguard issues and impacts have been described and addressed under the framework of the
parent project.There are no additional safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed
additional financing.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
All impacts have been described and addressed under the framework of the parent project.There
are no additional safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed Additional Financing.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no adverse impacts associated with the proposed additional financing.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Such measures have been described and addressed under the framework of the parent project.
There are no additional measures associated with the proposed additional financing.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
No additional identification of stakeholder and consultation is foreseen for the proposed additional
financing.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               24-May-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                            25-May-2010
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Moldova                                                   09-Mar-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The parent's project EA report and EMP were disclosed in 2010. No in-country disclosure is
Page 3 of 4


﻿expected for the additional financing.
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA[
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anatol Gobjila
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Kremena M. lonkova (PMGR)            Date: 27-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


