INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8244
Country:         Mauritania                 Project ID:   P144183
Project Name:    Mauritania Sustainable Landscape Management Project under the SAWAP
(P144183)
Task Team        Dahlia Lotayef
Leader(s):
Estimated        22-Jun-2015                Estimated 31 Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal Area:  Multi-focal area
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):        Water resource management (30%), Land administration and management
(30%), Biodiversity (20%), Other environment and natural resoure es
management (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       4.81             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                 4.81
Total                                                             4.81
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to expand sustainable land, forest and water
management practices in targeted productive ecosystems in Mauritania using a value chain approach.
C. Project Description


﻿1)     The Project will support targeted interventions and community level investments aiming at
integrating biodiversity conservation into sustainable land, water and forest management of a select
number of productive ecosystems, following two complementary approaches: (i) an integrated value
chain approach; and (ii) integrated landscape management approach. The Project will more
specifically focus on the conservation and increase of gum arabic producing tree populations, i.e.,
Acacia senegal and Acacia seyal. This will provide an opportunity for rural communities involved in
gum arabic production in the targeted zones to generate additional income and increase the resilience
of their livelihoods through better integration into agro-biodiveristy value chains, and commercial
*       markets. Mauritania has been historically known to be the second exporter of gum arabic in the
world with an average annual production of 5,700 tons between 1968 and 1972. At present,
Mauritania is facing severe degradation of its timber and non-timber forest resources, and this
production has decreased to around 300 tons/year, despite a modest regeneration favored by a recent
improvement in rainfall.
2)     The project will be implemented over five years, and includes three components:
*      Component 1: Sustainable Landscape Management (SLM) Knowledge, Governance and
Partnerships
*      Component 2: Investment in SLM
*      Component 3: Project Management
Component 1: SLM Knowledge, Governance and Partnerships (?US$ 954,000)
3)     This component consists of three sub-components which jointly will strengthen the
knowledge, governance and partnerships within and among the many stakeholders (national and
local government agencies, local communities, non-profit organizations and the private sector)
involved in SLM in general and in particular relating to gum producing natural landscapes and the
Gum Arabic value chain.
Sub-component 1.1: Building SLM Capacity, Governing Tools and Knowledge Sharing (US$.1/3.)
4)     This sub-component supports training of the Ministry of Environment and Sustainable
Development (MEDD) and relevant partners in mainstreaming principles of SLM into the
O
Q)      valorization and regeneration of degraded natural ecosystems. Special attention will be given to the
preservation and regeneration of Gum Arabic producing landscapes, targeting both sylvo- pastoral
and agro-sylvo- pastoral areas. This also includes the practice of enrichment of such landscape with
other dwindling woody (e.g. Adansonia digitana (Baobab), Sclerocarya birrea, Commiphora Africana
and Ziziphus mauritiana and Ziziphus mauritiaca) and herbaceous species (mostly fodder grasses),
as well as the practice of various compatible soil and water conservation methodologies ( e.g stone or
earth bunds or lines, 'demi-lune", zai and other planting pit technologies used in (semi-) arid
ecosystems). In addition, training will be given to Gum Arabic producing communities/associationas,
as to improve the production of Gum Arabic as related to selection and conservation of tree seeds
and the harvesting and storage of Gum Arabic. All training sessions will be based on available
modules developed by APEFE, the completed WB Community-based Watershed Management
project, the MDG project and PROLPRAF.
5)     This sub-component will also support the MEDD in the development of sectoral governing
tools, namely the formulation of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) guidelines, Environmental
and Social Safeguards requirements and best practices relating to forest preservation/regeneration
initiatives. Subsequently, relevant associations will receive training in how to comply to such EIA
and safeguards requirements.


﻿6)     This sub-component will also i) organize regional cross-site exchanges between targeted
local SLM associations; ii) hold workshops and outreach activities involving national and
international stakeholders networks and iii) develop knowledge sharing products to reach a larger
audience and make the knowledge accessible for an indefinite time period (e.g. project flyer, web
O
portal ?) Assistance will be provided by the BRICKS Regional Knowledge Hub Project.
Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Monitoring of Environmental Services (US $... 1/3...)
7)     This sub-component aims to support the MEDD - more precisely the Department of
Planification - and the targeted local partners, in the monitoring of changes in environmental services
of landscapes. To this goal, a participative monitoring systems will be installed which evaluates the
impact and cost-effectiveness of the varying supported SLM practices (Component 2.2.) on
enhancing maintenance of biodiversity, water and soil conservation, and biomass carbon storage.
This system will be aligned and feeding into the existing governmental national environmental data
management systems, currently supported by REPSAHEL/OSS. The monitoring activities will cover
the needs of the three GEF M&E Tracking Tools pertaining to this project, relating to Biodiversity,
Land Degradation and Sustainable Forest Management. Relevant training sessions will be held on
national and local levels. This approach intends to support the sustainability of the monitoring
activities beyond the Project's lifespan. The lessons learned from the results of these monitoring
activities will guide project activities during its lifetime (see 2.1) and could be used by the the
MEDD in relation to awareness raising and extension services. OSS, as mediated by BRICKS
Regional Knowledge Hub Project and the TerrAfrica Platform for SLM, will provide technical
assistance to this activity.
Sub-component 1.3: Enabling Development of a Sustainable Gum Arabic Value Chain (US$..1/3..)
8)     This sub-component supports development of a sustainable Gum Arabic value chain by
evaluating the current situation while identifying development opportunities, such as to make
recommendations for improvement available. Activities involved are : i) analyzing the socio-
economic situation of the Gum Arabic value chain covering a cost-benefit analyses both within the
value chain itself and its weight in the national economy, such as its contribution to GDP; ii)
inventory and mapping of the geographic distribution of Gum Arabic producing trees and
evaluating potential for further development (e.g. as related to hydrology) ; iii) reviewing policy,
legislative, regulatory and financial frameworks to identify opportunities for reform (e.g. such as
related to the code forestier 2007 which describes the gum producing Acacia Senegal as a protected
species and constraints related to land tenure); iv) organizing two times, earlier and later in project
a       life time, an national discussion platform event representing the various Gum Arabic value chain
stakeholders (growers, harvesters, traders, financers and government and civil organizations) and v)
training of local stakeholders in best practices, project management and development of relevant
entrepreneurial associations.
Component 2: Investment in Sustainable Landscape Management (?US$ 3,250,000)
9)     This component supports the implementation of SLM practices within productive
ecosystems with high potential for preservation and regeneration of Gum Arabic producting trees
within the capital district of Trarza and the regional districts of Brakna and Gorgol.
Component 2.1: Development of Regional Sustainable Landscape Management Plans (? US.. 1/10)
10)    This sub-component supports the participatory development of SLM plans for the three
targeted regions with the objective to guide the expansion and nature of the various SLM practices
over the lifespan of the Project. For the Gorgol region, the SLM plan will build on the available
Beylougue Watershed Management plan with help of the previous established watershed
management association. For the other two regions, new plans will be developed and where possible
integrated in the local community plans being established by the on-going PNIDDLE (Projet
National Integr6 Pour la Decentralisation de Developpement Local et L'Emploi des Jeunes).


﻿11)    During project preparation about 60 sites (of which 80 % sylvo-pastoral and 20% agro-
sylvo-pastoral) were pre-selected within the three regions, as of interest to be targeted for SLM
practices, over the Project's life time.
0
12)    SLM practices of the the sylvo-pastoral land parcels entails the preservation and regeneration
of the GumArabic producing natural ecosystems, while enriching the existing vegetation with other
dwindling and sought for indigenous woody (e.g. Adansonia digitana (Baobab), Sclerocarya birrea,
Commiphora Africana and Ziziphus mauritiana and Ziziphus mauritiaca) and herbaceous species.
Management of the much sparser agro-sylvo-pastoral land parcels in such ecosystems, will entail the
preservation and/or introduction of Gum Arabic producing tree species and/or other sought for
indigenous tree species within cultivated areas. On both type of land parcels such activities will be
accompanied by compatible soil and water conserving practices ( e.g stone or earth bunds or lines,
'demi-lune", zai and other planting pit technologies used in (semi-) arid ecosystems) The exact
nature of the SLM practices will be determined by the outcome of an IUCN study on best practices to
preserve and regenerate Gum Arabic producing natural landscapes and the input from local
communities.
13)     The SLM plans will yearly be updated as influenced by actual progress, preliminary result
of the monitoring of environmental services as linked SLM practices (Component 1.2) and input
from pertinent community land management fora.
Component 2.2: Practicing Sustainable Landscape Management (US$..9/10)
14)    Once agreed on the selected plots and SLM activities to be implemented during the first
project year, the participatory monitoring of changes of environmental services will be started within
and outside the selected plots. Then, once the respective communities have received relevant SLM
training in each of the three regions, the SLM practices will start to be implemented and expanded
according to the five year SLM plans.
15)    To strengthen the trust and incentives of the communities to continue to support the SLM
practices, part of the budget, about 10 to 20% per site/village, may be allocated to other activities
which will support the local economy as related to sound environmental management. Examples are
support given to improve vegetable gardens, to improve watering facilities, to restore river banks
(needed in Gorgol watershed), to deliver improved fuel stoves, gaz burners, and establishment of
a      local boutiques to sell product such as Gum Arabic, fodder etc.)
Component 3: Project Management (?<US$ 585,000)
16)    This component supports the MEDD in management of the Project by financing: (i) a project
management and administration training workshop covering procurement best practices; (ii) a project
launching workshop; iv) hiring of an Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) officer and (v)
implementation of project management (preparation of annual work and budget plans, updating of
Project Results Framework, coordination of activities at national and local levels, progress reports,
operating costs).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


﻿F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Dahlia Lotayef (GENDR)
Medou Lo (GENDR)
Salamata Bal (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is expected to have minimal adverse
OP/BP 4.01                              impacts on the environment. Nonetheless, the Project
may invest in activities - such as small-scale
rehabilitation projects or small scale irrigation
infrastructures - that have the potential for minimal
adverse social and environmental impacts. Adverse
impacts from these small-scale operations are easily
identified, minimized and mitigated by simple
interventions.
During preparation, the recipient will prepare an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), since the specific sites and scale of
subprojects are unknown at this stage, to screen all
potential investments for adverse environmental
impacts, guide execution of any activities such that
adverse impacts are avoided, minimized, and
mitigated, and describe the standard mitigation
activities for the types of project interventions
possible. This ESMF will include a budget for
mitigation activities, outline who will be responsible
for what, and describe ongoing trainings that will be
provided to the Directorate in support of
implementing safeguard activities.
The ESMF will be developed in consultation with
potentially affected communities and other
stakeholders, and a draft will be shared with them in
advance of public consultation. The final draft will
be widely disclosed publicly in a form accessible to
Project stakeholders. The ESMF will be reviewed
and cleared by the national environmental agency
and the Bank, then disclosed in-country and at Bank
Infoshop, prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         Project activities will bolster natural habitats in the
three regions of Mauritania. As such, the changes in
management of natural habitats will be for the better.


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes          Project activities will improve the management and
status of forests in the three project areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes          The Project may invest in agroforestry activities that
may require the use of pest control methods and
pesticides management on the part of local
producers. The recipient will prepare a Pest
Management Plan as part of the Project ESMF to
outline the standards for the purchase, application,
storage and disposal of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           The Project is not expected to support any activities
OP/BP 4.11                                that would directly and adversely impact any
physical cultural resources as defined in OP 4.11.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples, as defined by OP
4.10                                      4.10, present in the Project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The Project will not support the acquisition of land
BP 4.12                                   or the physical resettlement of people. Nonetheless,
the Project may support activities that restrict access
to resources within protected areas. In this case, the
recipient will prepare a Process Framework as part of
the ESMF to outline the activities necessary to
consult with users about potential restrictions,
identify potential losses as a result of the restrictions,
and develop alternatives to offset these potential
losses.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This project will not involve building dams nor is it
dependent upon an existing dam.
Projects on International    No           This project will not take place on any international
O
 Waterways 0P/l3P 7.50                   waterways, nor support any activities that will impact
international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         This project will not take place in any disputed areas
BP 7.60                                   as defined under OP 7.60, nor support any activities
that will impact disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The project-level ESMF will be prepared, disclosed, consulted upon and finalized prior to
appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dahlia Lotayef
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 29-Jun-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Practice Manager!     Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                  Date: 29-Jun-201 5
Manager:
0
G-)
0
Ut
0
Ut
0
0
G-)
0
Ut
0
0
Ut
0


