                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA4552
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P129401
                            Project Name:      Guiyang Rural Roads Project (P129401)
                            Task Team          Holly Krambeck
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Sep-2013                        Estimated   06-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Information technology (1%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways
                                              (99%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Trade facilitation and market access
                                              (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     250.00           Total Bank Financing:                  150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      150.00
                              Total                                                                                      250.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the Project is to provide improved transport accessibility in selected
                           areas of Guiyang, in a sustainable manner.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         Per the request of the Guiyang Municipal Government, the proposed Project will partly support the
                         implementation of the activities under Guiyang Rural Roads Development 12th Five-Year-Plan, with
                         a particular focus on the upgrading/improvement of existing lower class roads and the rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of county and township roads in poor condition. In addition, the Project will help build the capacity
                         for rural roads maintenance. To this end, the Project will include the following four components:

                         Component A: Upgrading/improving county and township roads (~RMB 1.113 billion: 57% of the
                         total project cost) will provide all-season roads to villagers and increase transport capacity in key
                         corridors. Physical outputs include: (1) upgrading one county road from Class IV to Class II; and (2)
                         improving unclassified county and township roads to Class IV.

                         Component B: Rehabilitation of county and township roads (~ RMB 755 million: 39% of the total
                         project cost) supports the rehabilitation of deteriorated county and township roads. The physical
                         outputs of the component include rehabilitated roads, with improved safety and drainage features.

                         Component C: Rural road maintenance pilot (~ RMB76 million: 4 % of the total project cost) will
                         enable the Guiyang Municipal Transport Bureau to test and verify methods that could improve the
                         cost efficiency and efficacy of the Guiyang Municipality rural road maintenance program. The
                         component comprises three distinct parts: (a) Development of the rural road maintenance pilot
                         design; (b) Implementation of the rural road maintenance pilot; and (c) Improvement of the Guiyang
                         Rural Road Management Information System.

                         Component D: Technical assistance (TA) (~RMB 6 million: <1% total project cost) supports the
                         implementation of two technical assistance programs that contribute to the longer term sustainability
                         of the rural road program: (a) Rural road network plan and (b) Training and study tours.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The rural roads under this project are located in the suburbs area of Guiyang Municipality. Guiyang
Public Disclosure Copy




                         covers 7 districts, 3 counties and 1 county-level city. The municipality boundaries span over 8,034
                         km2 area, located in a hilly and mountainous terrain with elevation ranging from 500 to 1,760 meters
                         above sea level. According to statistics in 2010, Guiyang has a total population of 4.32 million, of
                         which 1.38 million (about 32%) live in the rural areas.

                         At the end of 2011, the total length of rural roads in Guiyang was about 7,875km, which included
                         1,624 km county roads, 1,494 km township roads, 4,715 km village roads and 42 km dedicated roads.
                         The rural roads network in Guiyang is generally underdeveloped. The condition of rural roads,
                         mostly at Class IV or unclassified, was generally poor and with low quality of service. Existing
                         asphalt and cement concrete pavement has extensively deteriorated; and quite a number of roads are
                         unpaved. The poor road conditions caused much inconvenience and high travel cost for the villagers,
                         particularly in the mountainous areas.

                         The physical works under this project are mainly rehabilitation and upgrading of the existing rural
                         roads, therefore, the specific environmental, social and resettlement impacts may be minor.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jun Zeng (EASCS)
                         Ning Yang (EASCS)



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             Category B
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs)
                                                                         prepared
                                                                         Information disclosure and public consultation
                                                                         conducted per OP4.01 requirements.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The project is unlikely to cause any significant
                                                                         impacts on natural habitats. The policy is not
                                                                         triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not involve forests and is
                                                                         unlikely to cause negative impacts on the quality
                                                                         of any forests. This policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The project will not involve use or procurement
                                                                         of pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project is not anticipated to cause negative
                         BP 4.11                                         impacts on physical cultural resources. Chance-
                                                                         find procedure will be included in the ECOPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             15.43% of Guiyang population comprises ethnic
                                                                         minority people. Main ethnic minority groups in
                                                                         Guiyang are Miao, Buyi, Dong, Yi and Gelao.
                                                                         The Bank team confirmed that these groups are
                                                                         IP groups, as defined by the Bank’s OP4.10 on
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples, and it would be very likely
                                                                         that these ethnic minority groups would be
                                                                         present in or have collective attachment to the
                                                                         project area. Therefore, the Bank’s OP4.10 is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         triggered, and an Indigenous People Development
                                                                         Plan (IPDP) will be prepared.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Land acquisition and structure relocation will be
                         4.12                                            unavoidable for this project, although some of the
                                                                         specific impacts might be minor due to the nature
                                                                         of the project – project road segment selection
                                                                         criteria include minimal land acquisition and
                                                                         resettlement impact. During the project
                                                                         preparation, specific roads/components could not
                                                                         be determined (project road segments will be
                                                                         selected on a rolling basis) and therefore
                                                                         involuntary resettlement impacts could only be
                                                                         determined during project implementation.
                                                                         Based on above mentioned information, the Bank
                                                                         team concluded that the Bank’s OP 4.12 on
                                                                         Involuntary Resettlement is triggered, and a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                         prepared in both Chinese and English. It should
                                                                         describe the overall legal framework, planning



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                               principles, Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                               preparation and approval arrangement,
                                                                               procedures, compensatory and rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               approach, consultation and participatory
                                                                               requirements, grievance redress mechanisms, and
                                                                               organizational and monitoring arrangements.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               The project will not involve any dams. The
                                                                               policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International        No                 The project will not involve any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               waterways. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not located in disputed areas. The
                            7.60                                               policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP4.01 Environmental Assessment

                             Physical activities to be supported by the Project would include improvement and rehabilitation of
                             rural roads. The first batch to be implemented during the first year of project implementation
                             includes rehabilitation of 25 roads under component B. The project will result in benefits in terms
                             of providing improved access and road conditions to local communities. Because the physical
                             works will be largely within existing right-of-way, the project would not require significant civil
                             works, land acquisition or structure relocation. Though to a reduced extent, the implementation
                             would cause limited impacts on the environment including soil erosion and subsequent water
Public Disclosure Copy




                             pollution, damage on vegetation and animals, and noise and dust problems mainly during
                             construction. Therefore the policy is triggered. The project is Category B for environmental
                             purposes.

                             Comprehensive Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) was prepared by accredited EIA
                             Consultant, the Guizhou Provincial Environmental Science Research and Design Institute
                             (GPESRDI). The ECOPs draw on the experiences and lessons learnt from the rural road
                             component of existing Bank financed Guiyang Transport Project, and covers institutional
                             arrangements, each type of typical road construction/rehabilitation activities, and training plan.
                             The ECOPs also provides procedures for preparation and review of investment/site specific EAs/
                             EMPs to be developed during project implementation. The ECOPs were reviewed by the Bank
                             team and found satisfactory to the Bank safeguards requirements.

                             During project preparation, the project owner and EIA Consultant held workshops participated in
                             by responsible PMO staff and design engineers. This practice will continue during project
                             implementation stage to make sure the ECOPs are well incorporated into the design and
                             construction practices to be followed by contractors during construction stage.

                             Land acquisition and structure relocation will be unavoidable for this project, although some of the
                             specific impacts might be minor due to the nature of the project – project road segment selection


                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                          criteria include minimal land acquisition and/or resettlement impacts.

                           The project will also provide rural roads support to ethnic minority communities. The Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Impact Assessment indicated that negative impacts would be very limited.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project aims to improve accessibility, safety and drainage of rural roads in select areas of
                           Guiyang. The negative impacts are expected to be limited and short-term.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           NA
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Code of Practices
                           The project owner engaged GPESRDI, a class A EIA institute accredited by Ministry of
                           Environmental Protection to prepare the ECOPs. The ECOPs include how to manage the
                           implementation of ECOPs, such as institutional arrangements, responsibilities and roles of each
                           implementation stakeholder, specific code of practices for access road, site preparation, pits and
                           spoil sites, slope stabilization and cut/filling, drainage, bridge and culvert, etc. It also covers
                           cross-cutting issues such as soil erosion control, social disturbance management, wastewater
                           treatment, management of cultural relics, health and safety, and solid waste management. In
                           addition, a set of procedures for candidate rural road, including screening, environmental
                           document preparation, review and approval, reporting and documentation is included in the
                           ECOPs.

                          During project preparation, the ECOPs were shared and discussed with relevant project
                          management staff and design engineer to ensure proper incorporation of the ECOPs into
Public Disclosure Copy




                          engineering design. The ECOPs will be included in the bidding documents and civil works
                          contract to be followed by the contractors.

                          The project owner will engage an Environmental Management Consultant (EMC) to help manage
                          the implementation of ECOPs during project implementation.

                          Ethnic Minority Development Plan. Based on the findings of the Social Assessment study, an
                          Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was developed to ensure that project activities on
                          rural roads development are offered to these communities in the same way as other project
                          beneficiaries and that their participation in the Project would be encouraged.

                           Resettlement Policy Framework. A Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed
                           according to relevant local laws and regulations as well as World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                           Resettlement for the resettlement practices on relocation house construction and the new primary
                           school construction. It describes the overall legal framework, planning principles, procedures,
                           compensatory and rehabilitation approach, consultation and participatory requirements, training
                           plans, grievance redress mechanisms, organization and monitoring arrangements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the project preparation, the project owner and EIA Consultant carried out information


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           disclosure and public consultation through posters, questionnaire survey, interviews and public
                           meetings in project counties, townships and villages. Consulted people include potentially affected
                           villagers and local governments. Their comments and suggestions were incorporated into the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project design, ECOPs, and RFP. Full draft ECOPs were disclosed on the websites of each project
                           township and websites of 7 local government or transport bureau on August 6, 2013. The RFP
                           was disclosed in the newspaper and on the transport bureau website on August 29, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            06-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            29-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            29-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Holly Krambeck
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                          Date: 03-Nov-2013




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
