                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR9106
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P092631
                            Project Name:       Xi'an Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P092631)
                            Task Team           Reda Hamedoun
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Oct-2007                                  Estimated   24-Jun-2008
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTIDR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Urban Transport (76%), Other social services (15%), Sub-national government
                                                administration (9%)
                            Theme:              City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Municipal governance and
                                                institution building (25%), Pollution management and e nvironmental health
                                                (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       514.41           Total Bank Financing:                                       150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             364.41
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                150.00
                              Total                                                                                                514.41
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve accessibility and mobility in Xi'an, while reducing


                                                                                 Page 1 of 10
                         the environmental impact of urban transport system, and prot                                  ecting
                         Xi'an's cultural heritage, with a particular focus on the Ming walled cit
                         y.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Key performance indicators being considered are:
                          1.     Reduction in travel times for key user groups (i.e. cyclists, pedestrians, public transport
                         users).
                          2.     Reductions in car traffic to/from and across the Ming walled city and the Han Chang'an site.
                          3.     Increases in bus operating efficiency - on street speeds, reliability, passenger flows/bus
                          4.     Reduction in levels of key pollutants to national standards or better.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objective is to improve accessibility and mobility in Xi'an, while reducing
                         the environmental impact of urban transport system, and prot                                  ecting
                         Xi'an's cultural heritage, with a particular focus on the Ming walled cit
                         y.

                          Key performance indicators being considered are:
                          1.     Reduction in travel times for key user groups (i.e. cyclists, pedestrians, public transport
                         users).
                          2.     Reductions in car traffic to/from and across the Ming walled city and the Han Chang'an site.
                          3.     Increases in bus operating efficiency - on street speeds, reliability, passenger flows/bus
                          4.     Reduction in levels of key pollutants to national standards or better.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project restructure includes a new bus depot in western part of the city under Component 2 and
                         cancellation of several other activities.

                         Component 1: Urban road network - Although Xi'an has a clearly defined hierarchy of roads, some
Public Disclosure Copy




                         further improvements to arterial roads and junctions are required to bring them up to consistent
                         standards are required so as to ensure the most effective and efficient operation of the network within
                         the third Ring Road. In addition the city lacks an effective network of secondary roads within the
                         existing areas (including the Ming walled city) as well as new secondary roads to service the newly
                         developing areas. The current low density of the secondary road network forces traffic on the main
                         roads for even short distance trips and inhibits the efficient development of new peripheral areas and
                         land in Huxian County. Also lacking are adequate facilities for pedestrians and cyclists to cross main
                         roads.

                         This component consists of a package of investments within the 3rd Ring Road to complement the
                         investments in new major roads being made by ADB and XMG. It will include:
                          (i)    Junction improvements and additional interchanges on the first ring road (around the Ming
                         walled city) to increase the capacity and efficiency of this road, so as too attract traffic that would
                         otherwise cross the Ming walled city.
                          (ii)   Upgrading to multi-level interchanges of two remaining at grade junctions on the second ring
                         road, with the same objective as item (i)
                          (iii)  Construction of pedestrian bridges and underpasses to improve pedestrian mobility across
                         major roads and PT routes, and
                          (iv)   Upgrading of the road maintenance system.



                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                          Also included are roads to facilitate the urban expansion of the satellite town of Huxian, selected for
                         priority development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Public Transport. This component consists of a package of measures to strengthen
                         public transport performance:
                          (i)     Bus Rapid Transit (BRT). One pilot demonstration corridor, inclusive of bus costs,
                         passenger facilities (interchanges, terminals and stops, information systems) and ancillary equipment
                         (ticketing, bus location system), as well as TA for system planning, design, and operations support.
                          (ii)    Ten bus priority corridors: 100 km of bus lanes, and associated facilities, to improve
                         operating speeds and reliability.
                          (iii)   Interchanges: Three interchanges hubs to improve facilities for passengers
                          (iv)    One bus depot and maintenance yard (including land).

                         Component 3: Traffic Management and Road Safety - The objectives of this component are to
                         protect the Ming walled city and other cultural heritage sites thorough the upgrading of pedestrian,
                         bicycle and traffic facilities and the foundation of an ITS (Intelligent Transport System), which will
                         facilitate mobility management and ensure the safe and efficient use of the existing road and public
                         transport networks. The component complements investments in the ADB project, and includes:
                          (i)     Setting up an Area Traffic Control (ATC) system including CCTV, and associated junction
                         channelization
                          (ii)    Road safety program, including accident analysis software, accident investigation equipment,
                         remedial measures, road user education and enforcement initiatives and equipment
                          (iii)   Parking measures and equipment
                          (iv)    Pedestrian facilities
                          (v)     Bicycle facilities
                          (vi)    Technical Assistance for ATC, Accident Analysis, Parking Study and Travel Demand
                         Management (TDM) Study.

                         Component 4: Air Quality Management - Xi'an Environmental Protection Bureau (XEPB) has
Public Disclosure Copy




                         comprehensive and ambitious plans to improve air quality and to reduce vehicular emissions. For
                         this project, they proposed five activities which will allow them to expand air quality management
                         (AQM), with a focus on vehicular emissions:
                          1.      Ambient air quality monitoring which will cover fixed and mobile monitoring,
                          2.      Vehicle emissions monitoring and control measures for laboratory based and remote sensing
                         equipment and activities,
                          3.      Other priority point source emissions control measures,
                          4.      Information management and data analysis for air quality management for the city, and
                          5.      AQM policy, planning, and institution al strengthening.

                         Component 5: Cultural Heritage. This component is designed to provide transport infrastructure to
                         support proposals to protect and enhance two of the major historic sites in Xi'an. Two
                         subcomponents are proposed:
                          (i)     Han Chang'an Site - Pedestrian and Bicycle Paths for the Weiyang Palace Site. The purpose
                         of the subcomponent is to provide better access for people to visit the Weiyang Palace site by
                         marking and utilizing the ancient roads. The proposal includes four pedestrian and bicycle paths (6
                         or 8 m wide, and about 7 km long in total) inside the site, and one access road connecting the site and
                         Daxing Rd, a main urban road of the city.
                          (ii)    Bicycle Ring inside the Ming City Wall and the 15 Scenic Spots Bicycle Route. This
                         subcomponent would provide support for investments in bicycle facilities within the Ming City.

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         50% of tourists who come to Xi'an visit the Ming City Walls. The objectives of the subcomponent
                         extend beyond providing bicycle routes and aim to be a catalyst for more fundamental changes in the
                         approach to traffic management in the Ming City.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 6: Capacity Building. This component is designed to respond to the request from Xi'an
                         for Bank assistance to develop a capacity in the city for transport planning and policy making. To
                         date, these topics have been suggested for possible TA support in the project:
                          (i)     Strategy Study and Short Term Improvement Program - given the urgent need for this
                         capacity building, it is being considered for possible retroactive financing.
                          (ii)    BRT planning, design and implementation assistance
                          (iii)   PT planning and Reform
                          (iv)    Traffic Management - ATC, Parking, Accident Analysis, and TDM
                          (v)     AQM Vehicle Emissions
                          (vi)    Ming City Management Plan
                          (vii) Financial Planning.

                         The project undertakes a restructure and the proposed changes by components are:
                         1. Road Component: cancel Dongcheng road in Huxian.
                         2. Public Transport Component: Add construction of a new bus depot and its equipment in western
                         part of Xian. Reduce the number of bus priority lanes from 13 to 2, as the remainder has already been
                         constructed with counterpart funds.
                         3. Traffic Management Component: Cancel TM1.2 200 Intersection channelization. Cancel TM 2.2
                         Accident Remedial Measures. Cancel TM3.4 Road User Education (RUE). Add TM1.1-1
                         Engineering Project Supervision for TM1.1, TM1.4, and TM3.1.
                         4. Air Quality Management Component: Add ventilation and water purification equipment to the Air
                         Quality Monitoring Center to render it fully compatible with operating sensitive testing equipment.
                         5. Cultural Heritage Component: Cancel bike path in favor of enlarged city wide bike share program
                         financed with counterpart funds.
                         6. Institutional Development Component: Urban transport planning implemented with local funds to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen financial planning. Add ATC design, study tours, project results analysis.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Xi'an City, Shaanxi Province, P.R.China

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Shaojun Chen (GTIDR)
                         Jun Zeng (GURDR)
                         Ning Yang (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No




                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                As part of the project restructure, physical works under road network and cultural heritage
                              components will be reduced. Meanwhile, under public transport component, bus priority lanes will
                              be reduced, and a new bus depot will be added. In addition, a new locationfor Xinzhu Bus Depot
                              was proposed. There are no substantial changes to environmental and social impacts compared to
                              those assessed during project preparation. The project EA/RAP category and safeguards policy
                              triggered remain unchanged.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The task team has carried out regular supervision missions to the project through field visits and
                             review of monitoring reports. The project EMP implementation performance has been satisfactory,

                             Under Component 1 Urban Road Network, completed works include two interchanges on the
                             second ring road and two interchanges on the first ring road of Xi’an City. Key environmental
                             issues identified include disturbance to traffic, construction related impacts such as dust and noise,
                             soil erosion, and construction waste management. The contractor worked with the project owner,
                             in coordination with the relevant city management authority, to implement various environmental
                             management measures to minimize the impacts. For example, special and site-specific traffic
                             diversion and management plans were prepared based on original EMP, and implemented to
                             minimize disturbance to traffic and safety concerns. The project sites and worker camps were all
                             well fenced and managed to minimize. Spoils and construction wastes were either reused on site or
                             disposed of through commissioning specialized contractors. No cultural relics or other types of
                             PCR resources have been found during construction. The project owner and contractors also
                             provided public communication means to disclose construction related information and address
                             potential complaints. Overall, given that the construction activities under this component has been
                             carried out in high-traffic and densely populated areas in the city, great efforts have been made to
                             manage environmental impacts. The EMP implementation performance has been satisfactory.

                             The implementation of Component 2 Public Transport has been delayed significantly. The


                                                                        Page 5 of 10
                         originally proposed Xinzhu Bus Depot has not been implemented due to unavailability of land. An
                         alternative site has been identified for this bus depot. As part of the project restructure, a new
                         Western Bus Depot is proposed as well. For both bus depots, environmental assessments and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         public consultation have been carried out following domestic EA regulations and OP4.01
                         Environmental Assessment; anticipated impacts are mainly construction related, such as soil
                         erosion, noise and dust, social disturbance, and waste management. No PCRs have been identified
                         in either site. These impacts can be well managed through implementing readily available
                         mitigation measures and contractor code of practices. Site-specific EMPs for each bus depot have
                         been accordingly prepared.

                         Under Component 4 Air Quality Management, physical activity included construction of an
                         environmental monitoring building. During site preparation, a small tomb was found. The
                         contractor followed chance-find procedure. Local relics cultural authority organized survey and
                         excavation that are in line with domestic regulation and OP4.11. The contractor resumed
                         construction after the cultural relics authority issued permission. The Bank team documented the
                         process in mission AMs.

                         Component 5 includes roads in Han Chang’an site, the implementation was significantly behind
                         the original schedule, because after the project preparation the government initiated a proposal to
                         apply for the UNESCO world cultural heritage for Silk Road, which virtually affected any
                         activities relevant to the proposal. Construction of the roads started in early 2013 after the proposal
                         was accepted by UNESCO. The construction of the roads strictly followed EMP measures and
                         impacts identified are minimal.

                         Two RPs of Huxian and Xi’an implementation performance have been moderately satisfactory
                         through the Bank supervision task team site visit and external monitoring reports.

                         Huxian Road Network covers 5 subprojects, acquired 869.7mu of land and involved house
                         demolition of 60 households and 22 enterprises the resettlement activities started in September,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2008. 100% farmland land and houses were taken, However , around 40% lands taken
                         compensation have not been fully paid since the local government finance constrain. Huxian
                         government promised that all the payment which higher than that in RAP will be disbursed to
                         affected villages or PAPs by the end of 2014.

                         Xi’an component, all land acquisition and house demolition of subprojects have been completed,
                         and compensation standards or fees in line with Xi’an RP has been disbursed to affected villages
                         and affected persons. However, some of resettlement sites construction are delay (i) 39HHs of
                         Xinjiabiao village affected by 2nd Ring Road North-East Interchange subproject in 2010 have not
                         been moved to new houses; (ii) 37HHs houses were demolished due to Weiyang Palace
                         construction in 2013 and are facing 36 months transition. Xi’an government agreed to pay the
                         transition fees PAPs on time and speed up construction of resettlement sites.

                         As for the resettlement issues of Huxian and Xi’an components, agreed actions were prepared to
                         address the issues, the Bank team documented the process in mission AMs. For example, for
                         delays in moving PAPs to their houses since 2010, client agreed to i) double payment of transition
                         fees after 36 months transition, ii) speeding up the construction of resettlement sites to ensure
                         PAPs can move in by end of 2014; and iii) monitor the progress by external monitoring agency.




                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Overall, the project will have long-term positive environmental benefits. One indirect impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                           foreseen is the potential increase in the numbers of tourists in the future. Since Xi'an is a world-
                           famous tourist destination with cultural heritage preservation as a central pillar for the economy of
                           the city, it has a strong capacity for planning and implementation of cultural heritage protection
                           while handling the increase in the number of tourists.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Comprehensive alternative analysis were carried out during project preparation, including
                           “without project” scenario, site/route selection, scale and construction techniques. Environmental
                           and social considerations were taken into account adequately.

                           The project restructure includes adding a Western Bus Depot. Besides, a new location for Xinzhu
                           Bus Depot was proposed. Site selection for the two bus depots are main considerations for
                           alternative analysis. The sites for the two bus depots were selected considering the land
                           availability, local infrastructure, and other environmental and social considerations. Both sites are
                           located by major roads. Hence there is no need to build new roads to access the bus depots.
                           Distances between the bus depots and existing communities met relevant regulations, which would
                           help minimize potential impacts associated with construction and operation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             During project preparation, the project owner retained Xi'an Environmental Science Institute for
                           EA preparation following domestic regulations and OP4.01. The EMP implementation
                           performance has been satisfactory based on regularly supervision missions carried outby the Bank
                           team. These mitigation measures for managing construction and operational impacts will remain
                           valid.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Two RAPs were prepared in line with both OP4.12 and Chinese law and regulation. The RAPs
                           described in detail the overall legal framework, project impacts, entitlements, strategy and action
                           plans for relocation and livelihood rehabilitation, consultations, grievance redress, implementation
                           schedules, cost and budget as well as institutional and monitoring arrangements. A staff in Xi’an
                           and Huxian PMO was designed to in charge of land acquisition and resettlement activities; in
                           addition Shaanxi Academy of Social Science was entrusted to conduct the project resettlement
                           external monitoring and evaluation. Two RAPs implementation performance have been
                           moderately satisfactory through the external monitoring report and the Bank team supervision.
                           Huxian land compensation payments delay and Xi’an resettlement sites construction delay are two
                           outstanding issues. Xi’an and Huxian Project Management Office addressed these issues and
                           actions are being taken to speed up the payments and resettlement sites construction.

                           Prior to the project restructure, the project owner retained accredited EIA consultant to conduct
                           environmental assessment for Xinzhu Bus Depot and Western Bus Depot following national
                           regulations and OP4.01. Given that the environmental and social impacts associated with the
                           proposed activities are limited, EMPs were prepared for each bus depot. The EMPs summarized
                           environmental impacts associated with the construction and operation of the two bus depots and
                           public consultation process. The EMP also details the environmental management organization
                           and responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           estimates of EMP implementation. The EMPs will be incorporated into the bidding documents and
                           civil works contracts for the two bus depots.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In addition, Resettlement Due Diligence Review reports were prepared by Shaanxi Academy of
                           Social Science for newly added Western Bus Depot and Xinzhu Bus Depot separately due to their
                           land acquisition activities were completed in 2011. Western Bus Depot subcomponent took 30 mu
                           of farmlands in Xinjunzhai Village of Weiyang district without house demolition, affecting 9
                           households with 46 persons. And Xinzhu Bus Depot subcomponent occupied 103 mu of collective
                           land in Xiaoyan and Xinhe Villages, Baqiao District and no house demolition is involved,
                           affecting 36 households with 165 persons.

                           DDR reports prepared by Shaanxi Academy of Social Science indicated that: i) the involuntary
                           resettlement practices conducted were in line with the Chinese laws and regulations; ii) the PAPs’
                           livelihood was recovered to pre-project levels; and iii) there are no legacy issues. In addition,
                           actions such as vocational training, job opportunities creation, endowment insurance for Land-
                           expropriated Farmers (LEFs) and their monitoring to ensure all PAPs have at least restored their
                           livelihoods are under implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During the project preparation, two-rounds of public consultation were carried out following
                           OP4.01/OP4.12, and documented in the project EA /RAPs. The full draft EA and RAPs was
                           locally disclosed in May, 2007 with an announcement made in Xi'an Daily on May 21, 2007.

                           During preparation of the project restructure, public consultations for the Xinzhu Bus Depot (new
                           location) and Western Bus Depot were carried out following OP4.01. Potentially affected local
                           communities were consulted and their opinions have been incorporated into the project designs
                           and EMPs. The full draft EA reports were disclosed in September, 2012 locally, and the revised
                           drafts were disclosed on April 25, 2014 at the website of Xi’an Public Transport Company.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       30-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    30-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       24-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Jul-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Reda Hamedoun


                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Approved By
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Surhid P. Gautam (RSA)    Date: 11-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)          Date: 11-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 10 of 10
