INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 198
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cote d'Ivoire              Project ID:  P143332
Project Name: CI- Productive Social Safety Net (P143332)
Task Team       Azedine Ouerghi
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Feb-2015                Estimated    28-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
Total                                                                      50.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective (PDO) is to provide cash transfers to poor households in selected
regions and develop the foundations of a social safety net system.
3. Project Description
The proposed IDA Project has three components: (i) Cash Transfer "Plus" Program targeted to Poor
Households that is combined with accompanying measures; (ii) Developing the Foundation of a
Page 1 of 6


﻿Social Safety Net System; and (iii) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The total IDA
allocation for the intervention is USD 50 million, allocated as follows:
Component 1: Cash Transfer "Plus" Program targeted to Poor Households (estimated US$ 40 million
O
from IDA).
This component will support instituting the main benefits package as part of a national social safety
system. This component finances cash transfers, goods and consultant services for building this
program, comprising two sub-components: (a) cash transfers to targeted poor households; and (b)
accompanying measures to promote investments in human capital and livelihoods.
Sub-Component 1.1: Cash Transfers to Targeted Poor Households
Enrollment: Households will be enrolled in phases over the course of the project to allow for testing
the cash transfer delivery system, evaluation, adjustment as needed and broader roll-out to more
households. This phased approach will allow for building in lessons learned from the first phase of
implementation prior to broader roll-out and refining the targeting methodology as needed based on
the availability of new data from the 2015 Household Living Standards and the 2014 National
Census.
Targeting approach: A new social safety nets targeting approach for the Ivoirian context will be
developed, tested and refined as a core component of the project. The process for targeting will be
piloted, tested and complemented by comprehensive training prior to roll-out, particular as regards
survey materials, questionnaire and communication with communities and policy makers about the
process. The cash transfer program will target the poorest households in predominately rural areas in
the central, northern and western regions of Cote d'Ivoire. These regions have been chosen as they
are characterized by: (i) higher-than-average poverty rates; (ii) weak access to basic services in terms
of health and education, as indicated by poor use and high cost barriers to maternal health services,
low school enrolment, and high illiteracy; and (iii) poor child malnutrition in terms of height-for-age.
Within these regions, the departments and communes to be targeted will be determined based on
available data using a transparent procedure to be detailed in the targeting manual. The selection of
beneficiary households within selected communities will be based on the proxy-means testing
formula and community-based validation protocols.
Sub-Component 1.2: Accompanying Measures to Support Investments in Human Capital and
Livelihoods
This sub-component will support the development and implementation of two packages of
accompanying measures to promote (i) investment in human capital (awareness rising/training to the
benefits of education and health especially for children) and (ii) livelihoods (training to existing
initiatives e.g. cooperatives, women groups etc.). The development of the accompanying measures
will rely on inter-sectoral coordination in particular existing programs operating in the same selected
areas (local communities/administration, Donors, NGOs, etc.). In addition to relying on existing
initiatives, implementation of the accompanying measures will relay on private providers and NGOs
based on performance-based contracts. The accompanying measures will focus on a range of
community mobilization and sensitization targeted to both cash transfer beneficiaries as well as non-
beneficiaries in the selected communities. Given that some of the barriers to improving nutrition,
using health and education services and strengthening livelihoods are due to supply constraints in
many areas, this component could also help generate the demand for such services and pressure local
Page 2 of 6


﻿administration to increase the supply. The accompanying measures will also build on successful
interventions that have been implemented in Cote d'Ivoire by domestic and international partners.
Component 2: Developing the Foundation of a Social Safety Net System (US$ 5 million from IDA)
This component supports the development of key elements for the foundation of a national social
safety net system using the cash transfer as basis. This component finances goods, information
technology and consultant services for developing and operationalizing these elements, including (a)
targeting system for cash transfers; (b) household registry; (c) payment system; and (d) management
information system (MIS), including technical and data capacity for monitoring and evaluation of
project performance and impact evaluation of interventions. These elements will initially be
designed, applied and tested to support implementation of the cash transfer progra m initiated under
Component 1.
Sub-Component 2.1: Targeting System for Cash Transfers
The targeting system, together with the registry, forms the foundation of a modern social safety net
system for Cote d'Ivoire. This sub-component will support the development of the targeting manual
that will define the specific geographical, household and community-level targeting protocol for
Component 1. It will also support the necessary consultations, evaluations, manual revisions and
other procedures needed to formally validating and adopting the targeting procedure, rules and
guidance for broader applications.
Sub-Component 2.2: Social Protection Household Registry
The national registry is a unique household database that will facilitate targeting of social transfer
programs, including social safety net, access to subsidized social services such universal health care,
fee waivers, scholarships, training etc. This sub-component finances the information technology
goods for creating the database, unique identification number, data security and privacy mechanisms;
and consultant services for developing household questionnaires, protocols and manuals.
Sub-Component 2.3: Cash Transfer Payment System
a        The payment system will be designed to incorporate best practices within and outside of Cote
d'Ivoire that would be best adapted to deliver timely and reliable cash transfer payments. The
payment system will be designed to ensure predictable and reliable payments to targeted households
while minimizing transaction costs and leakages for both the program and the beneficiaries to the
extent possible. The payment system would be managed by a third-party service provider through a
performance-based contract. Multiple payment modes may be used based on the availability of
reliable options and the context of the selected regions.
Sub-Component 2.4: Management Information System and Capacity-Building
This component finances the development of a management information system (MIS) that includes
all of the tools for managing the household registry and delivering cash benefits under the social
safety net system. The main components to be designed and implemented as part of the MIS are:
(a)    beneficiary registration procedures and unique identification system;
(b)    payment systems and inter-operability for data collection on payments made;
Page 3 of 6


﻿(c)    budget management and financial reporting;
(d)    tracking indicators collected routinely on beneficiary payments and participation in
accompanying measures;
(e)    functionalities to ensure interoperability and coordination with other national databases and
O
)        registries, and consistency with country statistical systems;
(f)    training and technical assistance for monitoring and evaluation; and
(g)    training and technical assistance for institutional capacity building, including roles, terms of
reference and coordination among responsible departments and agencies.
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated US$ 5 million)
This component finances consultant services and goods to support the project implementation unit
(PIU) in managing the project and monitoring project-related activities and outcomes. This
component would also entail support to ensure (i) all project activities and tasks are executed, (ii)
coordination among all actors involved in project implementation, (iii) fulfilling and monitoring of
procurement and fiduciary requirements and audits, (iv) monitoring and evaluation of project
outcomes and intermediary results, and (v) an impact evaluation to measure program effectiveness on
beneficiary and household-level outcomes.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No
U         Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Page 4 of 6


﻿Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to have a positive social impact by improving household income, as well
as encouraging investments in human capital and productive activities in targeted communities.
The project is not expected to trigger any social safeguards policies.On the basis of pre-determined
criteria and detailed targeting protocols, the project will target the poorest and most vulnerable
communities, specifically by providing cash transfers as well as by providing accompanying
measures for longer-term social benefits to adults and children in the area.
The project is a Category C project, because no civil works will be undertaken and no adverse
environmental or social impacts are expected. The project does not require any land acquisition
leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources and livelihood. No
safeguards policies are triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Not applicable.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes  No [      NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Azedine Ouerghi
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)           Date: 31-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)           Date: 31-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


