                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1069
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cote d'Ivoire                      Project ID:    P147740
                            Project Name:      Health Systems Strengthening and Ebola Preparedness Project (P147740)
                            Task Team          Dominic S. Haazen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Oct-2014                        Estimated   25-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHNDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (30%), Population and reproductive health (25%),
                                              Child health (25%), Nutrition and food security (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      77.00           Total Bank Financing:                   70.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           7.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 35.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                   35.00
                              Total                                                                                       77.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen the health system and improve the utilization and quality of health and nutrition
                           services in selected regions.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         The project will support key interventions to address gaps in the efforts by the RCI to reduce barriers
                         to improving access to health services. The proposed amount of the project is $75 million, including
                         $70 million in IDA, and $5 million in counterpart funding for RBF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         It is proposed that the project would have 2 components, as follows:

                         a)       Results-based Financing: ($36.5 million) This component aims to increase the volume and
                         quality of health services, with a specific focus on maternal and child health and nutrition
                         interventions, through PBF in selected regions. Specifically, performance-based incentives will be
                         used to support: (a) increased utilization of targeted services related largely to MNCH; (b) improved
                         clinical practice and health worker motivation (both intrinsic and extrinsic); (c) structural
                         improvements (e.g. availability of drugs and commodities, and health facility rehabilitation); and (d)
                         improved management capacity, governance, monitoring and record keeping at health facilities.
                         Performance payments can be used for: (i) health facility operational and capital costs (e.g. including
                         maintenance and repair, drugs and consumables, outreach activities (e.g. for transport and
                         performance payments to community workers to stimulate demand); and, (ii) financial and non-
                         financial incentives for health workers according to defined criteria. Performance based incentives
                         will be additional to existing financing at target facilities.;

                         b)      Strengthening the Health System for Improved Performance: ($38.5 million) would finance
                         areas which are critical to the effective operation of the health system generally, and RBF in
                         particular; in the following 6 subcomponents:

                         (i) Improved Health Insurance Coverage (CMU): These activities will include a number of technical
                         assistance (TA) and related activities to support the implementation of the CMU scheme. Specific
                         activities will include: (a) developing criteria for identifying indigents (developing a “common
                         targeting mechanism” together with Social Protection), and testing this mechanism for a specific
                         period of time and for a large with limited number of people to work out any operational issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related to the functioning of this mechanism within the CMU environment; (b) assisting with the
                         development of a costing study to ensure that the tariffs used for reimbursing services under CMU
                         fairly cover the costs of providing those services; (c) supporting analysis of the sustainability of
                         CMU and the PBF approach, including appropriate modelling and fiscal space analysis; (d)
                         supporting information systems linkages necessary for CMU (included under sub-component (iii)
                         below), and (e) engaging long-term technical assistance to support the ongoing development and
                         operation of the CMU scheme. The TA for the fiscal space analysis, will address the overall
                         sustainability of various health financing approaches within Cote d’Ivoire, including both RBF and
                         TFHCI, as well as CMU;

                         (ii) Essential Infrastructure and Rehabilitation: Both the RCI (through the PPU) and other financiers
                         (such as the Bank’s Emergency Infrastructure Project) have supported the rehabilitation of health
                         facilities, but neither is replacing essential medical equipment. At the specific request of the Minister
                         of Health, this component will support two key activities: (a) rehabilitation of selected health
                         facilities; and, (b) the bulk purchase of essential equipment to supply newly rehabilitated facilities
                         with the inputs they need to provide high quality care. This sub-component will also include
                         ongoing monitoring throughout the project with respect to both the availability and use of this
                         equipment;

                         (iii) Health Management Information Systems (HMIS): The lack of an HMIS to support ongoing


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         health service delivery is a gap that is not fully addressed by other development partners. A robust
                         and functional HMIS is an essential element of both PBF and CMU. Given the involvement of other
                         DPs in this area, the Bank’s support will focus on the development of facility-based information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         systems that will have appropriate linkages with CMU and begin the development of electronic
                         patient records; as well as the training and development of a cadre of staff who are able to both
                         utilize and further develop these information systems.

                         (iv) Supporting Improvements in Health System Management: These activities will take place at both
                         the facility and supervisory levels (district and region) in order to improve the overall level of health
                         system management, as well as to ensure that there is adequate capacity to manage PBF and CMU
                         interventions. This sub-component would include support to hospital reform, and will be developed
                         in consultation with the other DPs engaged in this area (WHO, UNICEF, USG), as well as the
                         development of a strategy for community health (as noted above, RCI currently does not have
                         CHWs), and other TA to support health system strengthening, including other assistance for HRH
                         not currently covered through the AFD program;

                         (v) Ebola Preparedness: Based on the approaches developed in the emergency responses in Liberia,
                         Sierra Leone and Guinea, this sub-component will rapidly provide essential equipment, supplies,
                         drugs and vehicles that are essential in ensuring that the country is prepared for an EVD outbreak in
                         Cote d’Ivoire. These expenses would be pre-financed by UNICEF, and be eligible for retro-active
                         financing. It is expected that the equipment and supplies procured under the project will contribute
                         to the overall level of emergency response preparedness in Cote d’Ivoire, and be useful for
                         communicable disease outbreaks other than EVD.

                         (vi) Project Management: In accordance with the normal approach in Cote d’Ivoire, the project with
                         support the financing of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to manage the overall project. Project
                         financing will support overall project management and fiduciary staff only, while technical staff will
                         primarily be provided by the MSLS. In view of the newness of both PBF and CMU in the country,
                         additional technical assistance may be provided, but they will be included under the relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component budgets
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Initially, the RBF component of the project is proposed to take place in 2 regions of the country, one
                         close to Abidjan and one about an hour's drive away. There will be 2 districts in each of these
                         regions. These locations will be confirmed during project appraisal. Based on the speed of the initial
                         RBF roll-out and available resources, there will be further scale-up to other parts of the country.
                         Those locations are not known at the moment. The equipment and rehabilitation sub-components
                         will likely cover more than just the RBF target districts, although these locations are currently under
                         discussion. Other sub-components will be national in scope.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The proposed Environmental Assessment (EA)
                          BP 4.01                                              Category is proposed as "B", since as the project
                                                                               activities may lead to an increase in Health Care



                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                                                                        Waste (HCW), and there will be some
                                                                        rehabilitation (although no new construction. The
                                                                        indirect potential negative environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        social impacts of the project are linked to the
                                                                        handling and disposal of medical and health waste
                                                                        (such as placentas, syringes, and material used for
                                                                        delivery of pregnant women) in health facilities
                                                                        covered by the project area. HCW, together with
                                                                        rehabilitation/expansion of basic health
                                                                        infrastructure are expected to be site-specific,
                                                                        small to moderate, easily mitigated, and should
                                                                        have no localized adverse environmental impacts.
                                                                        Since Cote d’Ivoire is classified as a fragile state,
                                                                        per OP10.00 para. 12, the completion of the
                                                                        safeguards instruments will be deferred to project
                                                                        implementation. An Environmental and Social
                                                                        Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has
                                                                        been prepared and included as an Annex in the
                                                                        PAD. It provides guidance on screening and
                                                                        applying the Bank's safeguards policies, including
                                                                        codes of practice to be applied during the project
                                                                        implementation. The national Health Care Waste
                                                                        Management Plan will be updated during project
                                                                        implementation to include the WHO protocols on
                                                                        Ebola. Environmental and Social Management
                                                                        Plan(s) will be prepared as and when necessary
                                                                        during project implementation to address the
                                                                        environmental and social impacts of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        rehabilitation works. All safeguards documents
                                                                        will be consulted upon and disclosed in-country
                                                                        and at the InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           The project does not affect or involve natural
                                                                        habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           The project does not affect or involve forests or
                                                                        forestry.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The project does not involve pest management.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The project does not affect or involve physical
                         BP 4.11                                        cultural resources. A "chance finds" procedure
                                                                        will be included in any ESMP(s).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                        area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           The project does not involve land acquisition
                         4.12                                           leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                        restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.




                                                                Page 4 of 6
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project does not involve dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                 N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts. The only safeguard issue is environmental,
                              since as the project activities may lead to an increase in Health Care Waste (HCW), and there will
                              be some rehabilitation (although no new construction).
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The indirect potential negative environmental and social impacts of the project are linked to the
                              handling and disposal of medical and health waste (such as placentas, syringes, and material used
                              for delivery of pregnant women) in health facilities covered by theproject area. HCW, together
                              with rehabilitation/expansion of basic health infrastructure are expected to be site-specific, small
                              to moderate, easily mitigated, and should have no localized adverse environmental impacts.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              None.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The national HCWMP will be updated and Environmental and Social Management Plan(s) (ESMP
                              (s)) will be prepared during implementation as and when necessary. The borrower has
                              successfully implemented a number of World Bank financed projects over the years and is well
                              aware of the Bank's safeguards requirements.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              A consultation will be held once the HCWMP is updated and any ESMP(s) are prepared. These
                              documents will be shared with the press and key stakeholders such as NGOs and associations and
                              will also be posted on the MOH website.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                             Date of receipt by the Bank                                         27-Feb-2015
                             Date of submission to InfoShop                                      27-Feb-2015
                             For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                             Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                        Page 5 of 6
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Cote d'Ivoire                                                    27-Feb-2015
                              Comments: Will be disclosed once completed. Anticipated date is provided.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Dominic S. Haazen
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 23-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                          Date: 03-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
