                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6563

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lebanon                           Project ID:     P147854
                            Project Name:      Lake Qaraoun Pollution Prevention Project (P147854)
                            Task Team          Maria Sarraf
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated       26-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEE                             Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        50.00                 Total Bank Financing:         50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        50.00
                              Total                                                                        50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objectives are to reduce the quantity of untreated municipal sewage
                           discharged into the Litani River, to increase the adoption of integrated pest management practices
                           among targeted farmers and to improve the capacity of key stakeholders to manage environmental
                           pollution around the Qaraoun Lake.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will comprise the following components:
                         Component 1. Improve the collection of the municipal sewage (US$ 45 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance activities that increase sewerage collection in areas where waste water
                         treatment plants have already been constructed in order to maximize the utilization of investments
                         already made:
                         - It is likely to finance expansion of service coverage for sewerage collection in the villages of Kaa
                         El Reem, Hazarta, Karak in the Greater Zahlé (estimated between 70-90 km of network). This
                         sewage network will be connected to the Zahlé Waste Water Treatment Plant (WWTP) which has a
                         capacity of 56,000 m3/day. Zahlé WWTP is funded by the Italian Cooperation and is expected to
                         become operational in February 2014.
                         - This component will also examine the possibility of expanding sewage collection to cover Zahlé
                         East and South (Masse, Raite, Dei Ghazal, Koussaya, Ain Kaferzebd, Kfar Zabad, Terbol, Dalhmyat)
                         if Zahlé WWTP can accommodate the flow of these additional villages. This is estimated at about
                         120 km of networks.
                         - It will also look at completing the sewage coverage to maximize the utilization of 3 small size
                         wastewater treatment plants constructed by USAID (El Ferzol, Ablah and Aitanit/Qaraoun) and now
                         being operated by the municipalities.

                         Component 2. Increase the adoption of IPM practices (US$ 1.5 million).

                         This component will build and strengthen the capacity of farmers in the project area to implement
                         integrated pest management (IPM) practices and to reduce the application of chemical fertilizers.
                         This will allow farmers to reduce the quantities of pesticides and fertilizers used without reducing
                         yields. The emphasis will be on irrigated farms in the West Bekaa district, given the close proximity
                         to Lake Qaraoun and to the main course of the Litani River immediately upstream from the lake .

                         Given that FAO has been implementing a Regional Integrated Pest Management Program in the Near
                         East since 2004 that covers 10 countries (including Lebanon) , it is likely that FAO will be in charge
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of implementing the activities under this component. IPM activities will be implemented through
                         Farmer Field Schools (FFS) methodology, which is a proven methodology that is based on
                         participatory approach to train and empower farmers on the use of IPM techniques and on the proper
                         handling and disposal of pesticides. Similar participatory approaches will be used to train farmers on
                         alternative methods and practices for sustainable fertilizer use in the project area. Baseline surveys
                         and regular farm visits will be conducted to monitor the use of agro-chemicals by targeted farmers as
                         well as the sales of these chemicals in the project area. The project will also support capacity
                         building of MoA extension agents and other stakeholders on IPM and FFS approaches, and will
                         sponsor public awareness campaigns related to environmental and public health concerns associated
                         with excessive use of agro-chemicals.

                         Component 3. Capacity Building, Technical Studies and Project Management (US$ 3.5 million)

                         Capacity building. This component will fund institutional technical assistance for the Bekaa Water
                         and Wastewater Establishment (BWWE) by building on the capacity strengthening that has been
                         initiated under the Bank-financed Ba’albeck Water and Wastewater Project (P074042), which closed
                         in June, 2012 and on GiZ support, which is phasing out from the water sector in Lebanon. It will also
                         support the Litani River Authority (LRA) by building on activities achieved under the USAID Litani
                         River Basin Management Support Program and continue to focus on strengthening its capacity to
                         monitor water resources, manage irrigation system, improve risk management, and strengthen
                         institutional capacity to support the implementation of the Business Plan (initially as a secretariat of
                         multi-sectoral committee) and potentially as River Basin Agency, if its mandate is expanded.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Technical Studies. As indicated earlier, the quantity of solid waste generated in villages/towns
                         located in the Upper Litani Catchment was estimated at 650 t/ day in 2011. However this amount is
                         likely to have increased substantially due to the influx of Syrian refuges , which has increased the
                         population of this area by at least 50%. Currently there is one sanitary landfill (constructed by a WB
                         funded project) in Zahlé serving a large area and receiving about 130 t/ day. Two additional sanitary
                         landfills are under construction: one in Baalback with a capacity of 100 t/day (with funding from the
                         Italian Cooperation) and a small one in the city of Jeb Jennin funded directly by the municipality.
                         The Business Plan has identified the need for additional sanitary landfill to cope with the quantity of
                         waste generated around the Litani River /Lake Qaraoun upper catchment area. Under the proposed
                         project, it is suggested to undertake all necessary technical, environmental and social studies for (i)
                         establishing a sorting and landfilling site in Barr Elias, Tal Thnoub and/or Rachaya; and (ii) the
                         closure and capping of existing dump sites such as Temnin al Tahta, Qab Elias, Barr Elias, Hawch Al
                         Harim, Al-Khyara, Jeb Jennine or Gazze.

                         Project Management. This component will support the establishment of a fully functioning Project
                         Management Unit (PMU). Funding will cover the cost of consultants, field visits, office equipment,
                         audits and any operating costs necessary for project implementation as well as activity monitoring
                         and evaluation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The overall technical assistance under the project will cover the entire Litani river basin, while direct
                         investments will focus on the villages of Kaa El Reem, Hazarta, Karak in the Greater Zahlé area, the
                         villages of Masse, Raite, Dei Ghazal, Koussaya, Ain Kaferzebd, Kfar Zabad, Terbol, Dalhmyat) in
                         Zahlé East and South, and municipalities of El Ferzol, Ablah and Aitanit/Qaraoun. The Litani River
                         is the principal artery of Lebanon, exceeding 170 km in length, and its major water structure is the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Qaraoun dam, which forms the Qaraoun Lake (or reservoir), which was built to produce hydropower,
                         and provide water for irrigation and water supply. The Upper Litani River catchment extends over an
                         area of 1,500 km2 (10% of the Lebanese territory) and comprises 99 towns/villages distributed into
                         four administrative districts: Baalbeck, Zahlé, West Bekaa, and Rachayya.

                         Large stretches of the River and the Lake are polluted from four sources of pollution: (i) Most
                         municipal wastewater is currently discharged untreated in the Litani River; In the Bekaa, it is
                         estimated to be 63 million m3 with an annual load of 21,300 tons of Biochemical Oxygen Demand
                         (BOD). (ii) Industrial wastewater is estimated at about 4 million m3 in the Bekaa. Of 294 industrial
                         establishments located along the Litani river, 120 are large-scale priority industries located within
                         400 m of the river, its tributaries or Qaraoun Lake, many of which produce effluents that are
                         conveyed to surface water through either the nearby tributary or the existing sewer networks. (iii)
                         Municipal Solid waste generated in the upper catchment of the Lake is estimated at 650 tons per day.
                         Due to lack of sufficient number of sanitary landfills, most garbage is dumped in open dumps or in
                         the River itself along the entire Qaraoun catchment. (iv) Agriculture is the largest land use in the
                         basin and irrigated agriculture in the Bekaa covered about 54,000 ha concentrated in three districts:
                         Baalbek (24,000 ha); Zahlé (16,000 ha) and West Bekaa (10,000 ha) . Vegetables, fruit trees, cereals
                         and industrial crops are the main crops and farmers over-fertilize their crops and the most important
                         constituents of agricultural runoff and water seepage are agricultural chemicals and non-degradable
                         pesticides which end up in waterways with irrigation overflows. Pollution from these sources has led
                           to the deterioration of water quality in the Litani River and the Qaraoun Lake, and results indicate
                           high concentrations of ammonia, nitrites and fecal coliforms and phosphates and sulphates in all
                           sections of the river. Sediments in the Qaraoun Lake contain high concentrations of metals such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Arsenic (As), Cadmium (Cd), Mercury (Hg) and Vanadium (V) and phenols and TPH, indicative of
                           urban runoff and organic industrial pollution.

                           While this project is an environmental enhancement project, activities related collection, treatment
                           and disposal of sewage and construction or rehabilitation of sewer systems may generate
                           environmental impacts – during construction and implementation periods. For this project, the
                           environmental safeguard aspects will be related to the construction/ rehabilitation of the sewage/
                           septage treatment facilities, main sewer trunk lines, pumping stations, sewer manholes, interceptor
                           canals and sludge management. During project implementation the impacts are likely to arise from
                           discharge and quality of treated water, if any, odor and sludge management, temporary disruption of
                           access and services, disruption of access and traffic, general layout of the habitation, and impacts due
                           to rubble, noise, dust and air pollution. The main environmental issues related to existing and
                           operating wastewater treatment plants could be inadequate network and connectivity, poor operations
                           and maintenance, discharge of untreated water, poor sludge management, including disposal,
                           inaccurate use of (un)treated water etc.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Council for Development and Reconstruction is responsible for national development plans and
                           implementing infrastructure projects. It has been the implementing agency for various World Bank
                           funded projects and as such is familiar with Bank procedures. Experience from earlier projects
                           indicate that the CDR has effectively and satisfactorily implemented Environmental Management
                           Plans and under their aegis has promulgated guidelines on sludge reuse and has strengthened
                           capacity on monitoring and sampling of water and wastewater quality, along with public awareness
                           campaigns. The Ministry of Environment sets environmental standards, approves EIA reports,
                           monitors environmental quality and regulates collection and disposal of solid waste. The Bekaa
                           Water and Wastewater Establishment (BWWE) which is responsible for the service provision of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           water and wastewater services and irrigation within this project area, is a weak agency with
                           insufficient institutional and financial capacity. It has also inherited distribution networks in poor
                           conditions, with very high levels of illegal connections and very low collection rates from those
                           legally connected. The Litani River Authority monitors the quality of the Litani River, while the
                           Ministry of Agriculture is responsible for the regulation of pesticide and fertilizers and has launched
                           measures to enhance enforcement and promote awareness about proper use, handling and disposal of
                           pesticides.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                           Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Government will prepare an Environmental
                           BP 4.01                                               and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for
                                                                                 the entire project, since site locations for
                                                                                 construction of the sewage network are still
                                                                 unspecified and the location of the connectivity
                                                                 pipelines are not yet identified. The ESMF will
                                                                 conform to the requirements of OP4.01 as well
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 as the Lebanese laws and/or regulations on
                                                                 environmental reviews and impact assessment,
                                                                 and any other pertinent environmental
                                                                 requirements as they relate to the project. As
                                                                 and when individual subprojects are identified
                                                                 and their designs are finalized, Environmental
                                                                 Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental
                                                                 Management Plans will be prepared for each, in
                                                                 accordance with their environmental risks,
                                                                 based on the screening tools and guidelines
                                                                 established in the ESMF.
                                                                 Post-assessment of the 4 existing Waste Water
                                                                 treatment plants at Zahlé, El Ferzol, Ablah and
                                                                 Aitanit/Qaraoun will also be undertaken to
                                                                 determine current conditions of operations and
                                                                 recommendations will be made to mitigate and/
                                                                 or improve the existing conditions.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project will be implemented within the
                                                                 identified villages and districts and at the 4
                                                                 existing wastewater facilities which are not
                                                                 located in the proximity of natural habitats or
                                                                 protected areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will be implemented within the
                                                                 identified villages and districts and at the 4
                                                                 existing wastewater facilities that are not in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 forested zones and generated activities will not
                                                                 have any adverse impact on forests
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project does not finance procurement or use
                                                                 of pesticides/insecticides. However the project
                                                                 will provide institutional support and capacity
                                                                 building on IPM practices to key stakeholders
                                                                 (irrigated farmers, research institutes and
                                                                 official/staff of MOA). The capacity building
                                                                 may also have indirect impacts on irrigation
                                                                 practices with reliance on application of
                                                                 fertilizers and pesticides. This policy is being
                                                                 triggered to ensure that these activities are well
                                                                 managed. The ESMF will include an annex
                                                                 detailing the required IPM guidelines
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   All construction activities will include
                         BP 4.11                                 mechanisms to screen for chance finds of
                                                                 physical cultural resources, and if found, the
                                                                 policy will be triggered and appropriate
                                                                                                                                 measures will be taken as per the policy. The
                                                                                                                                 equivalent national regulations of the GoL will
                                                                                                                                 be adhered to at all times. The triggering of this
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 policy will be determined after completion of
                                                                                                                                 the ESIA
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no groups of indigenous people or
                                                                                                                                 indigenous communities in the project areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The project will finance the sewage networks
                                 4.12                                                                                            associated to the wastewater treatment plants
                                                                                                                                 which have already been constructed. Efforts
                                                                                                                                 will be made to avoid land acquisition for the
                                                                                                                                 construction of sewage pipelines. However, it is
                                                                                                                                 not hundred percent sure that land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 will be avoidable before the alignments of the
                                                                                                                                 pipelines are finally determined. Therefore OP
                                                                                                                                 4.12 is triggered and a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be prepared. For the land used
                                                                                                                                 for the wastewater treatment plant, a post
                                                                                                                                 assessment will be carried out and remedial
                                                                                                                                 actions will be taken if there are any pending
                                                                                                                                 issues related to the land use.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Government of Lebanon has prepared Draft Terms of Reference for commencing the
                                      preparation of the Environmental and Social Management Framework and the post-assessment of
                                      the 4 wastewater treatment plants. It is expected that these safeguard documents will be ready by
                                      May 2014. As and when individual sub-projects are identified and their designs are completed, the
                                      site-specific Environmental Management Plans will be developed based on the guidelines and
                                      screening tools established in the ESMF.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Maria Sarraf

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 05-Dec-2013
                                 Coordinator:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)   Date: 11-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
