                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6197

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P147864
                            Project Name:      UP CORE ROAD NETWORK DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (P147864)
                            Task Team          Rajesh Rohatgi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Apr-2015                      Estimated        29-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (92%), Pollution management and
                                               environmental health (2%), Other social development (2%), Trade fa cilitation
                                               and market access (2%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases (2%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    570.00                     Total Bank Financing:        400.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     170.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        400.00
                              Total                                                                        570.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Proposed Project Development Objective is to – (i) improve quality, safety and sustainability of
                           targeted state highway corridors and; (ii) to introduce better Road Management Practices.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project shall have four components: (1) Civil Works; (2) Road Sector and Institutional Reform;
                         (3) Road Safety; and (4) Contingent Emergency Response. Following paragraphs depict how these
                         components would contribute in meeting the development objective and outcome.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Components

                         Component 1 Civil Works

                         The project envisages rehabilitation of about 1200 km and upgrading of about 700 km of roads.
                         During the project preparation, civil works for high priority roads amounting to 30% of total project
                         costs would be identified, prepared and awarded by the time of loan negotiation to meet the key
                         readiness requirement. A road selection framework would be agreed, early into project preparation,
                         to select roads for remaining 70% of project costs. Collaboration with IFC and MIGA would also be
                         explored for potential PPP investments. The Bank funded project shall also introduce use of e-tools/
                         e-procurement in procurement and contract/program management.

                         Project specific Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Land Acquisition,
                         Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy will be prepared based on World Bank Safeguard Policies
                         and applicable GoI and State’s Acts/Policies/Guidelines. The project will ensure proactive disclosure
                         and sharing of information with the key stakeholders, including the affected persons / communities
                         and will have a communication strategy focusing on efficient and effective usage of print and
                         electronic media, bill boards, posters, wall writing, and adoption of any other method suiting local
                         contexts. An integrated Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be established for the project to
                         address complaints using various mediums (e.g. a dedicated, toll free phone line, web based
                         complaints, written complaints and open public days) and address them in a time bound manner.

                         Component 2 Road Sector and Institutional Reform (RSIR)

                         The component would introduce better road management practice in PWD contributing to
                         sustainability of investments. The component would build upon recommendations made in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional development component of the UPSRP and the subsequent work done by the cells
                         established therein. The management oversight and implementation arrangement of this component
                         would be reviewed and improved, building upon the lessons learned from ICR of UPSRP. The
                         proposed activities are:

                         •       Finalization and adoption of Road Sector Vision, Policy and Master plan for Core Road
                         Network Development;
                         •       Implementation of an IT-Based Management Information System (MIS);
                         •       Establishment of a Quality Management System (QMS) in PWD;
                         •       Operationalization of Road Asset Management System (RAMS), integrated with Geographic
                         Information System database ; and
                         •       Introduction of performance monitoring in PWD.
                         •       Establishment of a Human Resource Development (HRD) Program and construction of
                         Training Centre;

                         Component 3 Road Safety

                         On September 5, 2013, a committee chaired by the Chief Secretary met to follow up on road safety
                         management issues raised at the High-Level Workshop on Road Safety Improvements in Uttar
                         Pradesh, held on July 6, 2013 with the support of the Bank and decided to prepare a cabinet note for:
                         (i) finalization of the State Road Safety Policy, (ii) the reorganization of the Road Safety Council (iii)
                         the constitution of a high-level committee to implement Council decisions and directions, (iv) the
                         creation of a road safety cell hosted by the Transport Department to serve as a secretariat to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Council and (v) a review of the road safety fund and its functions and governance arrangements
                         within three months. The Transport Department has been entrusted the responsibility to prepare this
                         note.

                         Proposed initiatives, as described in paragraph above, provide an excellent opportunity for the Bank
                         to support GoUP in achieving reduction in fatalities through a multi-sector Road Safety component.
                         This component would be designed around the five pillars of UN Decade of Action for Road Safety
                         (2011-2020) - Road Safety Management; Safer Roads & Mobility; Safer Vehicles; Safer Road Users
                         and; Post Crash Response. Based on the detailed accident data analysis during the project
                         preparation, interventions would be identified involving the relevant department(s) (i.e. Transport,
                         Health, Police, PWD and Education).

                         Component 4 Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC).

                         Uttar Pradesh has been plagued by various natural disasters such as floods, drought, fire, epidemics,
                         earthquake, causing severe damage to life and property and thus adversely affecting normal life. Out
                         of 71 districts, 30 are highly prone to floods while drought is a regular phenomenon in Vidhyachal
                         and Bundelkhand region. Similar is the case with epidemics. The component would ensure that once
                         a disaster is triggered, funds can be quickly allocated to this component as per exceptions set out in
                         OP 10.0.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the state of Uttar Pradesh (UP) which is the fifth largest state in
                         India. With an area of 2, 40,928 sq.km, UP covers 7.3% of India’s land area, and is the country’s
                         most populous state with a population of nearly 200 million. One sixth of India’s population lives in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the 70 districts of UP. Many roads in UP have locally important cultural properties located along the
                         edge of pavement. UP forms the bulk of the Gangetic plain in India and though it has very little
                         forest cover, it has several protected areas, including bird and animal sanctuaries and national parks.
                         Some locations in the state serve as freshwater wetlands, some not protected under law, but are
                         important staging / nesting grounds for birds.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         UP PWD has implemented Uttar Pradesh State Roads Project (UPSRP) and therefore has the
                         experience of working with World Bank. Over the life of the project, the UPPWD improved its
                         capacity to implement safeguards measures, with the systematic inclusion of EMP measures directly
                         into the Works contracts in the latter half. It also worked towards using negotiations to determine the
                         level of compensation to be given for involuntary land take. Under UPSRP, PWD had set up
                         environment and social cell headed by an Executive Engineer. The cell still exists though engineers
                         have been transferred. It had also circulated guidance documents to improve departmental working
                         by including specific measures to manage adverse impacts on the environment and people in its
                         activities outside the project also. However, the implementation of these measures beyond project
                         boundaries was not verified. PWD will re-assign staff to the cell to handle social and environment
                         aspects in the project. The new officials will receive training in environment and social safeguards.

                         As per the new “Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation
                           and Resettlement Act, 2013”, District Administration is additionally responsible for preparation and
                           implementation of Resettlement and Rehabilitation Process. The project however will support
                           district administration in this process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             In addition to the ESMF, Environmental
                           BP 4.01                                             Management Plans will be prepared for the
                                                                               specific segments identified and included in the
                                                                               30% of works that will be ready at appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             Some roads in the core road network may pass
                                                                               through or close to natural habitats, whether
                                                                               these are located in protected areas or not – such
                                                                               as wetlands.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes             In Uttar Pradesh, plantation on roadside trees
                                                                               and canal edges are designated as protected
                                                                               forests. While tree cutting for widening will be
                                                                               required, no commercial logging is going to be
                                                                               supported, if some of the project roads pass
                                                                               through the Reserved Forests, then it may affect
                                                                               health of the forest patch.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No              It is not envisaged to procure any pesticides
                                                                               under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             The project roads are dotted with local shrines,
                           BP 4.11                                             places of worship, and graves which can be of
                                                                               cultural value to local people. In addition, the
                                                                               possibility of chance-finds also exists since
                                                                               large quantities of earthwork are involved.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       TBD             Since the roads are not known at this stage,
                                                                               social screening and assessment will be carried
                                                                               out for each identified road and based on
                                                                               screening results and assessment road specific
                                                                               IPDP will be prepared.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             The project is likely to acquire private land
                           4.12                                                leading to loss of income and/or sources of
                                                                               income. The project is likely to displace non-
                                                                               titleholders settled within the road’s right of
                                                                               way.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           TBD             Some of the roads may be on canal edges and
                                                                               the proposed interventions may require some
                                                                               modifications to these. This will be determined
                                                                               during project preparation.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project interventions may include bridges
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            across international rivers but will not affect the
                                                                                                                                 water quality or quantity flowing to riparians.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             None of the project roads are expected to be in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Apr-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is expected that the Safeguards studies shall commence in April 2014, and completed in one
                                      year.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Rajesh Rohatgi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 27-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                                                                                         Date: 27-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
