                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR1127
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Turkey                                       Project ID:           P106284
                            Project Name:       Turkey Land Registration and Cadastre Modernization Project (P106284)
                            Task Team           Elif Ayhan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           10-Jan-2008                                  Estimated   01-May-2008
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSURR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Central government administration (98%), Sub-national government
                                                administration (2%)
                            Theme:              Land administration and management (50%), Administrative and civil service
                                                reform (25%), Municipal governance and institution buildi ng (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       210.10           Total Bank Financing:                                       203.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               7.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                203.00
                              Total                                                                                                210.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The overall goal of the project is to contribute to government efforts to improve quality and
                           effectiveness of public services through expanding and making effe


                                                                                  Page 1 of 6
                         ctive E-government applications. The specific objective of the proposed project
                         is to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the land registry and cadastre
                         services. This objective will be achieved through: (i) building the IT and comm
Public Disclosure Copy




                         unications infrastructure to support completion of the computerization of cadast
                         re and land registry services in high priority areas; (ii) renovating, updating
                         and production of digital cadastre and land registry information; (iii) improvin
                         g customer services in land registry and cadastre offices; (iv) improving human
                         resources in the Turkish Land Registry and Cadastre Agency (TKGM); and (iv) maki
                         ng digital land registry and cadastre information available to public and privat
                         e entities.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The overall goal of the project is to contribute to government efforts to improve quality and
                         effectiveness of public services through expanding and making effe
                         ctive E-government applications. The specific objective of the proposed project
                         is to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the land registry and cadastre
                         services. This objective will be achieved through: (i) building the IT and comm
                         unications infrastructure to support completion of the computerization of cadast
                         re and land registry services in high priority areas; (ii) renovating, updating
                         and production of digital cadastre and land registry information; (iii) improvin
                         g customer services in land registry and cadastre offices; (iv) improving human
                         resources in the Turkish Land Registry and Cadastre Agency (TKGM); and (iv) maki
                         ng digital land registry and cadastre information available to public and privat
                         e entities.
                         3. Project Description
                         The loan for Land Registry and Cadastre Modernization Project in the amount of €135 million (US
                         $203 million equivalent) was approved by the Board on May 1, 2008 and became effective on
                         August 13, 2008. The Project is being implemented by the General Directorate of Land Registry and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cadastre (TKGM) and the progress towards achievement of the PDO has been satisfactory since the
                         last two years. The project includes the following components:

                         - Component 1: Cadastre and Land Registry Renovation and Updating: The component will support
                         (through cadastre renovation) the conversion (into digital format), updating and integration of
                         existing analogue and digital cadastre information, land registry and related data, into updated,
                         accurate, consistent and standardized legally agreed cadastral renovated digital map and data sets,
                         that will be available for entry into TAKBIS.

                         - Component 2: Improved Service Delivery: The component will support the modernization of the
                         TKGM infrastructure so as to improve TKGM’s ability to provide core services to the Government
                         and citizens of Turkey. It includes consultancy services to provide strategic advice on critical issues
                         affecting the national implementation of TAKBIS in Land Registry and Cadastre Directorates. Model
                         offices will be established in three regions so as to provide examples of office layouts that support
                         streamlined, improved and integrated workflows involving both Land Registry and Cadastre
                         Directorates of TKGM and the operation of the integrated version of TAKBIS. This component will
                         also support procurement of furniture and equipment that may be required for the new model land
                         offices. Furthermore, the component will support the government’s e-Government initiative through
                         making available an E-Cadastre data through the planned Turkish National Spatial Data
                         Infrastructure. It will provide access to land registry and cadastre data.


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         - Component 3: Human Resources and Institutional Development: The component will support the
                         development of strategic plans and human resources development plans to ensure that the TKGM
Public Disclosure Copy




                         personnel skills match the strategic needs of the organization.

                         - Component 4: Property Valuation: The component will investigate and develop policies and
                         institutional options for the introduction of the property valuation function in Turkey in line with
                         international best practices.

                         - Component 5: Project Management: This component will finance the project management costs,
                         including the procurement and financial management consultants, the incremental operation costs to
                         supervise the central and field activities, and the monitoring and evaluations costs including the costs
                         of customer surveys.

                         All components of the Project, such as cadastral renovation, base mapping, information system
                         development (including e-government applications), training and establishment of model offices are
                         progressing satisfactorily.

                         This Restructuring will lead to the following changes to the project: (i) eight months extension of the
                         loan closing date until August 31, 2015, (ii) partial cancellation of savings from the loan proceeds in
                         the amount of €10 million (US$12.5 million equivalent), and (iii) reallocation of funds between
                         expenditure categories to reflect this partial cancellation. TKGM plans to carry out complementary
                         activities specifically to the property valuation component to reinforce the sustainability of results
                         achieved during the extended period. TKGM has prepared a plan that convincingly shows that half of
                         this saving could be utilized during the extended implementation period. Restructuring will not have
                         any impact on the environmental and/or social risk or safeguard management issues of the project.

                         There are no outstanding audits for this Project. All audit and financial management reports were
                         received on time and found acceptable to the Bank. Procurement and Safeguards performance is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         satisfactory.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Implementation of project activities will take place in Ankara and specific regional/local cadastral
                         and land registry offices country- wide. The safeguards relevant sub-project under the project was to
                         construct 3 model offices in Bursa, Kahramanmaras and Kilis Provinces. Necessary environmental
                         and social safeguard documents have been prepared for the construction of these 3 model offices.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (GSURR)
                         Esra Arikan (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No




                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project includes small scale construction works for the model offices in 3 provinces, namely
                              Bursa, Kahramanmaras and Kilis. The possible environmental impacts associated with the small
                              scale rehabilitation or reconstruction works were minor, short-term and mainly during the
                              construction phase including temporary emissions of particulate matter/dust to the air, noise
                              pollution, accumulated piles of construction waste, potential contamination of water and soil from
Public Disclosure Copy




                              improper material storage or usage of construction equipment, and exposure of workers to
                              asbestos containing materials. All of those risks have been dealt with in the EMF document
                              prepared during the Appraisal of the project and in the sub-project EMPs prepared for 3 model
                              offices during the implementation of the project. Bursa office is already constructed and
                              Kahramanmaras and Kilis model office tendering process has already been completed and the
                              EMPs are in place.

                              The restructuring will not have any impact regarding environmental impacts or safeguard
                              requirements.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               There will be no long term impacts due to the project activities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               The locations for the model offices have been assessed and no issues found regarding the
                              locations. Other than project location alternative analysis is not an issue for the simple
                              construction works.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                             The Borrower has prepared an EMF for the proposed construction works that provides
                           environmental guidelines and outlines appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures during the
                           proposed activities. The General Directorate of Land Registry and Cadastre (TKGM) is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           responsible for the implementation and monitoring of the Banks safeguards policies and resulting
                           environmental management and mitigation measures. TKGM fulfills its responsibility related to
                           environmental management of the project activities. TKGM also sent staff to safeguard training
                           events organized by the Bank.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the TKGM, authorities related to the Ministry of Environment, local
                           communities and municipalities, and NGOs. The EMF was disclosed in-country in local language
                           and in English through the TKGM✇❨ s website on December 10, 2007, as well as at the Infoshop
                           in Washington on December 10, 2007. The TKGM have continuous consultation with the
                           stakeholders, as necessary, to address environmental issues/concerns that may affect them.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       09-Dec-2007
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    10-Dec-2007
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Elif Ayhan
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 26-Nov-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
