                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC7262

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Dominican Republic             Project ID:      P146831
                            Project Name:     Education System Management (P146831)
                            Task Team         Peter Anthony Holland
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         02-May-2014                    Estimated        15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    LCSHE                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (70%), Public administration- Education (20%), Pre-
                                              primary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                   Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     50.00
                              Total                                                                     50.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to support the Dominican Government in improving
                           the management of the education system by: (a) improving teacher policies, (b) developing a
                           comprehensive evaluation system, (c) strengthening the quality assurance of Early Childhood
                           Development services, and (d) enhancing the institutional capacity of the Ministry of Education.
                           C. Project Description
                         2. The proposed Project would support the Dominican Government in implementing key priority
                         policies that will improve the management of the education system. The policy areas to be supported
                         are those elements most linked to improving the quality of education: teacher policies that aim to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bring the maximum talent to the classroom, student assessments that would identify the specifics that
                         need to be improved and track progress, quality assurance mechanisms for ECD services, as well as
                         institutional modernization to render more efficient the functioning of the system. As such, the
                         Project aims to put in place the necessary conditions at the system-level for improving education
                         quality, at a critical juncture where much needed increased investment and substantial expansion of
                         supply are coinciding with broad-based civil society support for meaningful education reform.

                         Component One: Supporting Results Required for Improved Education Management (US$40
                         Million)
                         3.      The objective of this component would be to support the Dominican Government in
                         enhancing the management of the education system, a precondition to improving the quality of
                         education. Priority policy areas that have been identified as key to this transformation are:

                         (i) Improving Teacher Policies

                         4.          Among the programs that the Dominican Republic plans to implement as part of a
                         comprehensive re-conception of the teaching career to improve the quality of education are: a)
                         improved quality of entering teachers through more rigorous selection of applicants to teacher
                         training institutions, the application of training standards, and changes in the pedagogical and
                         subject-specific contents of curricula, b) the professionalization of the teaching career, using
                         evaluation, induction and certification processes as tools to make the career both attractive and
                         challenging, c) a system of in-service training and professional development for different education
                         levels and curricular areas, responding to needs emphasized by schools, and d) training of school
                         directors to develop true pedagogical leaders as well as administrative managers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5.          The envisaged outcome of this sub-component at the end of the project is a teacher policy
                         framework that would make the teaching profession more attractive and challenging, including
                         revised and endorsed standards, with clear expectations in at least some areas such as pre-service
                         training, in-service training, directors’ training, and informed by students’ performance in national
                         assessments. The project would support results in a subset (one or more) of the above areas, with
                         DLIs reflecting progressive implementation results in the selected areas..

                         (ii) Developing a Comprehensive Evaluation System

                         6.          The proposed activities around strengthening the evaluation system are concentrated in
                         three areas: a) student assessment, b) school assessment, and c) institutional and technical capacity
                         strengthening. This subcomponent would include a cross-cutting focus on improving the use of data
                         generated to inform educational practices, for example, by determining institutional improvement
                         plans, the supply of training programs, and the content of education materials etc.

                         7.         The envisaged outcome of this sub-component is a functioning evaluation system, with
                         capable staff, that provides useful information about the performance of primary and secondary
                         students. In addition, more detailed information about school characteristics would be available to
                         inform decision making (eg. training, school administrative functioning, academic improvement
                         plans, content of educational materials, etc). Results for this component could include the online
                         publication and dissemination of national assessment results for a proportion of school districts, the
                         use of assessments data for school improvement plans, and the design, production, and dissemination
                         of reports using data from TERCE-2013 and PISA-2015.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iii) Strengthening the quality assurance of ECD Institutions

                         8.           Priority areas to support the strengthening of ECD quality assurance include: a) the
                         design of a pre-service training and professional development system for human resources under the
                         Quizqueya Empieza Contigo program, b) the development of an information and communications
                         strategy with the dual aims of maximizing public understanding of the program and improving
                         parenting practices, and c) the organizational design and institutional strengthening of the National
                         Institute of Comprehensive Care for Early Childhood (Instituto Nacional de Atención Integral a la
                         Primera Infancia - INAIPI), including the development of its quality management and certification
                         strategy.

                         9.       The envisaged outcome of this sub-component is a system of ECD quality assurance
                         mechanisms that evaluates the quality of services against standards. The activities mentioned above
                         would produce results such as 5,000 teachers trained and certified for pre-primary grades according
                         to quality standards and a percentage of ECD centers providing quality service according to the
                         standards of service delivery.

                         (iv) Enhancing the Institutional Capacity of the Ministry of Education

                         10.     Priority areas for improving institutional capacity include: a) supporting the decentralization
                         of Ministry functions and resources by increasing the proportion of the education budget transferred
                         to regional and district-level school boards, and training school directors and board members in the
                         execution of these funds, as well as carefully monitoring their use, and b) strengthening the
                         Ministry’s human resources system for both teaching and administrative staff.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         11.      The envisaged outcome of this sub-component is a system that allows the MINERD to fully
                         understand how its financial and human resources are being used, in order to inform the ongoing
                         decentralization process. Activities under this sub-component would lead to: a higher percentage of
                         the MINERD’s budget to be transferred to district and school boards, a number of schools and
                         districts being externally for the quality of their service provision and their use of financial resources,
                         and the production and dissemination of a report where the Human Resources System is used to help
                         identify savings, and reallocate personnel and financial resources.


                         Component Two: Technical Cooperation on Priority Education Policies (US$10 Million)
                         12.      This component would provide technical cooperation to the Ministry of Education and other
                         system actors such as the MESCyT that support the technical development and implementation of
                         policies. Specifically, the technical cooperation agenda would help the actors in the system achieve
                         the strategic targets known as DLIs. For each of the chosen policy areas and associated targets, the
                         technical assistance would support the critical pathways, resolving the bottlenecks that would lead to
                         the achievement of the DLIs. Examples of such technical cooperation activities in each policy area
                         include, among others: i) an evaluation of a representative sample of teachers in terms of both
                         content and pedagogical knowledge, to identify weak areas in which teacher training should focus its
                         improvements, ii) inputs to ensure the continuity and comparability of national assessments over time
                         and the dissemination and use of evaluation results to inform other priority areas for the
                           improvement of education quality (e.g. teacher training, development of education materials, etc.),
                           iii) the organization of workshops on topics such as the formation, training and audit of school
                           boards, or the LAC experience with full-time schools, and iv) the drafting of an institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                           framework of the INAIPI. In addition this component would include the design and implementation
                           of two impact evaluations (IEs): one IE of the government’s extended school day program, and
                           another of the impact of teacher training programs on student learning as measured by results in
                           national student assessments.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           13.     None of the Project components involve civil works, such as improvement or rehabilitation
                           of buildings. The policy and administrative changes to be executed do not have connected
                           environmental safeguards aspects, but instead are focused on improving the management and
                           efficiency of the education system programs. Accordingly the Project is considered Category C (no
                           adverse environmental impacts).

                           14.      There are no indigenous peoples in the Dominican Republic that meet the characteristics as
                           specified in the OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. However, there are many vulnerable people belonging
                           to ethnic minorities that would require specific measures for them to be able to benefit from the
                           Comprehensive Evaluation System (component 1.2) and to avoid that the more rigorous student and
                           school assessments lead to lower completion rates for these groups.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           15.      The Project would be implemented by the MINERD, the Ministry in charge of all pre-
                           tertiary public education in the Dominican Republic. The MINERD and its autonomous agencies
                           responsible for the policy areas identified as priorities would be responsible for implementing all
                           activities related to Component 1, under the coordination of the Office of International Cooperation
                           (OCI). The OCI is the office responsible for coordinating and overseeing all internationally-funded
                           projects in the education sector, as well as overseeing and supporting all institutions involved in their
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation. Specifically, of the autonomous agencies, ISFODOSU and INAFOCAM would be
                           responsible for the implementation of polices related to Improving Teacher Policies, together with
                           MESCyT, and the Dominican Institute of Research and Evaluation (IDEICE) for those related to
                           Developing a Comprehensive Evaluation System, while the General Directorate of Special Programs
                           of the Presidency (DIGEPEP) would oversee all implementation relating to Strengthening ECD
                           Institutions. The OCI would coordinate the technical cooperation under Component 2. During the
                           Bank’s previous Early Childhood Education (ECE) Project (P054937), which closed in August 2011,
                           the OCI carried out thorough monitoring of project activities during implementation in compliance
                           with its agreement with the Bank, and was responsible for the elaboration of process and impact
                           evaluations at various stages, which were one of the Project’s strengths. Although there are no
                           significant environmental or social negative impacts expected, the OCI has good institutional
                           capacity with regards to safeguard policies, accumulated through years of experience in
                           implementing projects financed by the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the
                           European Union, among other actors.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Glenn S. Morgan (OPSOR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   No           The project team proposes an environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     category of C per OP/BP 4.01 since the nature
                                                                     and scope of project activities (improving
                                                                     teacher policies, developing an evaluation
                                                                     system and quality assurance strengthening) are
                                                                     not expected to cause adverse environmental
                                                                     impacts.

                                                                     To ensure that the project does not have any
                                                                     negative social impacts and is sensitive to the
                                                                     needs of ethnic minorities, assessment
                                                                     information at the individual level will be
                                                                     confidential and new assessments will be
                                                                     included as diagnostic tools and not used for
                                                                     promotion of students. These measures in the
                                                                     project will (a) avoid potentially adverse effects
                                                                     on the ethnic minorities; and (b) ensure that the
                                                                     ethnic minorities benefit from the project in a
                                                                     culturally appropriate and gender and
                                                                     intergenerationally inclusive manner.

                                                                     The team will prepare a social assessment to
                                                                     analyze potential negative social impacts on
                                                                     vulnerable populations by using existing data
                                                                     from standardized student assessments. This
                                                                     will be important to identify whether specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     adaptations are necessary within the design of
                                                                     the evaluation system and/or to the teacher
                                                                     training (i.e. additional support for poor
                                                                     performing students or schools). These
                                                                     measures will help prevent any potential
                                                                     adverse distributional impacts the project might
                                                                     have.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No           The project will not affect any natural habitats.
                                                                     The Project will not support actions linked to
                                                                     the construction or rehabilitation of schools and/
                                                                     or other civil works that could adversely
                                                                     degrade or convert critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No           The project does not involve the management or
                                                                     use of forest resources. The Project will not
                                                                     support actions linked to the construction or
                                                                     rehabilitation of schools and/or other civil
                                                                     works that could adversely degrade or convert
                                                                     critical forest areas.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project will not involve the purchase or use
                                                                                                                                 of any significant quantities of pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project will not result in any impacts on
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         physical cultural resources. The project will not
                                                                                                                                 support activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                                                                                 management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no indigenous groups in the DR that
                                                                                                                                 meet the characteristics as specified in the
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not support construction or
                                 4.12                                                                                            other activities that would lead to involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement or land acquisition.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will it support
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the operation of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not affect any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways as defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project will not be implemented in areas
                                 7.60                                                                                            known to be disputed or affect disputed areas as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      June 1, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Peter Anthony Holland

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 27-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Janet K. Entwistle (SM)                                                                                              Date: 29-Jan-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
