                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC7588

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Lebanon                          Project ID:      P146691
                            Project Name:       Greater Beirut Urban Transport (P146691)
                            Task Team           Ziad Salim EL Nakat
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           10-Feb-2016                      Estimated        28-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       200.00                Total Bank Financing:           200.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         200.00
                              Total                                                                         200.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14.The Project Development Objective is to improve transport connectivity and mobility on Beirut’s
                           northern entrance between Tabarja and Beirut.

                           15. This objective will be achieved through (i) the construction of a new BRT system between
                           Tabarja and Beirut, (ii) the establishment of feeder bus services to the trunk BRT line and within
                           Beirut, and (iii) establishing appropriate institutional arrangements for the management, operation
                           and maintenance of the new mass transit system.
                         C. Project Description
                         18.     The Greater Beirut Urban Transport Project (GBUT) would achieve the above mentioned
                         Project Development Objective though the implementation of the following project components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         19.     Component 1: BRT Construction (US$ 150 million IBRD loan). This component will
                         finance the goods and works for the construction of the BRT infrastructure and associated civil
                         works, and the consulting services for the supervision of the BRT's construction. The BRT line will
                         be about 24 km in length and will run into sections of the existing highway and sections of the old
                         railway alignment. Infrastructure works will include the construction/reinforcement of the dedicated
                         bus routes, the construction of stations and access infrastructure (such as pedestrian access), and the
                         construction of park and ride facilities and feeder bus stops.

                         20.     Component 2: Financing of complementary feeder bus services (US$40 million). This
                         component will largely improve ridership on the BRT line therefore further increasing the success of
                         the project in meeting its development objectives. Component 2 will finance the construction of bus
                         corridors within Beirut and the purchase of new buses to support the government plan for improving
                         regular bus services within Beirut, as well as associated consultancy services. While envisaged in the
                         scope of this project/loan, the Municipality of Beirut could be interested in partly financing this
                         component.

                         21.      Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (US$ 8 million). This component will include
                         definition of the arrangements for the management, operation and maintenance of the new transit
                         system and the preparation of required studies for concessioning BRT operations to a private
                         operator, preferably international. The project foresees the strengthening of the capacity of the
                         Ministry of Transport and depending agencies such as the Railways and Public Transport Authority
                         to manage concession contracts with private operators, or the establishment of a new transport
                         authority, should the political situation allow, to take the leadership on the planning and regulation of
                         all urban transport. In addition, this component will finance additional studies for further expanding
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the public transport and mass transit coverage in GBA.

                         22.     Component 4: Project Management (US$ 2 million). This component will finance technical
                         assistance and outreach activities and other operational support for management of project
                         implementation. It will also include resources for monitoring project performance and results.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project constitutes the northern approach to Beirut in the form of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT). The
                         line of service would begin in the Tabarja- Jounieh area, a major populated area and feeder for
                         Beirut, and pass through the densely inhabited northern suburbs of Beirut before ending in the city’s
                         center (24 km total).

                         Preliminary assessment of the route of the BRT system indicated that the majority of the route exists
                         within the right of way of public roads. The route of the BRT system is likely to follow the existing
                         highway and the ROW for an old railway track that dates back to World War II. Some bridges on the
                         route that were constructed by the Allies (Australian Corps of Engineer) are still existent, some in
                         good condition. The team will discuss with the client the prospects of conservation of those physical
                         assets, and if they consider them as physical cultural resources, OP 4.11 will be assessed further
                         during project preparation. The land of the ROW still is owned by the government. There is no need
                           for new land acquisition for the project, but there are a few encroachers and squatters within the
                           ROW in some sections.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Although new buses will be purchased under Component 2, the scrapping of old buses will not be
                           part of the project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Activities in the past years in the sector have focused mainly on alleviating traffic at critical
                           intersections, increasing the capacity of the existing road network in Greater Beirut by building grade
                           separations at critical intersections, and regulating traffic with traffic lights and parking meters.
                           These interventions have been supported by the donor community through the Urban Transport
                           Development Project (UTDP) and executed by the Council for Development and Reconstruction
                           (CDR). During the implementation of the UTDP Project, CDR showed adequate competency
                           managing the environmental and social impacts and implementing the ESMP, and their performance
                           has been rated as satisfactory in the last supervision mission. The capacity of the Project
                           Implementation Unit within CDR that will be responsible for overseeing the BRT will be assessed
                           further during project preparation and appraisal, and if necessary, measures will be put in place to
                           enhance their capacity to implement the ESMP successfully. The CDR team will also benefit from
                           support from the environmental and social safeguards specialists in the World Bank team.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaogang Wang (GSURR)
                           Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            This project is assigned category “A”; an
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            (ESIA) with a detailed Environmental and Social
                                                                            Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared,
                                                                            consulted, reviewed and approved by the Bank, and
                                                                            disclosed in-country by the client and at the Bank’s
                                                                            infoshop prior to appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             No critical natural habitat is observed on the existing
                                                                            route of the BRT.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             N/A

                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No             N/A

                           Physical Cultural Resources       TBD            Some bridges were observed on the route of the BRT
                           OP/BP 4.11                                       system. They date back to WWII, constructed by the
                                                                            Allies, Australian Army Corps of Engineers around
                                                                            1940. It will be discussed further if those are
                                                                            considered physical cultural resources to be
                                                                            preserved under the Bank policy. In addition, a
                                                                            chance find procedure will be put in place to ensure
                                                                                                                        proper handling of chance finds in an area that is
                                                                                                                        known for its rich cultural heritage.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The project will not require major new land
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                acquisition as the alignment of the BRT will likely
                                                                                                                        be within the ROW of the exiting highway and the
                                                                                                                        old railway which stopped operation in 1975. The
                                                                                                                        government still owns the land. However, some
                                                                                                                        encroachers and squatters are observed within the
                                                                                                                        ROW. To mitigate the impacts, a resettlement plan or
                                                                                                                        abbreviated plan will need to be prepared by
                                                                                                                        following the requirements of OP 4.12. The RAP
                                                                                                                        will need to be prepared, reviewed, approved and
                                                                                                                        disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to
                                                                                                                        appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         N/A

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      N/A
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The required safeguard instruments for the proposed project are: (i) ESIA (with a comprehensive
                                      ESMP) and (ii) RAP. The final reports are expected to be completed and disclosed (both in-
                                      country and at the World Bank Info Shop) before appraisal planned to take place in February
                                      2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ziad Salim EL Nakat

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards                             Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                   Date: 13-Feb-2015
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/                               Name: Olivier P. Le Ber (PMGR)                                                                    Date: 16-Feb-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
