                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA3657
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bangladesh                        Project ID:    P133653
                            Project Name:     Municipal Governance and Services Project (P133653)
                            Task Team         Shenhua Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         16-Sep-2013                       Estimated   23-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDU                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (20%), Public administration- Other
                                              social services (15%), General transportation sector (20% ), Solid waste
                                              management (10%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (35%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (5%), Decentralization (5%), Public
                                              expenditure, financial management and procurement (5%), Participation and
                                              civic engagement (5%), Municipal finance (20%), Municipal governance and
                                              institution building (30%), Other urban d evelopment (20%), Urban planning and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              housing policy (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     470.26           Total Bank Financing:               410.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     60.26
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           410.00
                              Total                                                                                 470.26
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         The project development objective is to improve municipal governance and basic urban services in
                         participating Urban Local Bodies (ULBs), and to improve the Recipients capacity to respond
                         promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1. Municipal Governance and Basic Urban Services Improvement

                         This component will provide financial resources to 26 pre-selected ULBs with high economic growth
                         and job creation potential located along the three growth corridors and three district towns in the
                         South. The component will provide grant financing for improvements in basic urban services and
                         operations and maintenance (O&M), linked to performance improvements.

                         Component 2. BMDF Demand-based Sub-credits to ULBs for Urban Services Improvement
                         BMDF will provide demand-based financing for all ULBs for 90% of eligible urban services
                         improvement investment costs, at an 80:20 grant to loan ratio. ULBs will be required to finance the
                         remaining 10% of investment costs.
                         Component 3. Capacity Building and Implementation Support

                         This component will include capacity building for ULBs undertaken by LGED, implementation
                         support for LGED, and support for development of a National Municipal Performance Evaluation
                         System as well as a GIS-based Urban Property and Asset Management System; capacity building for
                         ULBs supported by BMDF, and long-term road map study and implementation support for BMDF;
                         and third party monitoring for the Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP) managed by
                         LGD.
                         Component 4. Emergency Response Provision

                         This component will support, at GoB request, response and reconstruction activities following an
                         adverse natural or man-made event that causes a major disaster, by re-allocating the IDA credit to
                         this component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Under Component 1, the project will include infrastructure investments in 26 urban local bodies
                         (ULBs) located along the three growth corridors and three district towns in the South, which have
                         been identified under the preparatory TA. It will finance rehabilitation of local urban services (roads,
                         footpaths, storm drains, garbage collection systems, street lighting; construction of small culverts and
                         foot bridges; and new construction of kitchen markets and bus and truck terminals) requiring
                         minimum or no involuntary land acquisition. There will be no sanitary landfills, water or wastewater
                         treatment plants or river rehabilitation involving dredging and no significant adverse environmental
                         impacts are expected. The locations of sub-projects under Component 2 (BMDF lending) are not
                         known at this stage, but the investments in basic services will be the similar to Component 1.
                         Component 2 is expected to support around 190 ULBs based on certain criteria all over Bangladesh.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (SASDI)
                         Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)
                         Iqbal Ahmed (SASDI)




                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes             In general, the project is aimed to improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                      overall urban infrastructure and also bring
                                                                      associated environmental benefits. No large-scale
                                                                      infrastructure investment or major expansion will
                                                                      be implemented under the proposed project. The
                                                                      subproject activities are not expected to cause any
                                                                      long term or irreversible environmental impact.
                                                                      However, some negative impacts may arise on
                                                                      health and environment of surrounding
                                                                      communities. In view of subprojects nature, the
                                                                      overall project is classified as a Category ‘B’ and
                                                                      the safeguard policy OP/BP 4.01 has been
                                                                      triggered for the proposed operation. The policy
                                                                      has been triggered to ensure that the sub project
                                                                      design and implementation will be focused on
                                                                      reducing adverse impacts and enhancing positive
                                                                      impacts.

                                                                      The Environmental Management Framework
                                                                      (EMF) has been prepared by LGED and BMDF
                                                                      based on the : (i) assessment of the environmental
                                                                      practices of the recently completed project
                                                                      ‘Municipal Services Project (MSP)’; and (ii)
                                                                      evaluation of the potential overall environmental
                                                                      impacts of the proposed project activities. The
                                                                      EMF will be the guiding document for subproject
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      specific (i) environmental screening; (ii)
                                                                      assessment; (iii) consultation and disclosure; (iv)
                                                                      preparation of environmental management plan
                                                                      (EMP) with budgeting; (iv) implementation and
                                                                      supervision of EMP; (v) reporting and quality
                                                                      control etc. All sub-projects will be screened to
                                                                      assess the need to perform the extent of
                                                                      environmental assessment.

                                                                      In addition, the relevant Environmental, Health
                                                                      and Safety Guidelines of the World Bank Group/
                                                                      International Finance Corporation (IFC) will be
                                                                      applicable to the project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes            Since the project will be implemented in already
                                                                      developed urban municipalities, it is highly
                                                                      unlikely that any natural habitant formed largely
                                                                      by native plant and animal species will be
                                                                      affected or modified by the project activities.
                                                                      However, the EMF stipulated the code of practice



                                                              Page 3 of 8
                                                                         on natural habitat as advance precautionary
                                                                         measures and the policy has been triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             It is unlikely that any designated physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resources will be affected by the
                                                                         subprojects. However, the impacts will be
                                                                         examined as part of the environmental screening/
                                                                         assessment of each sub-project. The EMF
                                                                         provides criteria for screening and assessment of
                                                                         physical cultural resources. In addition, ‘Chance
                                                                         find’ procedures conforming to local legislation
                                                                         on heritage would be evaluated.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The project will be implemented in urban areas
                                                                         including city corporations and municipalities. A
                                                                         portion of the country's tribal communities are
                                                                         living in the urban areas and sub-projects may
                                                                         also be taken from Chittagong Hill Tract districts,
                                                                         the hub of tribal peoples (indigenous people by
                                                                         Bank definition). However, the project will be
                                                                         socially inclusive to share benefits of the project
                                                                         equally to the tribal peoples and will exclude any
                                                                         activity that may affect them adversely. The
                                                                         exclusion criteria and social inclusion mechanism
                                                                         has been included in the Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Framework (SMF) of the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             According to the scope of the project, sub-
                         4.12                                            project activities will be limited within the ULBs’
                                                                         existing and available land. However, additional
                                                                         land may be required to accommodate civil works
                                                                         under special circumstances. Following the
                                                                         practice of past projects managed by LGED, such
                                                                         land is expected to be obtained through voluntary
                                                                         donation, direct purchase, exchange or
                                                                         contribution against compensation by the
                                                                         community. In cases where such methods will not
                                                                         be feasible but the proposed basic urban
                                                                         infrastructure are critical, involuntary acquisition
                                                                         will be the last resort to obtain the land. A social
                                                                         management framework (SMF) has been
                                                                         developed for possible interventions to avoid or
                                                                         minimize social impacts and maximize social
                                                                         development outcomes of the project.




                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No large-scale infrastructure investment or major expansion will be implemented under the
                              proposed project. Based on the types of subprojects to be financed under the project, it is expected
                              that the project activities will not cause any significant, irreversible and long-term environmental
                              impacts. The environmental impacts of the project are expected to be mostly construction related
                              and limited within the project boundaries. These impacts can be mitigated through implementation
                              of appropriate environmental code of practice and environmental management plan. Three Bank
                              policies related to environment have been triggered: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment),
                              OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11).

                             According to the scope of the project, sub-project activities for improvement of basic
                             infrastructure services will be limited within the ULBs’ existing and available land. However,
                             additional land may also be required to accommodate civil works under unavoidable
                             circumstances. The project is expected to obtain such lands through voluntary donation, direct
                             purchase, exchange or contribution against compensation by the community. Involuntary
                             acquisition will be the last option to obtaining lands.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Given the existence of tribal peoples in the municipalities, the project areas are likely to have
                             inhabitants from the tribal communities those are indigenous in culture and language. The project
                             interventions will exclude any activity those are likely to affect these communities adversely but
                             they will obviously be among the beneficiaries.

                              Due to the framework approach, actual impacts will only be understood at the detailed design
                              stage during implementation. Bank policies on involuntary resettlement (OP 4.12) and on
                              indigenous peoples (OP 4.10) have been triggered to ensure that project design and
                              implementation focus on social inclusion, and avoid, minimize and mitigate adverse social
                              impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The subprojects to be financed under the project will be identified during the project
                              implementation phase and as such the exact locations, size and extent and the degree of impact of
                              the subprojects to be funded under the projects are not known. Since the project will improve the
                              urban infrastructure, it may gradually open-up the development opportunity in the adjacent areas
                              through private and other financing. This may in-directly contribute to localized pollution.

                             On the other hand, effective short- and medium-term capital investment planning and long-term


                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           urban planning, zoning laws and guidelines, and GIS will be supported under the technical
                           assistance of the project. This is expected to improve local level development planning process.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           As mentioned earlier, the details of subprojects and their actual locations are not known at this
                           stage. Both the EMF and SMF have provisions for subproject specific alternative analysis. The
                           steps to be followed in subproject specific alternative analysis are: (a) identify and define
                           alternatives; (b) development and refinement of alternatives and technical methodologies; (c)
                           analysis and evaluation from environmental and economic perspective; and (d) selection of the
                           locally preferred alternative.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           LGED and BMDF have jointly prepared the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and
                           Social Management Framework (SMF) for the project. In addition, both the agencies have planned
                           training program/orientation during project preparation for its staff to carry out the environmental
                           and social screening/assessment.

                           Both LGED and BMDF have previous experience in implementing similar kind of projects and
                           familiar with the World Bank safeguard policies. In particular, LGED has developed reasonable
                           institutional capacity for its implementation. The project will support further capacity building of
                           the LGED on mainstreaming environmental management in urban infrastructure. An assessment
                           of the performance under the Municipal Support Project (MSP) including institutional capacity
                           assessment identified the areas where further capacity strengthening is required. Bank missions
                           will supervise environmental compliance as part of regular implementation support missions.

                           In order to ensure proper environmental management in the project, independent environmental
                           auditing will be carried by a third party monitoring firm. A ToR for engagement of the third party
                           monitoring firm has been included in the EMF. It has been agreed that LGED, BMDF and ULBs
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will comply with the requirements of the Environmental Management Framework.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The stakeholders are the ULBs, the urban communities who will be directly benefited from the
                           project intervention and project affected people due to environmental and social impacts. The
                           EMF and SMF presented a guideline for carrying out consultation, including guidelines on nature
                           (FGD/ informal meetings) and number of consultation, location, and type of participants. Several
                           field level consultations have been carried during the preparation of the EMF and SMF. As a part
                           of disclosure, summary of the EMF and SMF report and impact mitigation measures have been
                           translated into Bangla and disseminated locally. Copies of the full report (in English) and the
                           summary (in Bengali) will be sent to concerned Pourashavas and City Corporations offices and
                           will be made available to the public. In accordance with WB disclosure policy, the EMF report has
                           also been uploaded in the website of ULBs/ LGED/ BMDF and in the Bank InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          04-Sep-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       16-Oct-2013



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bangladesh                                                           04-Sep-2013
                           Comments: If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources
                                         policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the
                                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          24-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       24-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                           04-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          24-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       24-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                           24-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?



                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Shenhua Wang
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 24-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)                                   Date: 07-Nov-2013



                                                                        Page 8 of 8
