                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC9689

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bangladesh                      Project ID:     P149671
                            Project Name:     Dhaka Bus Rapid Transit Project (P149671)
                            Task Team         Ke Fang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         16-Jun-2015                     Estimated       15-Oct-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTIDR                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (20%), Other public sector governance (20%), City-wide
                                              Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                   Total Bank Financing:       250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        50.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                              250.00
                              Total                                                                    300.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           22.    The proposed Development Objective is to improve urban passenger transport services for
                           people who travel through or travel along the proposed BRT Line 3 South corridor (BRT L3-S). The
                           BRT L3-S supported under the project and the BRT L3-N supported by the ADB will form a
                           continuous BRT system on the BRT Line 3 corridor, which is a key element of a rapid mass transit
                           system being developed in Dhaka, as envisioned in the Strategic Transport Plan (STP) which was
                           developed with World Bank support in 2005.
                         C. Project Description
                         To achieve the proposed objectives and create visible and substantial impact on Dhaka’s urban
                         transport improvement, the proposed project will include the following components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Construction and initial operation of BRT L3-S, including improvements in non-motorized
                         transport, and traffic management and road safety along the corridor.
                         •        Preparatory work of BRT Line 1 (all alternatives, e.g.BRT, metro and Light Rail Transit will
                         be studied during project preparation), including feasibility studies and preliminary designs.
                         •        A Traffic Management component, taking advantage of the latest development in Internet
                         and Communication Technology (ICT) and Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) and utilizing low
                         cost but highly effective technologies to significantly improve traffic management and road safety in
                         Dhaka. The component can be piloted first by focusing on BRT Line 3, with capability to expand to
                         the entire city in the future.
                         •        An Institutional Development and Capacity Building component, to enhance/improve the
                         capacity of DTCA, Traffic Police, and the BRT Company and BRT operators.

                         The proposed BRT L3-S is on a main strategic transport corridor connecting the Old Dhaka where
                         jobs and urban services concentrate, with the northern part of the city where many people live. The
                         project is expected to bring in significant positive social benefits to the people in Dhaka city through
                         improved transit infrastructure and transport operation. It is expected that the BRT service will
                         contribute significantly towards improving the mass rapid transit network in the Dhaka Metropolitan
                         Area which has an estimated population of 11 million (in 2012).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is located at Dhaka, the capital of Bangladesh. The proposed BRT route (L3-S)
                         starts at the international airport in the north part of the city and travels down New Airport road,
                         Shahed Tazuddin Road, crosses the old city Centre, passes over the 2nd Buriganga Bridge and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         terminates at Keraniganj in the south, a distance of about 20 km. ADB is considering financing for
                         another 20-km of the Line 3 from the international airport towards Gazipur in the north (as L3-N).
                         The entire BRT L3-S corridor road belongs to three government departments: the Roads and
                         Highways Department (RHD) owns the section from Uttara to Banani (Banani Overpass), Dhaka
                         City Corporations (North) owns from Banani to Moghbazar, Dhaka City Corporation (South) has the
                         authority over the area from Moghbazar to Tati Bazar close to Sadar Ghat adjacent to Buriganga
                         bridge and RHD has the control over the rest, from Buriganga bridge to Keraniganj along the Mawa
                         link road.Between the two points, BRT L3-S will serve the Hazrat Shah Jalal International Airport,
                         Banani, Mohakhali, Tejgaon Industrial Area, Ramna, the Dhaka Central Business District, and Sadar
                         Ghat (central river terminal in Dhaka connecting the southwestern coastal districts through
                         waterways) all of which are most prominent transportation hubs. The bus will run in both directions
                         from the Airport Terminal to Keraniganj, crossing the 2nd Buriganga Bridge. Some roads will feed
                         the BRT system with standard buses and one important link will be near Sadar Ghatarea to reach
                         Sadar Ghat. The BRT line will be implemented at grade in most of the corridor but, in some sections,
                         flyovers will also be used to improve some of the at-grade BRT line conditions (Mohakhali and
                         Moghbazar areas). BRT will always be operated separately from the mixed traffic lanes.

                         BRT L3-S will use the multi-modal transport hubs to be developed with L3-N under ADB financing
                         at the starting point near the international airport. It will pass by the side of the existing Mohakhali
                         flyover, the Mohakhali ID bust terminal and is likely to potentially conflict with LGED flyovers from
                           Hatirjheel Link Road 2 passing over the rail line and Moghbazar Junction of New Eskaton road to
                           Old Elephant Road. In addition, Bridges Division under the Ministry of Communication has planned
                           the Dhaka Elevated Expressway along the BRT L3-S alignment from the international airport to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Kamalapur Railway Station, Jatrabari and Kutubkhali. RAJUK has plan for an overhead road from
                           Shantinagar to Jheelmil residential area. Bangladesh Army has a proposed to close off all cross
                           movements along the New Airport Road providing elevated U-turn ramps.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Dhaka Transport Coordination Authority (DTCA) has been assigned to be the overall coordinator for
                           preparing and implementing the proposed project, under guidance from the Ministry of
                           Communications. An overall Project Management Unit (PMU) has been established at the DTCA,
                           which is responsible for managing detailed designs, procurement and supervision of consultant and
                           goods contracts, financial management, and overall supervision of the project including safeguards.
                           Sub-PMUs or Project Implementation Units (PIUs) may be established at Roads and Buildings
                           Department (RHD), and/or Dhaka City Corporation (DCC), to be responsible for procuring and
                           supervising civil work packages located inside their jurisdiction boundaries, subject to detailed
                           implementation capacity and fiduciary assessments being carried out by the Task Team.

                           The Dhaka Transport Coordination Authority was established by an act of Parliament on April 16,
                           2001. DTCA is responsible to advise the concerned agencies on an integrated and safe traffic and
                           transportation system for Dhaka and to make necessary arrangements with that purpose. It
                           coordinates the traffic and transportation infrastructure development plan with the overall
                           development strategy plan for Dhaka as envisaged in the structure plan. It also formulates strategic
                           planning for traffic and transport sector of Dhaka and to coordinate inter agency cooperation. Under
                           the CASE Project, DTCA has carried out initial environmental and social assessment under the
                           feasibility study and understanding of the World Bank environmental and social safeguard policies
                           and their requirements. The other implementing agencies, where sub-PMUs or PIUs to be set-up,
                           have also past experience in working on Bank financed projects and managing safeguards
                           compliance issues as per Bank guidelines. However, these institutions do not have their internal
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capacity on environmental and social safeguards and will hire environmental and social specialists
                           for assessment, review, implementation supervision and monitoring. An environment and social
                           (E&S) unit will be set-up under the DTCA PMU for smooth design and implementation of the
                           project. The E&S Unit will be staffed with one senior environmental specialist and one senior social
                           specialist with a role to monitoring the safeguard activities. The requirement of environmental and
                           social specialist in Sub-PMUs or PIUs will be assessed during the project preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaohua Zhang (GURDR)
                           Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)
                           Md. Akhtaruzzaman (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The proposed project is expected to contribute
                           BP 4.01                                             in reduction of local air pollution and Green
                                                                               House Gas (GHG) emissions through
                                                                               improvement of the urban transport
                         infrastructure. It will involve construction and
                         initial operation of the BRT L-3 mainly in the
                         existing road network. However, the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will have significant environmental
                         impacts related to construction related localized
                         impacts, traffic disturbance, occupational health
                         and safety of workers, commuters, pedestrian,
                         non-motorized transport especially during the
                         construction phase of the elevated section for
                         Bus Rapid Transit.

                         The environmental impact assessment (EIA) of
                         corridor 3 of BRT has been initiated under the
                         Clean Air and Sustainable Environment (CASE)
                         Project. The EIA (including Environment
                         Management Plan) will ensure that any adverse
                         environmental impacts that may be generated by
                         the project are addressed. The EIA will lay-out
                         detailed plan for mitigation, monitoring and
                         reporting of all identified impacts and will
                         address institutional responsibilities, policy,
                         legal and administrative framework, costing and
                         financing. The EIA report is expected to
                         adequately cover: (i) description of all
                         components of the proposed project and their
                         individual and cumulative impacts; (ii)
                         environmental baseline of the project influence
                         areas; (iii) possible linked projects and their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental impacts; (iv) alternative analysis
                         from environmental consideration; (v)
                         immediate future need for road widening
                         (indirect impacts) due to BRT construction; (vi)
                         loss of economic opportunity (permanent and
                         temporary) of people due to construction work;
                         (vii) disposal of very old public transport (if
                         required); (viii) assessment of implementing
                         agency’s capacity for environmental
                         management; (ix) inter-agency coordination and
                         public/NGO participation; and (x) costing of
                         activities proposed for environmental mitigation
                         and monitoring. Since the EIA preparation is
                         part of the design consultant work, it has been
                         agreed with the implementing agency that the
                         EIA will be reviewed and updated by an
                         internationally reputed independent
                         environmental specialist.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The proposed project is not expected to have
                                                                 any impact on conversion or degradation of
                                                                 critical or other natural habitats. Accordingly,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the policy has not been triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The proposed project will not have any impact
                                                                 on the health and quality of forests, the rights
                                                                 and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                 dependence upon or interaction with forests;
                                                                 and the management, protection, or utilization
                                                                 of natural forests or plantations. As such, the
                                                                 policy has not been triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Not relevant for the proposed project.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The EIA will screen and assess any possible
                         BP 4.11                                 cause of disturbance to architectural land marks
                                                                 and other cultural property. This will be
                                                                 considered in finalization of the design. During
                                                                 the construction, the landscape of the sites may
                                                                 also be affected and structural damage to old
                                                                 structures may result due to vibrations and
                                                                 excavation of adjacent areas. The EIA will
                                                                 provide the required mitigation measures
                                                                 needed to address such disturbances or describe
                                                                 the chance find procedure. If the EIA identifies
                                                                 the physical cultural resources, the policy will
                                                                 be triggered at the appraisal stage.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project is located in the capital city of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Dhaka. Initial social impact assessment under
                                                                 the feasibility study indicates that there are no
                                                                 indigenous communitiesNo tribal peoples
                                                                 residing in the project corridor and therefore no
                                                                 impacts on them are expected under the project.
                                                                 will anyway be affected by the projectHowever,
                                                                 this finding will be further confirmed under the
                                                                 project design assignment.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   DTCA has conducted the feasibility level social
                         4.12                                    impact assessment (SIA), The BRT L3-S
                                                                 corridor is mostly existing roads only with
                                                                 designated lanes for BRT and transit stops.
                                                                 Small quantum of private lands will be acquired
                                                                 for development of a bus depot. However,
                                                                 public lands can be resumed from private uses
                                                                 for improvement of the corridor accommodating
                                                                 BRT lanes and transit stations along the
                                                                 corridor. These will lead to involuntary
                                                                 displacement of peoples and temporary impact
                                                                 on livelihoods of some group of people working
                                                                                                                                 along the proposed BRT corridor including shop
                                                                                                                                 operators, street vendors, rickshaw pullers, bus
                                                                                                                                 operators and others. DTCA has prepared a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 draft Resettlement action plan (RAP) in line
                                                                                                                                 with relevant Bangladesh laws and World Bank
                                                                                                                                 policies. The RAP contains the entitlement
                                                                                                                                 policies, mitigation measures and
                                                                                                                                 implementation arrangements. Under the the
                                                                                                                                 detail design, the consultant will review the
                                                                                                                                 feasibility level SIA,carry out additional surveys
                                                                                                                                 and , update the SIA and the draft RAP.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Not applicable for the project.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not applicable for the project.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not applicable for the project.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      August 15, 2014 to March 31, 2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ke Fang
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 15-Jul-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager:   Name: Elena Y. Chesheva (PMGR)                                                                                             Date: 15-Jul-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
