                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC8230

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Yemen, Republic of              Project ID:     P148747
                            Project Name:      Yemen Smallholder Agricultural Productivity Enhancement Project (SAPEP)
                                               (P148747)
                            Task Team          Garry Charlier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       20-Oct-2014                        Estimated       20-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: MNSWA                               Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Crops (30%), Animal production (30%), Agricultural extension and research
                                               (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural non-farm income generation
                                               (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     41.30                    Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    5.30
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                               36.00
                              Total                                                                      41.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to increase the adoption and use of productivity-enhancing
                           crop and livestock practices by smallholders in targeted project areas.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project, which will be implemented with a grant of US$36 million from the Global
                         Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) will consist of the following three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (I) Component 1: Community Sub-Projects and Investment Program (US$30 million): The objective
                         of this component is to support community sub-projects and investments that will protect land and
                         water assets, thus contributing to crop and livestock productivity. Subprojects and investments will
                         be selected and implemented through a community-based and participatory development approach.
                         Proposals for subprojects will be developed by the target communities, with support from MAI
                         branch offices, for approval by the project coordination unit within the central MAI office. Funding
                         for approved projects will flow from the central MAI office to the branch offices, which will support
                         the communities to implement the approved subprojects. Subprojects and investments will be
                         undertaken in the following areas:

                         (a) Community land and water management: Community investments to be financed include small-
                         scale infrastructure for soil and water management such as terraces, the construction of water-
                         harvesting structures, and small-scale spate irrigation sub-projects. These activities will build on the
                         successful water harvesting and small-scale spate improvement undertaken by MAI over the last
                         fifteen years.

                         (b) Livestock production: Support under this activity would include promoting animal health by
                         expanding the availability and reach of community animal health workers, improving livestock
                         feeding through livestock extension and services, and supporting community-based activities such as
                         bee-keeping.

                          (c) Community-based research and extension: The project would support community-based
                         extension and research, with the aim of introducing or expanding improved rainfed staple and higher
                         nutrition content and higher value crops. Investments under this activity would support village seed
                         banks, demonstration plots, and production of agricultural inputs such as locally adapted seeds for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         higher-productivity cereals cultivation, building on the successful model of farmer-based seed
                         improvement and management.

                         (d) Adding value to agriculture: This will include promoting community cooperatives and
                         associations engaged in business development, horticulture marketing, selling improved livestock
                         products, and other activities that improve the value of agricultural products.

                         (II) Component 2: Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening (US$4 million): The objective
                         of this component is to support capacity building activities (through consultant services, goods,
                         training, and non-consultant services) for communities, local and central government, and key
                         stakeholders involved in service provision.

                         (a) Community organization, capacity building and participatory planning: The project would
                         provide financing to support community mobilization and organization, community-based planning
                         to prioritize investments, implementation and management. Building on mobilization initiatives that
                         have been successful in a number of areas, the project will support training that will strengthen the
                         overall capacity of producer groups and community-based organizations (cooperatives, community
                         land and water management associations etc.) directly involved and supported in Component 1. In
                         agricultural extension, nutrition themes will be enhanced and demand-side nutrition awareness will
                         be targeted to women and households to complement household gardens and other measures to
                         diversify and improve diets.

                         (b) Capacity building and institutional strengthening for Government agencies, NGOs, and key
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders: Support under this activity will strengthen the capacity of services providers involved
                         in implementing Component 1. It would include financing for consulting services and training that
                         will: (i) strengthen capacity of Government agencies at central, regional and local levels for applied
                         research, demonstration and training; (ii) develop capacity for community-based extension and
                         farmer field schools; (iii) develop systems and capacity for multiplication and dissemination of
                         improved landrace seeds; and (iv) develop capacity for public, NGO, academia and private services
                         to provide support to community-based groups. At the national level, eligible activities would also
                         build upon past successful livestock initiatives to strengthen national veterinary services
                         (surveillance, diagnostic, vaccinations) and to establish a public-private partnership for veterinary
                         services and inputs.

                         (III) Component 3: Program Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$2 million): This
                         component would finance the provision of support to the Agricultural Improvement Program (AIP)
                         of MAI as implementing agency of SAPEP through the provision goods, consultant services,
                         training, non-consultant services, and incremental operating costs associated with the responsibility
                         of coordination, administration and management of project implementation. This would include: (i)
                         support to program management, coordination, and supervision, including fiduciary activities
                         (procurement, financial management), environmental and social assessments, reporting and audits;
                         (ii) strengthening MAI Branch Offices through training, equipment, technical assistance (including
                         with deployment of male and female community mobilizers); (iii) monitoring and evaluation,
                         including the cost of establishing and operating and M&E system for the project with adequate
                         baseline and project impact assessment studies. Incremental costs to be financed include incremental
                         contractual staff costs, office equipment and operations, operating cost of transport equipment and
                         travel (domestic and international).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Under the GAFSP financing proposal, four governorates were selected for implementation of the
                         project: Shabwa, Wadi-Hadramout (replacing Abyan on the initially-proposed list for security
                         reasons), Hajja, and Sana’a. In the six-region federation that is proposed for Yemen, Shabwa, Wadi-
                         Hadramout are now part of the new Hadramout region, Hajja is now part of the new Tehama region,
                         and Sana’a is now part of the new Azal region. Final project sites will be selected at the District-
                         level based on clear and transparent criteria including poverty levels, population density,
                         opportunities, vulnerability to climate impacts, and implementation capacity.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MAI) will implement the project. MAI will be
                         responsible for project preparation, coordination, and implementation. To this end, MAI is planning
                         to establish an Agriculture Improvement Program (AIP), similar to the National Irrigation Program
                         (NIP), and supported by a Project Coordination Unit (AIP/PCU) with adequate staff (technical and
                         subject specialists from the ministry) and administrative and fiduciary capacity (financial
                         management, procurement, environmental and social safeguards, etc.) at both central and
                         governorate levels. The AIP/PCU will be responsible for the day-to-day coordination and
                         implementation of the proposed SAPEP project. At governorate level the AIP/PCU will implement
                         the project activities through the Agricultural Offices or already existing Field Units (FUs) such as
                         the ones established under NIP.
                           MAI has been the implementing agency for past and ongoing Bank-supported operations, including
                           the Groundwater and Soil Conservation Project (GSCP), the Rainfed Agriculture and Livestock
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project (RALP), and the Agro-biodiversity and Climate Adaptation Project (ACAP). Thus, MAI and
                           its existing PCU has experience in supervising implementation of the Bank’s environmental and
                           social safeguards, however, their capacity on the application of safeguards policies will be further
                           strengthened during implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Banu Setlur (MNSEE)
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Policy is triggered as the project will include
                           BP 4.01                                             small-scale infrastructure and activities for soil
                                                                               and water management such as terraces,
                                                                               construction of water harvesting structures (e.g.
                                                                               cisterns), and small-scale spate irrigation sub-
                                                                               projects. Activities will build on MAI’s success
                                                                               in these areas over the last fifteen years. Since
                                                                               the locations of the sub-projects are not known
                                                                               at this stage, an Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) including a
                                                                               checklist for the screening of sub-projects will
                                                                               be prepared and disclosed before project
                                                                               appraisal. Site/sub-project specific
                                                                               Environmental and Social Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               (ESMP) will be prepared during implementation
                                                                               and before implementation of sub-projects/
                                                                               construction as required.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                               result in loss, conversion or degradation of
                                                                               natural habitats or critical natural habitats as
                                                                               defined by the policy.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              Policy does not apply as the project will not be
                                                                               implemented in any forested areas.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes             Policy is triggered as the project could include
                                                                               sub-projects relating to enhancement of
                                                                               agricultural productivity and introduction of
                                                                               high value crops, support seed banks and bee
                                                                               keeping. These activities could result in the use
                                                                               of pesticides and therefore OP4.09 is triggered,
                                                                               which will be covered within the scope of the
                                                                               ESMF. The ESMF will include a screening tool
                                                                               to identify subprojects that will need to prepare
                                                                               a simple integrated pest management plan
                                                                                                                                 (IPM). Such subprojects will prepare the IPM
                                                                                                                                 before they are approved for implementation.
                                                                                                                                 The Project will include relevant training at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 field level such as in IPM, selecting disease free
                                                                                                                                 seeds, bee keeping, etc.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not be
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         implemented in areas of cultural heritage sites.
                                                                                                                                 However, chance finds procedures will be
                                                                                                                                 included in EMP as is standard practice.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            Policy is not triggered as indigenous people as
                                                                                                                                 defined in the policy are not present in project
                                                                                                                                 areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            Policy is not triggered. No involuntary
                                 4.12                                                                                            resettlement is anticipated by the project. The
                                                                                                                                 project will not finance any activities which
                                                                                                                                 involve involuntary taking of land and
                                                                                                                                 involuntary restriction of legally designated
                                                                                                                                 parks and protected areas. Land for project
                                                                                                                                 activities will be free of squatters/encroachers. It
                                                                                                                                 is expected that lands needed for any
                                                                                                                                 subprojects will be in small scale and owned by
                                                                                                                                 the government. In case of private owned land,
                                                                                                                                 the project will manage to obtain the land
                                                                                                                                 through voluntary donation by local
                                                                                                                                 communities. The guidelines for safeguards
                                                                                                                                 screening, voluntary land donation and negative
                                                                                                                                 project list will be developed and included in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the Operational Manual and the PAD, and a
                                                                                                                                 GRM for land donation will be put in place. The
                                                                                                                                 client will conduct due diligence to ensure that
                                                                                                                                 no involuntary settlements will take place.
                                                                                                                                 Verification of the voluntary nature of land
                                                                                                                                 donation will be obtained and reviewed by the
                                                                                                                                 task team.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                                                                                 community sub-projects will not include
                                                                                                                                 construction or rehabilitation of dams as defined
                                                                                                                                 by the policy.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            undertake any activities in the catchment areas
                                                                                                                                 of international waterways and shared aquifers.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Policy is not triggered as project activities will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not be implemented in any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Jun-2014



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will prepared and disclosed in-
Public Disclosure Copy




                             country and at the Bank’s Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Garry Charlier

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                    Date: 09-May-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (SM)                   Date: 13-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
