                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR10464
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jul-2014, 26-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                                  Project ID:           P108904
                            Project Name:      PH - Regional Infrastructure for Growth (P108904)
                            Task Team          Christopher T. Pablo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Apr-2010                                  Estimated   01-Dec-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                                        Lending     Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (21%), General industry and
                                               trade sector (21%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Hig hways (21%), General
                                               water, sanitation and flood protection sector (21%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (16%)
                            Theme:             Regional integration (40%), Other Private Sector Development (20%), City-wide
                                               Infrastructure and Service Delivery (20%), Natural dis aster management (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          Yes
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       500.50           Total Bank Financing:                                       50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                            450.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                50.00
                              Total                                                                                               500.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                 Page 1 of 9
                         The PDO of the RIG project is to stimulate integrative investment within regions by improving
                         access to financing for local service providers.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The PDO of the RIG project is to stimulate integrative investment within regions by improving
                         access to financing for local service providers.
                          3. Project Description
                         The project is a USD 50 million equivalent on-lending facility approved by the World Bank Board
                         on February 2, 2012 and became effective on October 11, 2012. The project originally has three
                         components: Part 1 (Support for Regional Infrastructure Investments) supports improved physical
                         and economic integration within participating provinces by increasing access to finance of LGUs and
                         other local service providers for an open menu of local public infrastructure and services. Part 2
                         (Support to Post-disaster Reconstruction) provides support for reconstruction needs of LGUs affected
                         by disasters. Part 3 (Institutional Support and Strengthening of Local Service Providers) provides
                         access to technical assistance to enable LGUs to plan, develop, and finance infrastructure
                         subprojects.

                         After restructuring and with contribution from the Republic of the Philippines for the financing of
                         subprojects, Part 1 is proposed to be dropped and the loan allocation of this component amounting to
                         USD 40.0 million equivalent be reallocated to Part 2. Part 2 will now become the new Part 1,which
                         will have a total allocation of USD 499.88 million equivalent. DBP will maintain its contribution of
                         USD 0.5 million equivalent for institutional support (project management). The original Part 3 will
                         now become the new Part 2 and will be named Institutional Support.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will finance the reconstruction and rehabilitation of areas affected by recent natural
                         disasters, including: (a) Typhoon Yolanda that hit central Philippines, and (b) the 7.2 magnitude
Public Disclosure Copy




                         earthquake in the Bohol and Cebu islands. As a financial intermediary operation, the location and
                         nature of the investment subprojects will be determined based on demand from disaster-affected
                         LGUs in the aforementioned areas and DBP’s appraisal of specific LGUs’ financial creditworthiness.
                         The restructured project shall adopt the existing Environmental Safeguards Management Framework
                         (ESMF) and Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (RIPPF) ) separately re-
                         disclosed on September 11, 2014.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
                         Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             B - Partial Assessment.
                          BP 4.01
                                                                             The policy is triggered because the project will
                                                                             involve the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
                                                                             areas devastated by recent natural disasters, and
                                                                             will improve environmental conditions through
                                                                             the rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of such



                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                                                                    interventions, as drainage systems, sewerage and
                                                                    solid waste management facilities. Rebuilding of
                                                                    areas and structures may result in environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    and social impacts during construction and debris
                                                                    management. However, as these damaged utilities
                                                                    and the lack of basic services have left the areas
                                                                    uninhabitable and unproductive, the potential
                                                                    environmental and social impacts of the proposed
                                                                    recovery projects and their areas of influence are
                                                                    expected to be limited.

                                                                    The project shall adopt the latest Environmental
                                                                    Safeguards Management Framework (ESMF) as
                                                                    it lays out the systems and procedures in the
                                                                    conduct of environmental and social assessments
                                                                    by the Sub-Borrower, with oversight from the
                                                                    Project Management Team (PMT). The ESMF
                                                                    disclosed by DBP was reviewed and is found to
                                                                    be adequate in addressing the potential
                                                                    environmental and social impacts of the
                                                                    reconstruction and rehabilitation activities
                                                                    eligible for project financing. This ensures that
                                                                    the environmental and social safeguards policies
                                                                    of the Bank and National Government are
                                                                    followed and complied with. The environmental
                                                                    and social impact assessments will carefully
                                                                    assess the environmental and social impacts of
                                                                    priority investments, including impacts from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    ancillary facilities and linked projects, as well as
                                                                    provide detailed mitigating measures described in
                                                                    the Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                    (ESMP). A Monitoring and Follow-up program,
                                                                    Grievance Redress Mechanism, and institutional
                                                                    responsibilities, capacity building and training
                                                                    requirements for environmental safeguards staff
                                                                    are defined in the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No           This policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                    will not support activities that could significantly
                                                                    convert or degrade critical natural habitats. The
                                                                    ESMF includes a screening and scoping process
                                                                    for the identification of natural habitats and other
                                                                    ecologically sensitive areas that may be affected
                                                                    by the project. However, if the ESMF indicates
                                                                    that a potential subproject would significantly
                                                                    convert or degrade noncritical natural habitats,
                                                                    the project will adopt acceptable mitigation
                                                                    measures from the ESMF.



                                                            Page 3 of 9
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            This policy is not triggered since the project is not
                                                                         located in forested areas and the prevailing
                                                                         environmental conditions have been entirely
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         stripped of vegetation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not support directly or indirectly
                                                                         any investment that would trigger the policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The policy is triggered because the project will
                         BP 4.11                                         include financing for civil works that may affect
                                                                         physical cultural resources (PCR). Some
                                                                         subprojects may entail excavation, earth
                                                                         movement and/or inundation of land areas. An
                                                                         assessment of PCR to be affected by potential
                                                                         subprojects will be carried out through the
                                                                         Environmental Assessment (EA) process.
                                                                         Moreover, the ESMF provides adequate
                                                                         guidelines and procedures in screening and
                                                                         scoping of the sub-projects for potential impacts
                                                                         on PCRs, as well as appropriate prevention and
                                                                         mitigating measures to be carried out by the Sub-
                                                                         borrower. The ESMF also specifies Chance Find
                                                                         Procedures, and where necessary, safeguards
                                                                         procedures for inclusion in the technical
                                                                         specifications of construction contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The recent natural disasters affected mostly urban
                                                                         and peri-urban centers. However, some rural
                                                                         areas in Eastern Visayas, Panay Islands, Northern
                                                                         Cebu, Palawan, and Bohol were also affected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         With the exception of Eastern Visayas, the rest of
                                                                         the areas are known to have IPs. The large area
                                                                         covered by these disasters does not totally
                                                                         discount the possibility of presence of IP
                                                                         communities, albeit a very low probability, in
                                                                         other potential infrastructure sites. Nevertheless,
                                                                         the Resettlement and Indigenous Peoples Policy
                                                                         Framework (RIPPF) of the project shall be
                                                                         applied. Subproject screening will include
                                                                         determining the presence of IPs so that ways to
                                                                         benefit them form part of the subproject design.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The choice of location of infrastructure projects
                         4.12                                            may affect assets and people who may be
                                                                         occupying the same area or its right of way. To
                                                                         help ensure that loss of land, shelter and/or other
                                                                         developments including access to livelihood is
                                                                         restored to pre-project levels, a set of guidelines
                                                                         in the RIPPF was formulated under the original




                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                                 project. This has been reviewed and it remains
                                                                                 relevant under the restructured project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project is not triggered because the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 will not involve construction of dams nor is it
                                                                                 dependent on any existing dam or dam under
                                                                                 construction.
                            Projects on International        No                  This policy is not triggered because there will be
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 no sub-projects in international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  This policy is not triggered because there will be
                            7.60                                                 no sub-projects in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project will finance infrastructure subprojects such as roads, water supply and sanitation,
                              drainage, sewerage and solid waste management, as identified in the original project, but focusing
                              in areas affected by recent natural disasters. This will result in restored and/or improved access by
                              affected communities to local public services. While the DBP has yet to develop a robust pipeline
                              under RIGP, it is anticipated that the construction of new civil works or reconstruction of damaged
                              facilities may entail acquisition of privately owned land and/or other assets such as dwelling and/
                              or commercial structures, or may affect people’s access to livelihood and other resources. To
                              minimize any potential adverse social and/or environmental impacts, the project will: (a) consider
                              changing the design/location of the structure or facility; (b) locate and use idle or unoccupied
                              public land; or (c) compensate the owners whose assets are adversely affected by the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              In general, the project is expected to improve environmental conditions in disaster-affected areas
                              through the rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of infrastructure and services that promote
                              environmental management (e.g., drainage systems, sewerage and solid waste management
                              facilities). However, large-scale subprojects may have the potential to cause significant adverse
                              environmental impact, such as extensive cut and fill operations needed along steep slopes located
                              in upland areas. In such cases, the project will require a full Environmental Impact Assessment
                              (EIA) and an extensive Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) that will contain
                              appropriate mitigating measures to address these impacts. Guidance for the preparation of an EIA
                              and ESMP is provided in the ESMF and the Project Operations Manual.

                              The restructured project also triggered OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Assets as there may be sub-
                              projects that may entail activities that could affect such assets. Adequate guidance has been
                              reflected in the ESMF to address any potential adverse effects. The rest of the relevant OPs, such
                              as those that pertain to indigenous peoples and involuntary resettlement have been earlier
                              triggered, with corresponding measures duly reflected in the ESMF and the RIPPF. The
                              safeguards assessment undertaken also upholds that the rest of the OPs previously not triggered
                              will not bear any relevance to the restructured project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:



                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                            The conditions in the disaster-affected areas are generally degraded. Vegetation has been
                           stripped, debris has been left uncollected, water and sanitation services have not been fully
                           restored, many dwelling and livelihood structures have been destroyed. The impact of the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in these areas will be generally positive by providing restored or better access to basic services.
                           Other potential indirect and/or long-term impacts due to rehabilitation and reconstruction activities
                           would be increased livelihood and other economic opportunities, and improved environmental
                           conditions.

                           Any indirect or long-term adverse environmental impact is expected to be insignificant because
                           each subproject is required to prepare and implement a comprehensive ESMP, which will then be
                           strictly monitored by the implementing agency.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Project feasibility studies prepared and submitted by the Sub-borrower will identify alternative
                           designs and/or locations of structures and facilities when potential social and/or environmental
                           impacts are identified. Mitigating measures will be included in the total project cost particularly if
                           these are significant and irreversible.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower (DBP) is ISO 14001 certified and its corporate environmental policy states that it
                           is fully committed to support environmental protection and sustainable development. It vows to
                           ensure implementation of effective environmental management practices in its banking operations,
                           services and decisions. The DBP has a dedicated Environmental Unit that prepares and reviews
                           EAs and assists the Project Management Units (PMUs) concerning environmental and social
                           safeguards. Moreover, it has demonstrated its capacity to implement projects in compliance to the
                           World Bank Safeguards Framework with its recent experience in satisfactorily implementing
                           projects such as the Local Government Unit Urban Water Supply Project (LGUUWSP) and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Rural Power Project (RPP).

                           The Borrower has prepared an ESMF, RIPPF and Project Operations Manual, which are consistent
                           with Philippine laws and the World Bank’s safeguards policies. Sub-borrowers are required to
                           carry out environmental and social assessments, obtain clearances before subproject
                           implementation, and adopt an ESMP that addresses the recommendations of both assessments.
                           These frameworks (ESMF and RIPPF) will be adopted for the restructured project financed by
                           both IBRD ($50 million) and the Borrower ($450.50 million).

                           The Project Management Team (PMT) for RIGP has appointed environmental and social
                           safeguards personnel. Under this project, they are tasked to enforce safeguards requirements
                           including the preparation of a safeguards compliance review checklist, and screening candidate
                           subprojects for preliminary review. They are likewise tasked to supervise and monitor Sub-
                           Borrowers with regard to processes and requirements contained in the ESMF. In support of the
                           Sub-Borrowers and DBP’s marketing units, the PMT is tasked to provide capacity building
                           activities that relate to the environmental and social safeguards.

                           The PMT is currently using an updated screening process that includes triggers to safeguards
                           policies as defined in the ESMF to determine the financing eligibility of proposals submitted by
                           Sub-Borrowers. During project implementation, the PMT is responsible for supervising and


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           monitoring participating LGUs and local service providers with regard to the process and
                           requirements prescribed in the ESMF and RIPPF. It is also tasked to carry out capacity building
                           activities on environmental and social safeguards for both its marketing units and Sub-borrowers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In the early stages of the project, the PMT, with the assistance of the WB, has conducted a
                           safeguards training workshop attended by its entire staff including the environmental and social
                           safeguards specialists dedicated to the project. The PMT has recruited qualified safeguard
                           specialists from previous DBP development projects financed by international development
                           partners.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The DBP, sub-borrowers (e.g., local government units), and potentially affected people in
                           priority disaster-affected areas are the key stakeholders of the project. Under the Philippine EIA
                           law, public consultations are conducted by the Sub-borrowers during EIA preparation. These form
                           part of the Environmental Compliance Certificates (ECC) application process set by the
                           Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              11-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                 11-Sep-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed in DBP website: https://www.devbnkphl.com/UserFiles/RIGP%20ESMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         %20dbp.pdf
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              11-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                 11-Sep-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed in DBP website: https://www.devbnkphl.com/UserFiles/RIGP%20RIPPF
                                         %20-%20dbp.pdf
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 11-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              11-Sep-2014




                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      11-Sep-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed in DBP website: https://www.devbnkphl.com/UserFiles/RIGP%20RIPPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         %20-%20dbp.pdf
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Christopher T. Pablo
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                             Date: 26-Sep-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
