INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI009
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Peru                       Project ID:   P145610
Project Name:    PE - Lima Metro Line 2 Project (P145610)
Task Team        Georges Bianco Darido
Leader(s):
Estimated        30-Jan-2015                Estimated     26-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Urban Transport (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%), Municipal
governance and institution building (10%), City-wide Infrast ructure and Service
Delivery (80%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    5000.00             Total Bank Financing:   300.00
Financing Gap:          150.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                       4550.00
0         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           300.00
Total                                                          4850.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed development objective is to improve the urban mobility of people in the area of
influence of the Metro Line 2 and Line 4 Branch and support the integration of the public transport
system in the Metropolitan Region of Lima.
C. Project Description


﻿The project includes 35-km of new underground rail system (subway) with 35 stations in the
Metropolitan Area of Lima. A 35-year concession contract was signed in April 2014 comprising the
design, finance, construction, rolling stock provision, operation and maintenance of the 35-km
project. Government expects to carry about 660 thousand passengers per day once the 35-km are
o
operational (not expected before 2020).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
*      The Project is located in the Lima metropolitan area and thus an urban and highly altered
environment. The Project encompasses (1) a 27.3-km expansion of of the proposed Line 2 (East-
West corridor connecting the eastern district of At6 with the western municipality and Port of Callao
through various central districts of Lima), (2) physical connections with the existing Metro Line 1
(Tren Electrico) and the Bus Rapid Transit line (Metropolitano), and (3) a 7.7 km segment of the
future Line 4 connecting Line 2 with the international airport and northern districts. The first phase
to be constructed is the 5-km 'Etapa 1A' which includes 5 stations. Along the Lima Metro Line 2
alignment there several pre-Hispanic sites (Huacas) and historical buildings and monuments from the
new republican period. A segment of the proposed metro-line alignment passes directly underneath a
portion of the buffer zone of the Historic Center of Lima, considered a UNESCO World Heritage
Site since 1988. Also, some ventilation shafts are located inside of some Huacas (e.g. Puruchuco and
San Marcos) and a health center.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The institutional responsibilities related to Project environmental Bank safeguard policy
implementation is in different institutions. The Autonomous Authority of the Electric System for the
Massive Transport in Lima and Callao (AATE), which is part of the Ministry of Transport and
Communications (MTC) since June 2009, is the executing unit of the Project and has the primary
responsibility for environmental and social management. They presently have a small team of
professionals to manage environmental issues. AATE has stated they are presently recruiting two
socio-environmental management specialists and a specialist on environmental monitoring. Under
the Project concession agreement, the private consortium has various responsibilities related to
implementing environmental, health and safety management systems and compliance with regulatory
requirements for both project construction and operation and maintenance. Both AATE and the
MTC's Directorate for Concessions is responsible for contract supervision. In terms of permits, the
DGASA under the Ministry of Transport is responsible for issuing and monitoring the Project
environmental license. The Ministry of Culture is responsible for regulatory aspects related to
potential existence of archeological resources. An assessment of the institutional capacity of relevant
entities to meet WB environmental and social safeguard policy requirements will be undertaken as
part of project preparation.
AATE has a unit responsible for Sustainability and Interference with experience in involuntary
resettlement processes of population. Specifically, it has effectively made the purchase of land for the
Metro Line 1 project and is currently working on the acquisition of land for the priority segment of
Line 2 (Etapa 1A). However, there should still be a full assessment of their capacity in relation to the
implementation of safeguard policies (OP 4.12) identifying where gaps or issues must be addressed
with additional staff or their ability to implement appropriate methodologies. Additionally, training
in preparing resettlement plans for formal and informal land holders should during project
preparation.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (GENDR)
Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GSURR)
Jose Vicente Zevallos (GSURR)
O
U       Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is proposed to be as classified as
OP/BP 4.01                              Category A. An Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA), including an Environmental Management
Plan (EMP), has been prepared for the Lima Metro
Line 2 Project to meet Peruvian environmental
regulatory requirements. Consultation was performed
associated with the EIA development, including
disclosure of the draft EIA. The EIA has been
approved by the Ministry of Transport and
Communications' Directorate General on Socio-
environmental Matters.
The project has various positive benefits, including
improvement in the quality of life of the residents of
Lima; promotion of urban integration and
organization and consequent land development;
provision of increased comfort, reliability and
decreased commute times; increased urban
accessibility and mobility; less superficial vehicular
traffic on main roads, allowing for the decrease of
traffic congestion, combustion gas contamination and
sound, as well as commute times; air quality
improvement of Lima, contributing to the reduction
of greenhouse gas emissions and the mitigation of
climate change; improved public health due to the
reduced number of accidents and less environmental
contamination; job creation; and increased
commercial and economic activity. Additionally the
Project will include consulting services and
institutional strengthening activities for
capacity-building for stakeholder agencies in
transport planning, policy formulation and regulatory
reforms (including the reorganization of
conventional public transport modes, vehicle
scrappage).
In terms of potential negative environmental and


﻿social impacts and risks, in addition to typical
infrastructure construction impacts which are
localized and of short duration (e.g., generation of
noise, dust, waste management, etc.), there are some
project specific impacts and risks of particular
significance. Some potential significant impacts
during construction are effects on soil stability or
subsidence during tunnel excavation or vibrations
that could affect buildings, traffic congestion, noise
and dust generation around metro station locations,
transport and disposal of soil/excavated material
from the tunnel and station excavations to disposal
site, possibility of archaeological chance finds and
damage, impacts on cultural physical resources in the
Lima colonial/republican area, possible impact on
urban trees of aesthetic or historical value, worker
health and safety risks in tunneling and excavation
works, and decreased accessibility to businesses and
homes in the immediate vicinity of metro stations.
Potential significant operational phase impacts or
risks could include: vibration impacts on buildings,
waste management of metro rail car maintenance
facilities, and risk of emergency event (e.g., fire,
explosion, etc).
Based upon a review of the project EIA by the Inter-
American Development Bank (who is also
considering financing for the project) and the World
Bank, efforts are presently underway to develop a
supplemental document to the EIA to further address
some key potential environmental impacts (e.g.
environmental liabilities due to soil/water
contamination, physical cultural resources),
environmental management and monitoring and
involuntary resettlement. The preparation of the
supplemental EIA is being undertaken by an
international environmental consulting. More
specifically, the supplemental EIA is addressing: (1)
a more comprehensive presentation of the analysis of
alternatives for the Lima Metro Line 2 alignments
and construction techniques; (2) a more detailed
baseline especially in aspects related to physical
cultural resources and preparation environmental and
social sensitivity maps along the alignment; (3)
assessment of impacts in more detail based on
quantitative models and analyses and a better
baseline for vibration and noise impacts, traffic


﻿management during transport of spoil materials from
tunnels to the final disposal sites, impacts on
underground water and indirect impacts; (4) a more
detailed assessment of social impacts such as impacts
of construction on accessibility to houses and
businesses, traffic detours, aggravated congestion in
a city with high levels of congestion, effect on the
travel time to reach work place and school, etc.; (5)
development of a Resettlement Plan and
compensation of welfare losses on the basis of World
Bank and IADB involuntary resettlement policies;
(6) a more detailed environmental management plan
for the construction stage that includes technical,
workplace safety, health, environmental and social
specifications and a robust scheme for
environmental supervision during construction; (7) a
management plan for social impacts during
construction particularly for sensitive areas such as
hospitals, schools, street vendor areas and ensure
proper communication lines with communities
particularly affected during construction; (8)
management plans for areas of spoils final disposal;
(9) a policy on (i) no (zero) loss of green and
recreational areas; (ii) reposition of all affected
infrastructure (including ways affected by traffic
detours); (iii) ensuring accessibility to houses and
businesses during construction and compensation of
loss of welfare due to lack of accessibility; and (iv)
ensuring an inclusive deign with access to disabled
people; and (10) assessment of the project indirect
impacts on urban land uses in Lima, changes in the
value of land in poor neighborhoods and
communities in the vicinity of metro stations. Also,
studies on the increase in economic and financial
activities associated to construction of metro stations
and originated in the demand of goods and services.
There will be additional consultation processes
performed associated with the development of the
supplemental EIA.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD          The Project does not appear to have any potential
significant conversation or degradation of natural
habitat. However, since the project might adversely
impact the coastal habitats given that one of the
potential sites for spoil disposal (a volume of 3.9
million cubic meters) is located in the San Miguel
district's coastal zone which in turn is part of the


﻿Costa Verde area, the triggering of this policy will be
confirmed during project preparation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           This policy should not be triggered since the project
will not affect forests, forest dependent communities
not will it involve changes in the management of
forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           This policy should not be triggered since the project
does not involve the purchase or use of significant
quantities of pesticides. The project may, during the
operation phase of the metro, require the limited use
of regularly available pesticides for pest control (e.g.
rodents, etc.) in the tunnels. Applicable standard
procedures will be established in the operation phase
environmental management plan under OP 4.01. The
EMP will follow World Bank standards for purchase,
use/handling, storage, and disposal of any pesticides.
these procedures will be part of the Operational
Manual as well.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          This policy should be triggered given that valleys
OP/BP 4.11                                where Lima was built have been continuously
inhabited for more than 10,000 years and given that a
portion the proposed metro-line alignment passes
directly underneath a portion of the buffer zone of
the Historic Center of Lima, considered a UNESCO
World Heritage Site since 1988. Thus, probability of
chance find of pre-Hispanic artifacts and structures is
high. Also, construction of tunnels, stations and
ventilation shafts in this buffer zone - as established
in the R.S. No 2900-72/ED on December 28, 1972 -
and Huacas presents potential risks due to vibrations,
soil subsidence, visual impacts of entrance to stations
and ventilation shafts located in the historical plazas
and Huacas, and impacts to aesthetic values around
the stations including trash. It is suggested that a
prestigious firm be hired to undertake an
Archaeological Assessment Program (PEA) and get
the Archaeological Remains Inexistence Certificate
(CIRA) before the start of works. The
Archaeological Monitoring Plan during construction
is not enough given the high probability of
archaeological findings, and their presumed
existence, along the Lima Metro Line 2 alignment. ,
The assessment of the known resources should be
well developed under the preparation phase: all the
key resources should be identified and measures,
budgets, and responsibilities should be clearly known
prior to appraisal. Additionally, the Team plans to


﻿undertake consultations with national and
international experts on physical cultural resources as
well as any key contacts in the UNESCO committee
and/or headquarters.
ndigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           This policy should not be triggered since the project
4.10                                      activities will not affect indigenous peoples as
defined in the policy.
Nonetheless the Team will perform further due
diligence as part of Project preparation to assess
whether the presence of Indigenous Peoples in Lima
could warrant a differentiated approach to ensure that
this population benefits in a culturally appropriate
manner from the Project. The issue of language
discrimination experienced by indigenous peoples in
Lima is one of the main barriers for IPs when
migrating to the city (i.e. when using health facilities
and other public and social services). Given the
poverty level of indigenous migrants compounded
with their common occupations it is likely that these
groups could greatly benefit from the Project but
risks of exclusion due to a language barrier could
limit the potential of the Metro to benefit this
population. Given that indigenous migrants identify
language issues as one of the main barriers when
reaching urban areas, the Team will explore whether
there is need to provide signaling and other
information in indigenous languages (i.e. quechua).
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The 35-km underground alignment will not require
BP 4.12                                   land acquisition, except in the areas needed to build
stations and ventilation shafts. According to
estimates based on preliminary designs, Line 2 will
affect 338 lots and Line 4 Branch will affect 38 lots,
for a total of 376 lots. Of these, 279 are privately
owned and 98 belong to public entities. Two stations
(16 and 26) will affect lots occupied by shopping
centers.
Detailed designs are only available for Section 1-A,
which will affect 29 lots (21 owned by public entities
and 8 privately owned). The acquisition of the 29
lots will not cause physical displacement, except for
the acquisition of a privately owned lot required for
Ventilation Shaft 20. In this case, 12 informal
businesses that occupy a section of this lot will be
displaced.


﻿Land acquisition for Section 1-A is ongoing. A
resettlement plan is currently being prepared to
document land acquisition to date and to address the
displacement of the 12 informal businesses.
Land acquisition for the other sections will begin
once the detailed designs become available.
Resettlement plans will be prepared to address the
adverse impacts of land acquisition, according to the
provisions of the Project's Resettlement Policy
Framework. More designs may be ready and
properties identified for land acquisition for other
segment of the Project in October/November 2015.
Should this be the case an additional Resettlement
Action Plan will be prepared.
Resettlement plans will be developed and
implemented by the Autonomous Authority of the
Electric System of Massive Transport of Lima and
Callao (AATE). This agency developed land
acquisition and resettlement experience during the
construction of Line 1.
AATE is making progress in the negotiations with
the landowners affected by Section 1-A and has
already reached agreements with some of them and
delivered compensation payments. However, the
owners of the structures where the 12 informal
businesses operate have rejected AATE's
compensation offers to date. They sent a letter to
AATE in June, claiming that they have possession
rights. Meanwhile, AATE has initiated legal actions
to evict the occupants of the 12 structures and the
case is now in the hands of the Procuraduria General
de la Naci6n (Attorney General's Office). The Bank
informed AATE that no evictions should take place
until the Bank has approved the Resettlement Plan
for Section 1-A and until there is clear evidence that
all affected parties have received compensation
offers that meet the standards of the Resettlement
Policy Framework and that are based on a clear
understanding of the legal rights of the occupants of
the business structures, also in accordance with OP
4.12.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No          This policy should not be triggered as the project will
neither support the construction or rehabilitation of


﻿dams nor will it support other investments which rely
on services of existing dams.
Projects on International     No            This policy should not be triggered as the project will
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        not finance activities involving the use or potential
pollution of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This policy should not be triggered as the project will
BP 7.60                                     not finance activities in disputed areas as defined in
the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Nov-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Presently the schedule is for a draft Supplemental EIA in August 2014 and specific Resettlement
Action Plan to be completed in September. Additional consultation should occur by September/
October. There is still pending the issuance by the government of the Certificate of Inexistence of
Archaeological Remains (CIRA).
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Georges Bianco Darido
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                       Date: 08-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)                     Date: 12-Jan-2015
Manager:
0
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


