INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
6                                               Report No.: JSDSC1O4O
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Vietnam                    Project ID:   P152309
Project Name:    Vietnam Dam Rehabilitation and Safety Improvement Project (P152309)
Task Team        Cuong Hung Pham
Leader:
Estimated        18-Aug-2015                Estimated     30-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Irrigation and drainage (35%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (30%),
Water supply (30%), Public administration- Water, sanitati on and flood
protection (5%)
Theme(s):        Natural disaster management (35%), Water resource management (30%), Rural
services and infrastructure (25%), Infrastructure services for private sector
development (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
U
Total Project Cost:     550.00             Total Bank Financing:   500.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               50.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     500.00
Total                                                           550.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
17.    The Project Development Objective is to support the implementation of the Government dam
safety program by improving the safety of prioritized dams and reservoirs as well as to protect people
and assets of the downstream communities.


﻿C. Project Description
The project is intended to support the Government's dam safety program consisting of about 1,150
dams. This will be achieved by supporting both the structural safety of the dams and reservoirs
themselves, along with the operational safety required to safeguard the populations at risk and
downstream socio-economic infrastructure. This is directly aligned with the Government definition
of dam safety outlined in Decree 72. The project will also support Government to ensure a more
holistic, basin level integrated development planning approach to improve institutional coordination,
a       future development and operational safety.
The selection of dams to be rehabilitated under the project will be based on an a priori agreed
selection criteria aimed at prioritizing those interventions that address the risks within an explicit
poverty and inequality framework. Prioritization will be based on the probability and impact of
failure, both in terms of population impacted and socio economic infrastructure, including structural
risks, hydrological risk, downstream hazard and economic benefits. These will be categorized further
according to the level of readiness, to prioritize those within the set of dams ready for rehabilitation
with detailed engineering designs and those requiring rehabilitation for which detailed designs are
still required. Established procedures for prioritizing interventions developed by International
Commission on Large Dams (ICOLD) and others - for example Portfolio Risk Assessment - will be
applied. Building on lessons learned from Vietnam Water Resources Assistance Project this activity
will establish clear criteria to measure the dam safety risks in the future, including (i) Probability of
dam failure (structural risks based on height and storage volume); (ii) Impact of dam failure on
downstream populations; (iii) Impact of dam failure on downstream infrastructure; (iv) Poverty
context and impact; (v) Areas with ethnic minorities; and (vi) Readiness.
The project is designed to improve the safety of the dams and related works for about 500 dams in
different sizes, as well as the safety of people and socio-economic infrastructure of the downstream
communities as defined in Decree 72 governing the management of dam safety in Vietnam. This
adopts the international convention in defining dams based on height and volume. Specifically, the
Decree defines the following: (i) large dams from 15m high or with reservoir capacity of three
million cubic meters or more; (ii) medium dams from 1 Om to 15m high or dams with reservoir
capacity from one to three million cubic meters; and (iii) small dams from 5m to 1 Om high or dams
with reservoir capacity between 50,000 and one million cubic meters.
The project would be an optimized mix of both structural and non-structural measures. Structural
measures include rehabilitation and upgrading safety work of existing dams, including reshaping of
slopes, strengthening and treatment of spillways, grouting for seepage control, structure stabilization,
replacement of hydro-mechanical works and safety monitoring instrumentations, such as safety
monitoring equipment. Such physical works represent the large part of the project budget (>80%).
Non-structural dam safety activities, which are a critical and key component of the Bank-supported
activities under the project, would include support to strengthen the legal and institutional
framework; safety monitoring; operational procedures, operations and maintenance (O&M); and
emergency preparedness plans. These measures also include an assessment of the resources to
ensure sustained O&M and monitoring.
It is proposed that the project consist of four principle components.
Component 1: Dam Safety Rehabilitation (estimated cost = US$400 million)
This component will improve dam safety through physical rehabilitation of existing infrastructure.
This will include two different approaches required for the rehabilitation of large/medium and small,


﻿community-managed dams. The difference between the two relates not only to the types of works
and the regulatory framework, but also the institutional and implementation arrangements required to
undertake such works and ensure their sustainable operation and maintenance. This would include
support to (i) Detailed design, supervision and quality control of rehabilitation works for prioritized
dams and associated infrastructure; (ii) rehabilitation works, including civil works, such as slope
strengthening, structural stabilization, seepage control and spillway treatment, hydro-mechanical
works and installation of hydrological and safety monitoring equipment; (iii) preparation of
Operation and Maintenance Plans and Emergency Preparedness Plans; and (iv) adoption of
standardized checklist for community-managed dams.
Component 2: Dam Safety Management and Planning (estimated cost = US$90 million)
This component will improve the planning and operational framework for dam management to
safeguard the people and socio-economic infrastructure within downstream communities. This would
include provision of support to: (i) hydrological observation network and information systems; (ii)
integrated development planning and operational coordination mechanisms between irrigation and
hydropower reservoirs; (iii) regulatory and institutional support and strengthening on coordination
mechanism including national dam policy on registration, regulation, inspection, safety compliance
and penalties; (iv) technical specifications, safety standards and regulations to internationally-
accepted levels; and (v) capacity enhancement, basin-wide integrated dam reservoir operation plans,
emergency preparedness plan including dam break analysis, downstream flood mapping and
benchmarking, awareness raising and evacuation drills for local communities living downstream.
Component 3: Project Management Support (estimated cost = US$10 million)
This component will provide the necessary enabling environment to support project implementation.
This will include support for the following: (i) Project Steering Committee composed of MARD,
MolT and MoNRE to coordinate all project interventions; (ii) Project Management Unit (PMU)
within MARD to provide the necessary support services for timely and effective project
implementation, including monitoring & evaluation, procurement, financial management, safeguard
monitoring, etc.; (iii)Technical Assistance for beneficiary departments within MolT and MoNRE to
provide the necessary support services for timely and effective project implementation; (iv)
Establishment and operations of a National Dam Safety Review Panel; (v) Independent audits of
prioritized dams before and after rehabilitation; and (vi) Incremental operating costs for project
related activities.
Component 4: Disaster Contingency (US$ 0 million - no fixed allocation, but not to exceed 20% of
the total project cost)
This component will improve the response capacity of the Government in case of an emergency
relating to dam failure during project implementation. In the event of an emergency, this contingency
component would facilitate rapid utilization of loan proceeds by minimizing the number of
processing steps and modifying fiduciary and safeguard requirements so as to support rapid
implementation. This component would allow expenditures to be made in accordance with the rapid
response procedures of OP/BP 10.00 subject to the list of positive goods and services to be defined
during project development. Such a component is not a substitution for insurance, and does not
remove the need for construction covering dams included under the project. A generic positive list
may be combined with a list of excluded goods that could trigger safeguard policies. This is intended
to help ensure sufficient liquidity in the case of an emergency by financing the government's overall
response to the emergency and providing some measure of protection to Government's fiscal
accounts.


﻿D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will support rehabilitation of prioritized dams of various sizes across Vietnam. The
majority of these works are located in mountainous areas. Since the project is associated with
rehabilitation of existing dams, there will be no major alterations in the existing land use patterns.
The exact locations of the dams to be rehabilitated will be known during project preparation.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD).
MARD is experienced in implementing various World Bank-financed projects including dam safety
elements, for example VWRAP closed in 2010, and has demonstrated reasonable implementation
capacity. MARD also has an established Dam Safety Unit and is familiar with Bank procedures and
policies including environmental and social safeguards. Further to that, the proposed project is also
intended to strengthen the Borrower capacity in handling environmental and social aspects of dam
rehabilitation, operations and maintenance.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Tuan Anh Le (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will support the physical rehabilitation of
OP/BP 4.01                              existing dams, mostly built during the 1980s and
1990s, which have deteriorated over time.
Deterioration is due to a range of reasons including
initial construction quality, operation and
maintenance and so on. A large majority of the
estimated 500 dams to be rehabilitated under the
Q)                                              project are earth-filled dams and considered small
dams with height of less than 15m and design
volume of less than 3 million cubic meters (MCM).
Approximately 10% of the dams to be rehabilitated
are large dams which are over 15m high, or between
5 and 15m with reservoir storage in excess of 3
MCM in designed volume. The small dams are
being operated at community and district levels.
Large dams are managed and operated at provincial
levels through Irrigation Management Companies
which generally have good technical capacity. The
Bank will provide a concessional credit amount up to
US$500 million for activities envisaged under this
project. The Government of Vietnam will provide
approximately US$50 million to pay for preparatory
works including land acquisition, compensation
following the agreed resettlement policy framework.
If national dam rehabilitation program sub-projects
are co-financed by GoV or other sources, WB


﻿safeguard policies will apply, regardless of the
source of financing.
The project will not support significant structural
modifications or expansion, such as increases in the
heights of dams and/or significant changes in the
capacity and operation of reservoirs. Rehabilitation
under Component 1 is expected to include the
following types of interventions: (a) reshaping of
main and auxiliary dams; (b) slope stabilization,
using concrete slabsor stone paving combined with
greening measures; (c) strengthening or expansion of
existing spillways to increase the discharge capacity;
(d) refurbishment of existing intake structures, (e)
replacement of mechanical and electrical systems at
Intakes and spillways; (f) grouting or earthworks for
seepage control; and (g) improvement of the existing
access roads.
The socio-economic and environmental impacts of
the project during operation phase are expected to be
largely positive as the rehabilitation works and
improved operating procedures would reduce flood
risk downstream, both from large water releases due
to poor operation and dam failure, and potentially
improve overall management of water resources
within the basin. The potential social and
environmental impacts of Component 2 are minimal
and will be managed by incorporating social and
environmental requirements into institutional studies,
improved operational procedures and technical
assistance. However, dam rehabilitation under
Component I has some potential negative impacts
from pre-construction and construction activities.
Potential risks include (i) ground disturbance, loss or
damage to vegetation cover due to site clearance for
camp and work sites; (ii) increased level of dust and
noise, solid waste and wastewater generated and
discharged from construction sites, site office and
workers camps; (iii) increased erosion and sediment
discharge and disruption to local drainage (for
example due to open borrow pits and disposal sites);
(iv) localized health and safety risks for workers and
communities in the vicinity of the worksites; and (vi)
temporary disturbance to local communities.
Rehabilitation of existing dams may also raise some


﻿social and environmental legacy issues related to the
development of the original dams/reservoirs, such as
resettlement and impacts on areas of environmental
or cultural/historical importance.
The proposed Project has been classified as
Environmental Category A by the World Bank due to
the complexity of the potential impacts, issues and
risks mentioned above. The Project will need to
comply with the World Bank Safeguard Policies and
Vietnamese environmental management legislation.
During project preparation, the following safeguard
documents will be prepared and submitted for the
Bank to review and clear:
*      Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment Reports (ESIA) for the subprojects
implemented under Component 1 in the first year.
The ESIA will include potential social and
environmental impacts screening, assessment,
mitigation measures, institutional arrangement,
monitoring and reporting requirements. etc.
*      An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to identify specific instruments
that will be prepared during project implementation
based on a typology of subprojects. For all
subprojects, the design process will include a
screening and review of possible social and
environmental safeguard legacy issues and propose
necessary and feasible interventions. As such, the
ESMF will include provisions to identify and address
possible legacy issues, including: (i) screening
criteria; (ii) potential legacy issues; and, (iii) whether
and how the legacy issues can be addressed,
depending on the type and range of identified legacy
issues.
Public consultations will be carried out during the
preparation of the above-mentioned safeguard tools.
The Bank will review and comment on the draft
safeguard reports. The Final Draft safeguard reports
in the English and Vietnamese languages will be
disclosed by the Bank, and summary of safeguard
tools presented in suitable language will be disclosed
locally before project appraisal. Safeguard
documents prepared during project implementation
will also meet the Bank's requirements on public
consultations and information disclosure.


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           The project physical activities would only work on
existing dams and are not expected to lead to any
impacts on critical or semi-critical natural habitats.
The locations of subproject are not known at this
stage. The ESIA for each sub-project will scope,
screen and assess potential impacts to natural
habitants according to the ESMF. No separate
instrument is required for natural habitats. Adverse
impacts on natural habitats will be avoided or
mitigated through appropriate management
measures.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           TBD          The proposed project will not have any impact on the
health and quality of forests, the rights and welfare of
people and their level of dependence upon or
interaction with forests; or the management,
protection, or utilization of natural forests or
plantations. Integrated watershed management is
potentially supported but is not expected to impact
natural forests.
As sites are not yet identified the policy is set as
'TBD' at the concept stage with a caveat that the
determination of whether this is triggered or not will
be done during preparation. Sub-project ESIAs will
scope and screen for this policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           The project is intended to improve the safety of
prioritized dams and reservoirs in order to protect the
population and assets of downstream communities
from the risk of dam failure. Irrigation expansion or
agricultural water supply is not an aim of the project.
The project will not finance any procurement of
fertilizers and pesticides. Accordingly, the policy
has not been triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes           Some dams may have cultural property associated
OP/BP 4.11                                with them that may be impacted by dam
strengthening activities. A Cultural Property Action
Framework would be developed as part of the ESMF
to safeguard these properties during rehabilitation.
This safeguard policy has been triggered as advance
precautionary measure.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          The project will support rehabilitation/ upgrading of
4.10                                      several reservoirs/dams of various sizes across
Vietnam. Since most of these works are located in
the upstream/ mountainous areas where ethnic
minority peoples may live, this policy is triggered. A
social assessment (SA) as an integral part of the
ESIA mentioned in OP4.01 will be carried out in a


﻿sample of potential candidate dams, including dams
where ethnic minority communities reside, to address
the requirements of OP4.01, OP4.10 and OP4.12.
The SA will carry out a screening of potential
impacts (both positive and negative), disseminate
project information among ethnic minority
communities, carry out public consultations and
incorporate their overall perceptions, attitudes and
recommendations into project development. The SA
will confirm whether there is broad support from
local ethnic minority communities for the project.
Based on the SA, the project will prepare an Ethnic
Minority Policy Framework (EMPF). The EMPF
will guide preparation of Ethnic Minority
Development Plans (EMDP) for specific subprojects.
Where applicable, EMDP(s) for identified
subprojects will be prepared prior to project appraisal
for subproject(s) scheduled for implementation in the
first year of the project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The Project will require land acquisition (permanent
BP 4.12                                   and temporary) for the rehabilitation of the selected
dams. These activities may affect houses, assets,
crops, perennial trees, graves and livelihood of the
households living in the vicinity of the works.
However, the magnitude of adverse impact (as a
result of land acquisition) is anticipated to be small
given that no new construction is planned and the
relatively small scale of works. A Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed to guide
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) for
subprojects during project implementation. RAPs for
subprojects to be implemented in the first year, will
be prepared prior to project appraisal. The design
process for all subprojects will include a screening
and review of possible social safeguard legacy issues
and propose necessary and feasible interventions - as
specified above.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    Yes          The project will not finance construction of any new
dams or significant changes in dam/reservoir
structure and capacity. This policy is triggered due to
the planned rehabilitation of existing dams, including
large dams. It is therefore mandatory to engage
independent dam specialists to (a) inspect and
evaluate the safety status of the existing dam, its
appurtenances, and its performance history; (b)
review and evaluate the owner's procedures for
operations and maintenance; and (c) provide written


﻿report of findings and recommendations for any
remedial work or safety-related measures necessary
to upgrade the existing dam to an acceptable standard
of safety. Policy and practice relating to dam safety
needs to meet international benchmarks, such as
those laid out by ICOLD and the World Bank
regulatory frameworks for dam safety. These
measures are designed into the project, which
includes the establishment of a national dam safety
review panel (DSRP). The project will also establish
an independent Panel of dam safety Experts (PoE)
including international expertise who will carry out
independent review of dam safety reports and
proposed mitigation measures. This PoE will work
closely with the DSRP to ensure the technical
integrity of investment interventions.
Projects on International     Yes          There are six transboundary river basins in the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       country; however Vietnam is an upstream riparian
only in the Sesan-Srepok basin - a tributary of the
Mekong, upstream of Cambodia, and the Bang
Giang-Ky Cung basin, upstream of China. It is
expected that some of the dams will be located on
international river basins and therefore the policy is
triggered, however there are not expected to be
transboundary impacts as project activities are
limited to rehabilitation. A waiver for notification
will therefore be sought in accordance with the
Operational Policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project is not located in any disputed areas.
BP 7.60
O
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
*      Launching ESMF, RPF and other framework documents:          12-Dec-2014
*      Launching RAP, ESIA and other sub project documents:        05-Feb-2015
*      Completing and disclosing all safeguard documents:      15-May-2015
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:     Name: Cuong Hung Pham
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                          Date: 26-Nov-2014
Coordinator:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Practice Manager!   Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                 Date: 10-Dec-2014
Manager:
>1
0
0
0
Ut
0
Ut
0
>1
0
0
0
Ut
0
0
Ut
0


