                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA10306
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Feb-2013, 06-Jun-2014, 26-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                       Project ID:    P132317
                            Project Name:      Philippine Rural Development Project (P132317)
                            Task Team          Carolina V. Figueroa-Gero
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Feb-2013                       Estimated   29-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal          Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban
                                              Roads and Highways (40%), Irrigation and drainage (10% )
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Climate change (20%), Rural markets
                                              (20%), Decentralization (10%), Rural non-farm income ge neration (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     671.59           Total Bank Financing:                501.25
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                163.34
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   501.25
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                         7.00
                              Total                                                                                   671.59
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The PRDP aims to increase rural incomes and enhance farm and fishery productivity in the
                            targeted areas by supporting smallholders and fisher folk to increase their marketable surpluses,
Public Disclosure Copy




                            and their access to markets. This will be achieved through: (a) supporting changes in agricultural
                            and fisheries planning, resource programming and implementation practices; and (b) financing
                            priority local investments in rural infrastructure and enterprise development derived from
                            agricultural and fisheries modernization plans, using a value chain approach, and through
                            stakeholder consultations.

                            The results indicators for the Project are: (a) at least five (5) percent increase per year in real
                            household annual incomes of farmer and fisherfolk beneficiaries; (b) thirty (30) percent increase
                            in incomes for targeted beneficiaries involved in enterprise development; (c) seven (7) percent
                            increase in value of annual marketed output; and (d) twenty (20) percent increase in the number
                            of farmers and fisherfolk with improved access to Department of Agriculture services.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            The Global Environment Objective (GEO) is to strengthen the conservation of the coastal and
                            marine resource base in targeted project areas. This will be achieved through (a) enhancing
                            institutional and planning capacities of local governments and communities; (b) providing
                            support to marine protected areas with global biodiversity significance and select fishery co-
                            management arrangements; and (c) sharing of knowledge and best practices.
                         3. Project Description
                         PRDP would have four inter-linked components: Local and National Level Planning, Infrastructure
                         Development, Enterprise Development, and Project Implementation Support. The Local and National
                         Level Planning Component will strengthen the institutional planning and budgeting modalities
                         needed to implement the Project, while the Project Implementation Support Component will
                         encompass the implementation aspects, including the mainstreaming and harmonizing of PRDP
                         modalities with the Department of Agriculture's other programs. The Infrastructure and Enterprise
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development Components would support small-scale producers and enterprises to increase their
                         productivity and marketable surpluses through improvements in infrastructure, technical services and
                         facilitated market linkages, marketing contracts and use of private sector providers, agricultural and
                         fisheries state universities and colleges, for the delivery of extension services.

                         Component 1: Local and National Level Planning (US$ 14.29 million IBRD and US$ 1.40 million
                         GEF grant)

                         (a)     Subcomponent 1.1: Enhancing the Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Planning
                         (AFMP) Process (US$ 11.61 million IBRD and US$ 1.40 million GEF grant). (a) Rationalization of
                         the DA’s planning, programming and budgeting processes related to the development of AFMPs as
                         the main basis of decision making and operations in the DA at the national, regional and local levels;
                         and (b) Support for natural resource planning, management and resource utilization in selected
                         marine protected areas.

                         (b)     Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting AFMP Implementation (US$ 2.68 million IBRD). Design of
                         coordinated systems of technical support for the implementation of Sub-projects prioritized in the
                         provincial commodity investment plans (PCIPs).

                         Component 2: Infrastructure Development (US$ 361.71 million IBRD)


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         (a)     Sub-component 2.1: Value Chain Infrastructure Support (US$ 354.47 million IBRD).
                         Carrying out of specific Sub-projects to support infrastructure development by LGUs in priority
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commodity value chains (including, among others, farm-to-market roads, bridges, tire tracks,
                         communal irrigation, potable water systems, post-harvest facilities, production facilities, fish
                         landings, fish sanctuaries, tram lines, storage facilities, trading posts, green houses, solar driers,
                         watch towers, and slope stabilization works).

                         Cost sharing between the Department of Agriculture and the concerned LGU would be on 90:10
                         basis. Provincial Governments would be responsible for funding the O& M of investments. Criteria
                         for the selection, design, implementation, O&M and sustainability are detailed in the Operations
                         Manual for the component. Geo-tagging would be used to facilitate planning, procurement, and
                         monitoring of sub-projects.

                         (b)      Sub-component 2.2: Approaches for Improving the Effectiveness and Sustainability of
                         Infrastructure Investments (US$ 7.23 million IBRD). Development of technical specifications for
                         climate resiliency and disaster risk mitigation for local infrastructure.

                         Technical training and workshops to enhance the capabilities of DA-RFOs and LGUs will also be
                         conducted.

                         Component 3: Enterprise Development (US$ 100 million IBRD and US$ 5.60 million GEF grant).

                         (a)      Subcomponent 3.1: Rural agri-fishery enterprise and product ivity enhancement (US$ 90
                         million IBRD and US$ 3.36 million GEF Grant). (i) Carrying out of specific Sub-projects to support
                         vertical and horizontal clustering, joint business planning and investments by producer groups/
                         enterprises operating within priority commodity value chains; and (ii) Promotion of biodiversity
                         conservation and coastal resource co-management arrangements, as well as carrying out sustainable
                         income-generating livelihood activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Funding would be shared by the DA and provincial LGUs (PLGUs) on 80:20 basis. PLGUs would
                         assist proponent groups through capital investments, facilities, inputs and technical assistance.
                         Funding for enterprises would range from PhP 1-15 million with proponent groups contributing an
                         amount equal to at least 20% (in cash or in kind) of the incremental enterprise cost. The lead
                         proponent, an organized producer group or small- or medium-scale processor, would be responsible
                         for procurement and O&M of the approved investments. Criteria for lead proponent selection would
                         be: (a) acceptability to proponent group members; (b) broad network within the commodity sector;
                         (c) access to resources; and (d) proven track record in managing an organization.

                         GEF support will be catalytic in terms of ensuring that biodiversity conservation and coastal
                         resources co-management arrangements are included in the determination of interventions needed to
                         support commodity value chains.

                         (b)     Subcomponent 3.2: Technology and Information for Enterprise and Market Development
                         (US$ 10 million IBRD and US$ 2.24 million GEF Grant). Provision of technical assistance to
                         producers to increase their productivity and incomes through improved and sustainable
                         technological, operational and market knowledge and facilitation of market linkages.

                         A particular focus would be on facilitating vertical integration and trade facilitation. New and

                                                                        Page 3 of 13
                         sustainable technologies and approaches would be introduced in collaboration with other agencies.
                         Technical assistance requirements would be determined as part of the annual PCIP process and
                         would be provided by DA agencies or contracted by the Province with private service providers
Public Disclosure Copy




                         based on available expertise.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation Support (US$ 24million IBRD)

                         (a)   Provision of technical and operational assistance for the day-to-day coordination,
                         implementation, monitoring, evaluation and audit of the Project.

                                 To accommodate the short-term staff constraints, the project would provide for the
                         contracting of service providers (from within and outside the region) to meet specific project needs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The PRDP will be implemented nationwide, in all 16 regions of the Philippines. In general, sub
                         projects will be located in rural, agricultural and coastal areas of Luzon, Mindanao and Visayas
                         islands. Some sub projects will be located in areas with indigenous people or in areas that have been
                         declared as the ancestral domain of certain indigenous people groups.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Josefo Tuyor (OPSOR)
                         Jonas Garcia Bautista (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The Project will fund rural infrastructure, agri-
                          BP 4.01                                             enterprise development sub projects and technical
                                                                              assistance to the Department of Agriculture (DA)
                                                                              and Local Government Units (LGUs). These
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              activities are expected to have environmental and
                                                                              social impacts, hence the policy is triggered.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             Given that the sub projects are implemented
                                                                              nationwide, most of which will be identified
                                                                              during implementation, it is highly likely that
                                                                              some sub projects would affect natural habitats,
                                                                              hence this policy is triggered. However, the
                                                                              Project will not finance sub projects that would
                                                                              significantly degrade or convert critical natural
                                                                              habitats. The Project however will support sub
                                                                              projects that would improve the management of
                                                                              natural resources such as near shore marine areas
                                                                              by supporting community-managed marine
                                                                              protected areas, fish sanctuaries, mangroves and
                                                                              coral reef rehabilitation.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes             The policy is triggered as the Project may fund
                                                                              mangrove rehabilitation as part of its support to
                                                                              coastal/marine resource management. Other NRM
                                                                              activities that will benefit existing forests may


                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                                                                             also be financed.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes            The project will fund crop production and post-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             harvest activities which may inevitably involve
                                                                             use of pesticides, although the project itself would
                                                                             not finance purchase of pesticides. Use of
                                                                             pesticides may also increase in PRDP-supported
                                                                             areas when commercial production increases in
                                                                             these areas. For these reasons, the policy is
                                                                             triggered.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The PRDP is unlikely to affect any physical
                            BP 4.11                                          cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes            Some provinces where PRDP will operate have
                                                                             known presence of indigenous peoples (IPs). For
                                                                             this reason, OP 4.10 is triggered. The Social
                                                                             Assessment conducted during the preparation of
                                                                             MRDP found that indigenous peoples are often
                                                                             socially and economically marginalized. There is
                                                                             a possibility that they will be unable to participate
                                                                             in the planning and development process and/or
                                                                             share the benefits of the project, if measures are
                                                                             not properly in place.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Rural infrastructure sub projects may involve
                            4.12                                             involuntary land acquisition which in rare cases
                                                                             may entail displacement of homes and/or
                                                                             livelihood. Crops and properties may also be
                                                                             damaged or temporarily affected by construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             activities and farm owners would need to be
                                                                             justly compensated.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes            The PRDP will finance communal irrigation
                                                                             systems which may involve dam construction or
                                                                             rehabilitation. These dams will be small dams as
                                                                             defined under OP 4.37 (i.e., dams with height of
                                                                             less than 15 meters) and most likely be ogee weirs
                                                                             for run-of-river irrigation systems or dirt dams for
                                                                             small water impounding.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP/BP4.01 (Environmental Assessments) - The project is not expected to have large scale,


                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                         significant and/or irreversible impacts based on the actual experience of implementing the First
                         and Second Mindanao Rural Development Projects (MRDP1 and MRDP2), which are the
                         predecessors of PRDP. The types and nature of sub projects to be supported are assessed to cause
Public Disclosure Copy




                         localized and temporary environmental and social impacts, which can be readily mitigated through
                         proper planning, design and engineering measures. These impacts include loss of vegetation, soil
                         erosion and sedimentation of waterways, and elevated levels of noise and dust during construction.

                         OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management) – It is a policy of the Philippine Department of Agriculture not to
                         fund purchase of pesticides hence the project will not be financing the procurement and purchase
                         of chemical pesticides. However, the Project could indirectly result in increased use of pesticides.
                         The Project will be financing crop and animal production, post-harvest handling and processing
                         enterprises which may involve the use of pesticides from time to time using other sources of funds.
                         Also, pesticide use may increase over time in the influence areas of infrastructure sub projects as
                         commercial production increases in these areas due to improved market access.

                         OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitat) – Based on experience with MRDP1 and MRDP2, rural
                         infrastructure may affect natural habitats during construction. The year 1 Infrastructure sub
                         projects have been assessed and some sub projects could affect natural habitats.

                         OP/BP 4.36 (Forests) – The World Bank Policy on Forests was not triggered under MRDP1 and
                         MRDP2. However, experiences under these projects indicate that the PRDP’s support to natural
                         resource management would include management and rehabilitation of mangrove areas and
                         watersheds, which may change and improve the management regimes of these areas.

                         OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) – MRDP2 did not trigger this policy. However, based on MRDP2
                         experience, there will be sub projects that would involve construction or rehabilitation of ogee
                         weirs for run-of-river irrigation systems. It was observed that small run-of-river diversion dams do
                         not really impound large volume of water. The safety issues for these dams often relate to
                         accidental drowning of children at intake and the ogee weirs which are sometimes used by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         residents as footpaths to cross rivers. The same issues are expected under PRDP. The Borrower
                         has indicated that the Project may fund water impounding dams of up to less than 15 meters high,
                         the safety concerns would now also include potential breach of dam structures.

                         OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) – Under MRDP2, minority groups were purposively targeted as
                         beneficiaries of the project to meet the project's poverty alleviation objectives. Under PRDP, sub
                         projects could be located in areas where there are IP communities as well.

                         OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) – Infrastructure sub projects and facilities to be
                         rehabilitated or constructed under the project could involve involuntary land acquisition which, in
                         rare cases (based on MRDP experience), may entail displacement of homes and/or livelihood.
                         Crops and properties may also be damaged or temporarily affected by construction activities and
                         farm owners would need to be justly compensated.

                         Procedural and Capacity Issues – Since social and environmental safeguards for this project
                         would rely on frameworks, the greatest challenge would be the establishment of an internal system
                         of screening, assessment, planning, review and approval of sub projects on safeguard aspects and
                         the building of capacities within the various units of the project organization to implement
                         safeguards system. These will be addressed through enhanced staffing for safeguards, capability
                         trainings, and close supervision and monitoring, especially in the first two years of the project.

                                                                   Page 6 of 13
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The indirect and long term impacts would include: (a) potential agricultural encroachment into
Public Disclosure Copy




                           forest areas where farm-to-market roads will be rehabilitated and/or built; and (b) potential
                           increased use of pesticides due to increased commercial production in project-supported areas. The
                           LGUs and Regional Project Coordination Offices need to be aware of these potential impacts. In
                           very critical areas such as upland areas near public forests, LGUs would be required to submit
                           sustainable agriculture development/watershed management plans and to implement measures to
                           prevent further human encroachments into the forests. LGUs are also required to avail of the
                           Department of Agriculture's Integrated Pest Management – Farmer Field School (IPM-FFS)
                           program, which the project will support.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Project has adopted a set of general policies pertaining to the types and location of
                           infrastructure or development in the project areas, which were formulated under MRDP2. These
                           policies will guide LGUs on the proper use of the uplands, lowlands, and coastal areas. In
                           addition, alternatives will be considered at the sub projects level. All sub projects are subjected to
                           social and environmental screening in order to encourage LGUs to consider various
                           environmentally and socially sound alternative sites and subproject configurations.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Under MRDP1 and 2, three separate frameworks were prepared by the Borrower: (A)
                           Environmental Management Framework and Guidelines (EMFG), (B) IPPF, and (C) LARRF.
                           These frameworks would govern the processes and procedures, and documentary requirements in
                           the validation, screening, preparation, evaluation, approval and monitoring of sub projects in order
                           to ensure compliance with the various applicable safeguard policies of the World Bank. Under
                           PRDP, these frameworks have been updated and consolidated into an Integrated Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and Social Safeguards (IESSF) to facilitate on-the-ground application and implementation and to
                           have better integration between environmental and social issues and measures at the subproject
                           level. Public consultations on the IESSF were held from October 2012 to June 2014. The IESSF
                           had been disclosed in-country on December 12, 2012 and in the Infoshop on December 17, 2012.
                           This was re-disclosed in-country on June 5, 2014 and in the Infoshop on July 18, 2014.

                           In addition to EMFG, IPPF and LARRF, a Grievance Redress Mechanism Framework (GRMF)
                           has been adopted which requires that a grievance redress procedure shall be set up within each
                           participating LGU for airing and resolving grievances pertaining to the implementation of the
                           project activities.

                           (A) EMFG. This is designed to ensure that PRDP sub projects comply with the Philippine
                           Environmental Impact Statement Law (P.D. 1586) as well as the World Bank policies on
                           Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitat (OP 4.04), Forest (OP 4.36), Pest
                           Management (OP 4.09) and Safety of Dams (OP 4.37) which are triggered in PRDP. It contains:
                           (1) general policies pertaining to types and locations of agricultural development; (2) technical
                           environmental guidelines and design specifications for the most common sub projects; (3) detailed
                           description of the documentary requirements and the processes and procedures for screening and
                           evaluating the environmental aspects of subproject proposals; the procedures were designed to
                           facilitate compliance and ensure sub projects are cleared of safeguards requirements before being


                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                         approved for implementation; (4) guidance in preparing and evaluating the environmental aspects
                         of subproject proposals; and (5) various forms and templates. Under the EMFG, participating
                         LGUs are encouraged to adopt land use and protection policies which would help determine the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         types and locations of agricultural development in their areas. All Sub project proposals will
                         undergo environmental and social screening to determine their eligibility and the applicable
                         safeguard requirements vis-à-vis other World Bank safeguard policies, and to determine coverage
                         under the Philippine Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) law (PD 1586). Sub projects that are
                         deemed covered under the Philippine EIS law be required to secure Environmental Compliance
                         Certificate (ECC) from DENR. For sub projects deemed not covered under the PD 1586, the
                         Feasibility Studies of these sub projects shall include sections on Environmental and Social
                         Assessments which shall be the bases for the preparation of sub project's Environmental and
                         Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The Environmental and Social Assessment sections of the FS
                         will include assessments of impacts to natural habitats, forests, pesticide use, physical cultural
                         properties, involuntary resettlement and land acquisition and Indigenous People. The mostly
                         localized impacts of construction will be mitigated through strict adherence to guidelines in terms
                         of site selection, technical and engineering design and adoption of measures in operations and
                         maintenance systems. The required management measures of the applicable safeguard policies
                         will also be reflected in the ESMPs. The EMFG also provides for the following requirements:

                         (1) Pest Management. Sub projects proposals which involve procurement of chemical pesticides
                         using Project funds (i.e. including proponent's equity) shall be ineligible for funding, consistent
                         with the policy of the Department of Agriculture. The potential increase in use of pesticide will be
                         addressed through the promotion and support of Integrated Pest Management system under the
                         DA’s successful KASAKALIKASAN program, which is already widely practiced in the
                         Philippines. Hence, no separate Integrated Pest Management Plan for the Project was prepared.
                         For sub projects that would require regular application of pesticides, beneficiaries will be required
                         to attend a seminar on the proper use, handling and storage of pesticides and IPM.

                         (2) Natural Habitat. Sub projects that would significantly convert or degrade critical natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         habitats shall not be eligible for PRDP funding. The EMFG includes provision for screening of
                         sub projects for impacts on natural habitats and measures to address these impacts.

                         (3) Forests. The EMFG has the provisions for screening of sub projects for impacts on forest,
                         forest health and forest-dependent communities and measures in case impacts arise.

                         (4) Safety of Dams. Only small dams as defined in OP/BP 4.37 will be eligible for funding which
                         include dams of less than 15 meters in height. Proposals for dams of up to 10 meters will follow
                         the procedures outlined in the EMFG, while those which are more than 10 meters to less than 15
                         meters in height would need to follow the procedures outlined in OP/BP 4.37 and would require
                         prior evaluation and approval from the Bank. All dams that qualify for funding should be designed
                         and supervised by a qualified engineer. The environmental assessment section of the feasibility
                         studies of sub projects involving dams shall include a brief risk assessment of dam failure and
                         impacts on environment and on downstream communities and assets with corresponding
                         mitigating measures reflected in the ESMP. Moreover, sub projects involving dams should submit
                         dam safety plans which should include measures against accidental drowning at dam sites.

                         (B) IPPF. Based on the social assessment conducted during the preparation of MRDP, indigenous
                         peoples are often socially and economically marginalized in the areas where they are a minority.
                         Unlike the First and the Second MRDP, PRDP will not purposively target IP communities.

                                                                    Page 8 of 13
                         Instead, under the IPPF prepared by the Borrower, the Project will ensure that: (1) IP communities
                         in the regions and provinces are able to meaningfully participate in the conduct of I-PLAN
                         activities, including the preparation of the Provincial Commodity Investment Plans (PCIPs); (2)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the selection, screening and preparation of sub projects under the infrastructure and enterprise
                         development components will be undertaken with the involvement and participation of the IP
                         communities in the target areas in partnership with National Commission on Indigenous People
                         (NCIP) and the Local Government Units; and (3) whenever the proposed subproject site is located
                         within or will directly impact on any declared or proposed ICC/IP Ancestral Domain, the
                         requirements for government-sponsored development projects under the Indigenous Peoples
                         Rights Act (IPRA) as stipulated in the Free and Prior Informed Consent (FPIC) Guidelines (i.e.
                         NCIP Admin Order No.1 Series of 2006 or its successor issuances) are complied with. Otherwise,
                         if the project site is situated outside any declared or proposed Ancestral Domain but nevertheless
                         will directly affect and/or benefit any ICC/IP community or communities, a “free and prior
                         informed consultation” is undertaken, to provide for broad community support for the subproject.
                         The updated IPPF also requires that sub projects in IP areas undertake “free and prior informed
                         consultation” to provide for “broad community support”. In addition, the updated IPPF also
                         requires an IP Plan where the affected/benefited ICC/IP community is not the proponent or where
                         they constitute only a minority in the sub project area. To guide IPP preparation, an IPP template
                         has been developed and provided as an Annex in the IESSF.

                         (C) LARRF. This framework will ensure that all involuntary losses (i.e. whether lands, structures,
                         crops or other properties) of project-affected persons (PAPs) are properly and justly compensated
                         and all those who are displaced (whether physically or economically) are resettled and/or provided
                         with assistance to improve, or at least maintain, their pre-Project living standards and income
                         earning capacities. The LARRF prepared by the Borrower spells out the documentary
                         requirements and the processes and procedures to be followed in securing sites and easement for
                         sub projects and in compensating project-affected persons for any damaged crops or properties.
                         Under the LARRF, subproject proponents are required to conduct and submit the results of PAP
                         and entitlement survey, conduct and submit evidences of consultations with the PAPs regarding
Public Disclosure Copy




                         their compensation, and proper land acquisition documents. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                         would be required whenever there are PAPs to be physically or economically displaced by the
                         subproject.

                         (D) GRMF. The project requires that a Grievance Redress Mechanism be set up within each
                         participating LGU which shall conform to the Framework and which shall serve all components
                         and activities of the Project being undertaken within the LGU, including implementation of any
                         RAP. The framework which can be found in the PRDP ESSF outlines the key aspects of the
                         grievance redress process from submission to the resolution of complaints.

                         (E) Implementation Arrangements. The PRDP will be implemented by the Department of
                         Agriculture (DA) and participating provincial and local government units all over the country. In
                         terms of the preparation and implementation of safeguards, the accountability would rest primarily
                         on the concerned LGUs with DA providing technical support and oversight. For sub projects under
                         Component 3.1, while sub project implementation will rest primarily with the proponent
                         beneficiary groups, safeguards preparation and implementation will still be the main responsibility
                         and accountability of the concerned LGUs. Within DA, three (3) additional Program Support
                         Offices (PSOs) will be organized, one for Visayas and two for Luzon. The existing Mindanao
                         Rural Development Project PSO will eventually be absorbed under PRDP to serve the Mindanao
                         regions. These PSOs will be responsible for orchestrating project activities and providing support

                                                                  Page 9 of 13
                           to participating DA Regional Field Offices (RFOs) within the three main island groups. To
                           facilitate project coordination at the region, a Regional Program Coordinating Office (RPCO) has
                           been organized in each of the sixteen (16) DA RFUs. Except for Mindanao, environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           social safeguard capacities of these RFOs are still weak. For these RFOs, the Project has provided
                           staffing complement for safeguards in the RPCOs, which are being trained and oriented in the past
                           year on the basic elements of safeguards frameworks and guidelines, environmental and social
                           assessments, subproject screening, preparation, review and approval process, as well as the
                           preparation of ESMPs. DA has already designated Safeguards focal persons for the NPCO, PSO
                           and RPCOs. Consultations on the ESSF have been conducted among DA-RFUs and LGUs in
                           various regions of the country from October 8, 2012 to June 2014. The IESSF has been updated
                           and integrated into the Project Operations Manuals.

                           (F) Implementation Capacity Aspects. To address any inadequacy of skills in assessing and
                           reviewing environmental and social aspects of sub projects, a guideline for preparing and
                           reviewing the Environmental and Social Assessment section of the Feasibility Studies have been
                           developed while ESMP templates have been developed for the most common infrastructure sub
                           projects based on MRDP2 experience. In particular, the ESMP template for FMRs ensures that
                           slope stabilization measures are applied on critical road slopes, road safety issues are considered in
                           the design including installation of guard rails or planting of hedge rows while the impacts of
                           quarrying and damage to existing roadway are assessed and addressed accordingly. The ESMP
                           template for irrigation ensures that Schistosomiasis control and prevention and concerns for
                           accidental drowning at dam sites and deep canals are addressed.

                           The Borrower has already prepared the safeguards documents for Year 1 sub projects following
                           the existing subproject preparation and approval processes outlines in the Operations Manuals.
                           These safeguards documents which include ESMPs, PAP and entitlement survey results, land
                           acquisition documents and IP endorsements where applicable, have been disclosed at the LGUs
                           and at the MRDP and PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During project preparation, an institutional and stakeholder assessment (ISA) was conducted
                           nationwide through focused group discussions and interviews involving about 2,000
                           representatives of government agencies, private sector, civil society and rural farming and fisher
                           communities which include subsistence and commercial smallholders and fishers, women and a
                           sample of IP groups. During the discussions, the stakeholders have voiced out their needs and
                           constraints and these were considered in the project conceptualization and overall project design.
                           The project is expected to benefit women and indigenous peoples (IPs). IP areas would be covered
                           by the Project while enterprise development and the business aspects of farming and post-harvest
                           handling and processing, which are roles traditionally played by women in the Philippines will be
                           supported. PRDP will also employ participatory approaches in the planning of interventions at the
                           regional and local levels, particularly in the value chain analyses and resource assessments which
                           would input into the formulation of the Provincial Commodity Investment Plans. The Project will
                           also continue to use the same participatory approach which has been proven effective in MRDP in
                           the identification and preparation of sub projects of LGUs and communities. Project-affected
                           persons will be consulted and compensated following the Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and
                           Resettlement Framework.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   06-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                06-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                   05-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Posted in the Department of Agriculture's website (www.da.gov.ph), MRDP and
                                         PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net).
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   06-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                06-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                   05-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Posted in the Department of Agriculture's website (www.da.gov.ph), MRDP and
                                         PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net).
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   06-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                06-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                   05-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Posted in the Department of Agriculture's website (www.da.gov.ph), MRDP and
                                         PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net).
                          Pest Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?




                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Carolina V. Figueroa-Gero
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/      Name:                                             Date:
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
