                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC8033

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kosovo                          Project ID:      P149005
                            Project Name:      Education System Improvement Project (P149005)
                            Task Team          Flora Kelmendi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                          Estimated        15-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH2                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (20%), Education for all (80%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        10.00                Total Bank Financing:        10.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                10.00
                              Total                                                                      10.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity and accountability mechanisms of
                           institutions responsible for pre-university education.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project is organized around three components. All of the proposed interventions are a
                           continuation of work undertaken under a previous project, Institutional Development for Education
                           Project (IDEP-P102174).
                         Component 1: Strategic and financial planning and monitoring capacity for decentralized education
                         system (Estimated total cost US$ 3 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to strengthen: (i) the strategic and financial planning, analytical
                         and monitoring capacity for the central and local government to operate in a decentralized education
                         system; (ii) management capacities at school level for increased implementation of school financial
                         autonomy through increasing the capacities of school directors; (iii) school level planning and
                         management through the implementation of school grants program.

                         Subcomponent 1.1 Strengthening the strategic and financial planning capacities at central, municipal
                         and school level

                         This subcomponent aims at building and strengthening the institutional capacity at central and
                         municipal level for strategic and financial planning, management, monitoring and accountability in
                         the pre-university education sector. Project activities would be primarily targeted at the Budget and
                         Planning Department and Pre-University Education Department in MEST, and Municipal Education
                         Department in the Ministry of Finance (MoF), and the Municipal Education Directorates (MEDs) –
                         all of which are responsible for planning and managing resource allocation.

                         At the central level, the activities would include support to: (i) review the adequacy and equity of the
                         national per capita financing formula; (ii) review the adequacy of the municipal-to-school formula;
                         (iii) build the capacities for planning educational budgets using the central-to-municipal and
                         municipal-to-school formula and taking into account enrollment trends and financing needs under to
                         various policy scenarios; (iv) develop key educational indicators to monitor the implementation of
                         the formula; and (v) develop and introduce procedures for regular monitoring and assessment in
                         order to identify issues and risks, and propose solutions. Investments in Education Management and
                         Information System (financed under Component 3) would be closely linked with the development of
                         monitoring indicators, so that duplication of data collection is avoided. The MEST Budget
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Department would be responsible for analysis and the provision of information related to strategic
                         and financial planning for MEST and other key stakeholders.

                         At the municipality level, in addition to the revision and simplification of the municipal-to-school
                         formula, the project would support complementary activities related to: (i) developing and
                         introducing clear budgeting and financial management rules (or bylaws) needed to support school
                         financing planning and support school financial autonomy; and (ii) targeted training to apply the
                         formula and monitor its implementation by the school directors.

                         At the school level, the Project will support the further implementation of school financial autonomy
                         by strengthening the capacities of school directors. The activities would include (i) develop criteria
                         and programs for school director licensing as envisaged in the pre-university education law; and (ii)
                         developing procedures for assessing performance of school directors, including but not limited to
                         budget planning and execution. The Project would build on the work started by the USAID Basic
                         Education Project and the GIZ Basic Education Project. These activities are a continuation of work
                         undertaken under the Institutional Development for Education Project (IDEP).

                         Subcomponent 1.2 School Development Grants and pilot stipend program

                         This subcomponent seeks to strengthen school’s planning and operational capacity. Building on the
                         experience of the IDEP project, the subcomponent would: (i) strengthen the school development
                         planning system; (ii) support selected schools to prepare and implement multiple-year school
                         development plans through training on management, planning and self-evaluation; (iii) finance the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         school development grants (SDG) (US$ 5,000 to US$ 15,000).

                         Schools would be expected to prepare a school development plan with strategies to enhance the
                         quality of teaching and learning activities in their school, which would then serve as the basis to
                         receive financing under the school development grant scheme. This activity aims at: (a)
                         strengthening the capacity of schools to plan and manage resources; and (b) promoting participation
                         of schools boards, teachers, parents and communities in educational planning, implementation and
                         monitoring of school activities. The SDGs would be linked, to the extent possible, with ongoing
                         reform efforts, such as training of teachers to support teacher certification or student assessment
                         results (which are supported under Component 2). The work would be coordinated with the
                         European Commission (EC) Twinning Project on school-based quality assurance.

                         A second activity under this component would be the establishment of a pilot stipend program to
                         increase female participation in secondary education and female transition rates from lower to higher
                         secondary education. The design of this program will be informed by a gender assessment, to be
                         carried out during project preparation. While more diagnostic work is needed to determine how to
                         address this problem, the team is currently considering options such as: (i) incorporating stipend
                         resources under the School Development Grant so that schools have autonomy over the selection of
                         beneficiaries; or (ii) channeling funds through the Municipal Education Directorate and Municipal
                         Social Assistance and Welfare Department under a pilot scheme.

                         Component 2: Teacher Certification and Student Assessment Systems (Estimated total cost US$ 4
                         million)

                         The objective of this component is to: (i) improve and strengthen teacher management and
                         certification; and (ii) provide support for the strengthening and improvement of Kosovo’s student
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment and examination system.

                         Subcomponent 2.1. Teacher Certification and Career Advancement

                         This subcomponent aims at (i) supporting the implementation of the system for teachers’
                         professional development, performance assessment, and promotion (or career advancement) scheme
                         that was developed under IDEP; and (ii) strengthening and systematizing teachers professional
                         development.

                         In terms of the teacher certification and performance assessment, the project would support the: (i)
                         development of a staggered implementation plan for teacher performance assessment aligned with
                         local capacities; (ii) implementation of teacher promotion scheme by developing/clarifying the
                         competences and responsibilities of promoted teachers and linking this with financial incentives; (iii)
                         identification of teacher professional development trainings that are in accordance with the
                         requirements of the licensing system requirements, and making available a training catalogue to all
                         relevant stakeholders; and (iv) development of criteria and policies for teacher induction programs in
                         order to link pre-service training with teacher licensing requirements.

                         Additionally, the proposed Project would support the implementation of systematic in-service teacher
                         training and professional development by: (i) developing a framework that identifies the mandatory,
                         elective and advanced teacher training programs and their funding modality; (ii) preparing a training
                         catalogue that lists the training courses provided by MEST and other training providers in accordance
                         with licensing requirements for teachers; (iii) developing and introducing procedures and models for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementing the teacher professional development as per the requirements in Administrative
                         Instruction 15/2013 on Funding for Teacher Professional Development and 16/2013 on
                         Implementation of Teacher Professional Development; and (iii) making resources available for
                         teacher training through school development grants. These activities are a continuation of work
                         undertaken under the IDEP.

                         Subcomponent 2.2. Strengthening capacities of key institutions for monitoring educational outcomes
                         and assessment of student learning

                         The Assessment Unit in MES T is currently responsible for conducting students’ assessment and
                         examination activities. The law on Pre-university education envisages the unit should be transformed
                         into a semi-independent Agency for Curriculum, Standards and Assessment. This subcomponent
                         would support activities aimed at strengthening Assessment Unit’s and the future assessment part of
                         the Agency’s capacity to develop and conduct national and international student assessments and
                         examinations to identify the strengths and weaknesses of the education system and inform policy.
                         This subcomponent would support activities to: (i) establish a sustainable system for a
                         comprehensive and coherent national framework for student assessment; (ii) develop a
                         comprehensive and effective feedback system to ensure that data and qualitative information from
                         examinations and national and international surveys of learner achievement are provided to decision
                         makers, practitioners and other end-users; and (iii) strengthen the infrastructure of the Assessment
                         Division/Agency through refurbishment of accommodation and provision of equipment.

                         In this regard, the activities would include: (i) development of a framework that defines the
                         purposes, principles and policies for the high-stake examinations (e.g. the Matura and the Grade 9
                         orientation exam); (ii) definition of the roles and key objectives of surveys of learner achievement
                         such as sample-based national assessments (e.g. Grade 5) and international assessments (e.g. PISA);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iii) development of individualized school reports as a tool for school self-evaluation; (iv) support to
                         a range of communication activities to ensure internal communications (i.e. within MEST, MEDs,
                         etc.) and external (i.e. school Principals, subject teachers, etc.) and the wider public/parents; and (v)
                         support the introduction of technological solutions to improve efficiency and effectiveness, in
                         particular, providing for the development of an integrated examinations processing system and
                         integration with the student level module of the Education Management and Information System
                         (EMIS).

                         Component 3. Education Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity and Implementation and
                         Communications Support (Estimated total cost US$ 3 million)

                         The primary objective of this subcomponent is to: (i) enhance overall education monitoring capacity
                         at the national, municipal and school levels; and (ii) provide project specific implementation and
                         communication support.

                         Subcomponent 3.1. Enhance Education Monitoring and Evaluation Capacity

                         Specifically, this component would finance activities to enhance the existing EMIS so that it is
                         highly operational not only by MEST but also at the municipal and school levels. The main
                         objectives of the enhanced EMIS would be to: (i) provide education planners, administrators and
                           managers with appropriate, reliable and timely data and information required for decision making;
                           (ii) coordinate national efforts in data collection, processing analysis and dissemination with respect
                           to data relevant to education; and (iii) streamline the flow of information used for decision making by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           reducing, and if possible, eliminating duplication in data collection.

                           Specifically, EMIS will be enhanced in a phased approach with a student level module for all levels
                           of education, including higher education. Subsequently, EMIS would include a module on financing
                           and would be integrated with the teachers and student assessment database. Specific activities will
                           include: (i) assessment of the current status of the education information system and development of
                           specifications for expanding the system (to be finance during the preparation phase under the WBIF
                           Grant); (ii) development of modules for student level data entry and provision of technical support at
                           central, municipal and school levels; (iii) development of hardware system to allow effective
                           function of the enhanced EMIS as the hub of the system; (iv) provide training to school and
                           municipal managers and central government staff for the EMIS; (v) provide needed hardware for
                           small and remote schools without access to internet. The general approach to EMIS development
                           would comprise phased approach. Initially, under the guidance of an EMIS Working Group
                           established by MOES, the user requirements and a functional specification would be developed
                           forming the basis for module development; after development and testing of the modules are carried
                           on a pilot basis, the major hardware procurement and roll-out of the system to the whole Kosovo
                           would be carried out. These activities are a continuation of work undertaken under the Institutional
                           Development for Education Project (IDEP).

                           Subcomponent 3.2. Implementation, communication support

                           The objective of this component would be to support project specific Monitoring & Evaluation
                           (M&E) and communications activities, as well as incremental operating costs for the Project
                           Coordination Unit.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           This Project would support pre-university institutions nationwide, as well as the Ministry of
                           Education. No Land acquisition or physical displacement of residents is expected. The only
                           infrastructure related activity expected would be the refurbishment if the Assessment Agency
                           building which would involve only interior or minor exterior rehabilitation work, not including any
                           extension of the premises or any new construction.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Education Infrastructure Department is experienced and has proven capacity to
                           comply with Bank's safeguards requirements. The staff of the Department received training under the
                           previous World Bank project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Not applicable.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Flora Kelmendi
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 31-Mar-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)                                                                                                Date: 31-Mar-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
