                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA6680

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jan-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Nigeria                          Project ID:    P148593
                                                      Parent         P106280
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Lagos Eko Secondary Education Project Additional Financing (P148593)
   Parent Project    Lagos Eko Secondary Education Project (P106280)
   Name:
   Task Team         Olatunde Adetoyese Adekol
   Leader:
   Estimated         06-Dec-2013                      Estimated   04-Mar-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTEW                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Secondary education (70%), Vocational training (30%)
   Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (60%), Education for all (30%), Other
                     human development (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      42.30           Total Bank Financing:              42.30
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                           42.30
     Total                                                                                 42.30
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                            Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The development objective of the project is to improve the quality of public junior and senior
   secondary education in Lagos State. The project will support over half a million public school
   students in 637 secondary schools, over 7,000 teachers and school administrators and will
   strengthen the capacity of district, state and education institutions.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The proposed Lagos EKO project will focus on quality enhancement of secondary education to
address the government ➢❨ s priority of human capital development. Detailed project components
will be finalized during further preparation phases, informed by the findings of project preparation
studies. The Project components have so far been developed around the following areas:

Component 1: Promoting Secondary School Effectiveness through School Development Grants. The
objective of the school development grant is to provide public secondary schools access to
discretionary resources with an explicit focus on improving the quality of education services as
priority needs are defined at the school level. The grants will be provided based on clear and
transparent school performance criteria. This component would empower and support SBMCs to
plan for and improve teaching, learning and participation in their schools. The grant would augment
schools operating costs and non-salary expenditures to improve learning performance of students in
public junior secondary and secondary schools. Two windows of grants will be given: (1) school
improvement grants demonstrating an impact on student learning outcomes, with a cap on
infrastructure (30%); and (2) grants to science and technical colleges for twinning arrangements with
the private sector to strengthen the linkages between skills training and labor market demand.

Examples of activities that could be supported under window 1 are: (a) instructional materials and
learning inputs; (b) training opportunities; (c) training related to identified local skills needs,
especially in senior secondary and technical colleges, (d) teacher development and support programs;
(e) mechanisms for improving the quality of intake into secondary/technical colleges and reducing
failure and drop-out rates; (f) strategies for skill development programs/ICT to improve secondary
teaching and learning; and(g) minor rehabilitation, upgrading of school infrastructure.


To access the grants, a pre-requisite is the training and capacity building of SBMCs to prepare school
development plans to improve teaching, learning and participation of their schools. Window 2 would
support proposals for cooperation between technical colleges and private sector institutions to fund
activities that would lead to more relevant teaching, research and development activities.

Component 2: Enhancing Quality Assurance for Junior and Senior Secondary Schools. This
component would support the improvement of the quality assurance systems in Lagos State to
measure quality, identify deficits, feedback information to service providers, determine training
needs, and establish appropriate benchmarks, standards, and ratings. The compilation of this critical
data will provide continuous assessments as well as impact evaluation of project and government
interventions. Furthermore, it will measure the learning outcomes in private education as well as


                                             Page 2 of 6
public, to give the government a comprehensive picture of the education sector while holding all
stakeholders accountable for delivering a quality education. Activities would include: (a) launching
a state education census to collect data on all institutions in Lagos; (b) strengthening standardized
student assessments; (c) using assessments to determine teacher professional development needs and
provide quality training; and (d) the development of a school rating system to establish standards
across public and private schools.

Component 3: Project Management and Institutional Arrangements. The project will be implemented
at the state level, and coordinated by the SMOE in close coordination with the relevant parastatals (e.
g., SUBEB) and FME and federal parastatals (e.g., UBEC, ETF). This component will support
overall project management, monitoring and evaluation and the design and implementation of a
communication strategy. The capacity building support for implementation would begin during the
project preparation stage. The technical support for the implementation of the project may include a
team of consultants, specializing in project implementation (including project management, financial
management and procurement) and financed under the Credit.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will support public secondary schools in Lagos State.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTN1)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             School Development Grants: This component
 BP 4.01                                             could support minor rehabilitation, upgrading and
                                                     refurbishment of existing public secondary
                                                     schools which may contribute to soil erosion,
                                                     pollution or loss of vegetation, thus the EA (OP
                                                     4.01) policy is triggered. The Environmental and
                                                     Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the
                                                     original project has been updated for this
                                                     proposed AF and re-disclosed in-country on
                                                     December 10, 2013, and on January 8, 2014 at the
                                                     InfoShop and will be implemented to address any
                                                     potential negative environmental and social
                                                     impact
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No




                                             Page 3 of 6
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The proposed AF is category B project as the original project because the project activities remain
     the same. Only OP/BP 4.01 is triggered and due to the small scale nature of the planned civil
     works (interior rehabilitation of schools, digging of small wells, greening of school grounds, etc),
     little or no negative environmental or social impacts are expected as a result of implementation.
     The original project’s ESMF was updated and re-disclosed in-country on December 10, 2013, and
     on January 8, 2014 at the InfoShop. Sub-projects will continue to be screened for environmental
     and social impacts following the screening process described the ESMF. Sub-projects found to be
     Category C will implement environmental and social measures while Category B sub-projects will
     require the preparation of ESMPs.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     The components and the activities are the same as in the original project. There are no foreseen
     potential long-term or indirect negative social and/or environmental impacts.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     Lagos State has had considerable experience in the implementation of World Bank Safeguards
     Policies. To address potential negative impact consistent with the requirements of the triggered
     safeguard policy, the Government had prepared an Environmental and Social Management
     Framework (ESMF) under the original project. The framework is consistent with national laws as
     well as the Bank’s triggered safeguard policy, Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01. The
     original project’s ESMF was updated and re-disclosed in-country on December 10, 2013, and on
     January 8, 2014 at the InfoShop. Sub-projects will continue to be screened for environmental and
     social impacts following the screening process described the ESMF. Sub-projects found to be
     Category C will implement environmental and social measures while Category B sub-projects will
     require the preparation of ESMPs. The ESMF contains an Environmental and Social Management
     Plan (ESMP) with responsibilities for mitigation and monitoring, costs, duration, and institutional
     capacity building to implement the ESMF. The ESMP and Environmental clauses will be inserted
     in the bidding documents and contracts of the contractors. Per the ESMF, Environmental
     Engineers in the contractors’ team will ensure compliance with safeguards policies through on-site


                                               Page 4 of 6
  project supervision. During implementation of the proposed AF, an environmental audit will be
  conducted to review and evaluate the project’s adherence to the relevant social and environmental
  safeguards outlined in the ESMF. Based on its findings, the audit will present a set of
  recommendations and an action plan to improve and/or enhance the project’s environmental and
  social sustainability
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  During the development of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) under
  the original project, extensive consultations with stakeholders such as the Federal Ministry of
  Environment, Housing and Urban Development, Lagos State Environmental protection Agency,
  Lagos State Ministries of Education, Environment was carried out. In particular, public
  consultations were carried out throughout the project preparation phase to encourage participation
  and foster social inclusion. The ESMF was then disclosed in country and at the Bank Info Shop on
  October 15, 2008. For the purpose of this proposed AF, the original project’s ESMF was updated
  and re-disclosed in-country on December 10, 2013, and on January 8, 2014 at the InfoShop.
  Furthermore, local communities are well aware of the project and its activities; during
  implementation of this AF, project stakeholders at local government areas and community level
  will be continuously consulted at various stages of the project cycle. Consultations with local
  communities will be continuously organized during project implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       10-Dec-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08-Jan-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                            Page 5 of 6
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Olatunde Adetoyese Adekol
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SM)                  Date: 28-Jan-2014




                                             Page 6 of 6
