                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA10730
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jun-2014, 10-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                              Project ID:    P146344
                            Project Name:      Nepal: Grid Solar and Energy Efficiency (P146344)
                            Task Team          Rabin Shrestha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Sep-2014                        Estimated   09-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (70%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (15%),
                                               Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       138.00           Total Bank Financing:  130.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            8.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 130.00
                              Total                                                                                       138.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives (PDOs) are to: (i) increase electricity supply to the NEA grid
                           through grid-connected solar farms; and (ii) reduce NEA’s distribution losses in pilot distribution
                           centers.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         The proposed project consists of two components: (a) Grid-connected Solar Farms Development; and
                         (b) Distribution System Planning and Loss Reduction. The total cost estimated for the proposed
                         Project is US$ 138.0 million, including interest during construction, physical and price contingencies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Grid-connected Solar Farms Development (US$ 54.0 million). This component will support (a)
                         design, supply, construction, commissioning, operation and maintenance (O&M) of grid connected
                         solar farms of 25 MWp capacity to supply electricity directly to NEA’s distribution network, through
                         an engineering, procurement, and construction (EPC) contract; (b) hiring of an Owner’s Engineer
                         (OE) to support NEA to procure the EPC contract and supervise its execution; and (c) incremental
                         operating cost and capacity building. The solar farms will be built using conventional solar
                         photovoltaic (PV) technology nearby the Kathmandu valley. Electricity generated will be supplied
                         directly without electricity storage facilities, at 11kV medium voltage (MV) level, to the existing
                         substations of the NEA. A number of candidate sites, including the two existing hydropower plants
                         (Devighat and Trishuli) owned by the NEA, are identified with sufficient areas for installation of the
                         solar farms through a screening process based on criteria such as land ownership by NEA, size of
                         areas, intensity of solar radiations, daily sunshine durations, shadows, and topographic and
                         geological conditions. Bid documents for the EPC contract is scheduled for issuance in November
                         2014 and signing of the contract is expected in March 2015. O&M services for 5 years from the date
                         of commission will also be included in the EPC contract. The O&M services include supply of spare
                         parts, preparation of an O&M manual and training of the NEA’s engineers for O&M. An OE (or
                         individual consultants) will be hired to assist NEA in bid evaluation, construction supervision,
                         acceptance test, commissioning, and reviewing the O&M Manuals. The capacity building program
                         includes hiring of consultants for independent bid evaluations, and training of NEA staff on project
                         management and O&M of solar farms.

                         Distribution System Planning and Loss Reduction (US$ 84.0 million). This component will support:
                         (a) preparing the Distribution Master Plan (DMP); (b) preparing the Distribution Loss Reduction
                         Master Plan (DLRMP); (c) preparation and implementation of pilot loss reduction projects in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected distribution centers of NEA following recommendations of the DLRMP; and (d) capacity
                         building for distribution system planning at both NEA’s distribution center and corporate levels. The
                         component will help redress the high system losses in the country, enhancing NEA’s capacity in
                         distribution system planning and management, and enhancing on-grid and off-grid planning
                         coordination for rural electrification.

                         Following recommendations of the DLRMP, investment for system loss reduction will be piloted in a
                         number of distribution centers of the NEA, which may include: (i) replacing conductors of
                         distribution feeders or building new distributions lines to reduce line losses; (ii) adding or replacing
                         distribution transformers to maintain voltage levels and reduce transformer losses; and (iii) adding
                         capacitor banks to compensate reactive power to manage voltage levels.

                         The capacity building programs may include: (i) provision of instruments and proven software and
                         training for distribution system loss identification and reduction planning; and (ii) development of a
                         Geographic Information System (GIS) database with information/data of locations and details
                         regarding the NEA’s existing generation, transmission, and distribution facilities (including
                         specifications); grid connected customers (households, industries, commercials, institutional
                         customers, etc.); potential customers in grid-covered areas; potential demands in not grid-covered
                         areas; among others, for distribution system / rural electrification master planning. The GIS database
                         is critical for on- and off-grid rural electrification planning, loss reduction planning, and distribution


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         system and customer management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The list of candidate locations identified for initial screening are:

                         •        Devighat Hydropower Plant: Devighat Hydropower Plant, located at Devighat in Nuwakot,
                         with an installed capacity of 14.1 MW and annual design generation of 144 GWh, was commissioned
                         in 1984 and rehabilitated and upgraded to 15 MW in 2011. It lies on the right bank of Trishuli River
                         and is approximately 10 km downstream of Trishuli hydropower station. In this hydropower plant,
                         there are 4 areas suitable for installation of solar panels: i) Raatmatay Area, ii) Keraghari, iii) Staff
                         Quarter Area, and iv) Forebay Ground Area. All these areas have good sunshine hours from 7:30 AM
                         to 5:30 PM. All these areas are less than 1.5 km away from the tapping point (a substation in the
                         power plant area) with 11kV transmission line to evacuate electricity to be generated by the proposed
                         solar farm project. These areas are owned by NEA and are free of land ownership issues.

                         •        Trishuli Hydropower Plant: Trishuli Hydropower Plant, located approximately 10 km
                         upstream from Devighat Hydropower Plant, with an installed capacity of 24 MW and annual design
                         generation of 163 GWh, was commissioned in 1967. In this hydropower plant, there are 3 areas
                         suitable for installation of solar panels: i) Trishuli 2 Area 2, ii) Trishuli 5 Area, and iii) Reservoir
                         Pond Area. All these areas have good sunshine hours from 7:00AM to 4:30PM, and are less than 3.3
                         km away from the tapping point (a switchyard in the power plant area) with 11kV transmission line
                         to evacuate electricity to be generated by the proposed solar farm project.

                         •       Pharping Site: This is the first hydropower plant developed in Nepal, which has been
                         declared as a National Heritage. Recently, centenary year was celebrated. The power plant (106 years
                         after construction) has not been generating electricity for a few years due to decrepitude. The
                         candidate site is in steep slope and facing the south direction, near the power house. There is an 11kV
                         transmission line, which evacuates electricity generated by the power plant to the nearest substation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The monument (a triangular tower) on the top of another hill, on the west side in front of the
                         candidate site, may cause shadow on significantly large areas and make the suitable areas for the
                         solar panel installation narrower.

                         •        Markhu 1: Land was legally acquired and transferred in the name of NEA. There are quite
                         old residences and a guest house. The site is located at lakeside of the reservoir of Kulekhani
                         hydropower plant (60MW storage type). Sun light is available from 8:00 to 16:00 during winters and
                         8:00 to 17:30 during summer seasons. The land is quite flat, but narrow (it could be good for 1 to 2
                         MW). Houses on the site need to be demolished. The nearest substation at Kulekhani 2 hydropower
                         station, which is about 15 km away.

                         •        Markhu 2: This site is located a few hundreds meter away from Markhu 1 site. Although the
                         boundary of NEA’s land was unclear at the site, the land is the larger than Markhu 1 and Parphing
                         and seems suitable for the solar system installation facing the South direction. The site is located at
                         lakeside of the reservoir of Kulekhani hydropower plant. The land consists of the slope to reservoir
                         and flat land facing the south direction. The site could be enough for 5 MW solar panel installations,
                         if NEA owns all of the area. NEA needs to identify exact size of the site on a topographic map.

                         •       Other sites selected for screening are Sunkoshi Hydropower Plant, Sundarijal Hydropower
                         Plant, Middle Marshyangdi Hydropower Plant, and Panauti Hydro Power Plant.


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Parthapriya Ghosh (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The policy is triggered because the activities/
                         BP 4.01                                         interventions proposed under the Project may
                                                                         have low impacts on the natural environment and
                                                                         human health. The Project during construction
                                                                         requires clearing up of sites, dismantling of
                                                                         existing structures, excavations, which have
                                                                         impacts (though minimal) to physical and
                                                                         biological environment. Potential concerns during
                                                                         operation include management wastes (e.g. glass,
                                                                         chips, photo-voltaic cells from solar farm), as
                                                                         well as visual intrusion. Each activity will be
                                                                         subjected to environmental screening and site
                                                                         specific EMP prepared to address the relevant
                                                                         environmental impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            No.

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The alignments of MV lines for connecting solar
                                                                         farms with the grid and for piloting loss reduction
                                                                         in selected distribution areas are not-known.
                                                                         Hence there is possibility that some MV lines fall
                                                                         in the forest. Besides, NEA has planted trees
                                                                         within the premises of several of the candidate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         sites. These trees need to be cut. Hence, this
                                                                         policy is triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Project does not envisage use of pesticide.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered because screening of
                         BP 4.11                                         candidate sites done as part of ESMF preparation
                                                                         indicates existing local cultural sites in and
                                                                         around the NEA premises where solar farms are
                                                                         proposed. Cultural site may also be located near
                                                                         the transmission lines, locations of which are not-
                                                                         known. Site specific EMP (prepared under OP
                                                                         4.01), where necessary, will provide relevant
                                                                         mitigations to protect PCR. The ESMF contains
                                                                         broad guidelines for handling Chance Find PCR.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Social screening suggests presence of indigenous
                                                                         community around the project site. Vulnerable
                                                                         Community Development Plan will be prepared
                                                                         for the final project site as suggested in ESMF.



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             Though no private land acquisition is envisaged
                            4.12                                                as all solar panels will be installed on land owned
                                                                                by NEA, OP 4.12 has been triggered as there
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                could be land acquisition related to project
                                                                                intervention which has not been envisaged yet
                                                                                such as widening of approach roads.. The ESMF
                                                                                prepared by the project includes Resettlement
                                                                                Policy Framework. Social impact assessment will
                                                                                be carried out for the finalized site and a
                                                                                Resettlement Action Plan if required will be
                                                                                prepared based on social impact assessment
                                                                                results.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              Project neither support dam construction, nor
                                                                                depend on existing dam.
                            Projects on International        No                 Project does not affect quantity and quality of
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                international water body.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Project is not located in disputed area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Highly significant environmental and social impacts are unlikely given the type of activities
                              (installation of solar PV panels without battery for power storage, short 11 kV transmission lines
                              for connecting to national grid), and locations within NEA’s own premises. Small scale
Public Disclosure Copy




                              excavation is needed for making space for solar farm. High risks activity or locations are avoided
                              through ineligibility criteria / negative list. The project is, hence, environmental Category B as
                              expected adverse environmental impacts are limited in scale (site specific), largely reversible and
                              can be readily addressed through readily available mitigation measures. The potential adverse
                              issues/ impacts are associated with site clearing (shrub vegetation removal) & excavation, waste
                              management and management of labor camps. Most of the impacts are limited to the construction
                              phase and are temporary in nature. The construction period impacts vary depending on site and
                              activity, and may include localized soil erosion, pollution of water & land, dust & air pollution,
                              noise, occupational health & safety, and loss of vegetation. Potential environmental concerns of
                              the solar farms during the operational stage are related to management wastes that may contain
                              glasses, chips and photo-voltaic cells. Except for the visual quality, operational phase impact has
                              negligible footprint. Specific issues related to component 2 are PCB in the transformer and
                              dismantling of the existing conductors. PCB based transformer and capacitor bank are not
                              permitted. The construction as well as operational phase impacts can be mitigated/ offset by good
                              housekeeping measures, a site specific environment management plan (EMP) that contains clearly
                              defined, contractually agreed mitigation measures and implementation arrangements, linked with
                              construction supervisions are deemed sufficient to address related impacts.

                             While the Project is expected to benefit local communities, the implementation of certain
                             subprojects could lead to some adverse social impacts. Social screening conducted for the


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           potential project area suggests that there is no likelihood of private land acquisition for solar farms
                           as all installations will be on land already owned by NEA. However, some portion of these land
                           plots is encroached. The screening result shows that encroachers are largely cultivators and few
Public Disclosure Copy




                           houses. There could also be potential adverse impact though limited if any approach road needs to
                           be widened or if roads right of way is not enough to erect or rehabilitate 11 kV distribution lines.
                           Potential adverse impacts may include loss of (i) land (temporary or permanent), (ii) livelihood,
                           (iii) access to private or community property, etc. Site selection could be locally controversial
                           among directly affected people and other stakeholders. The Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for the Project acknowledges these issues and
                           integrates the measures for addressing them in the project implementation process.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           A large scale solar farm could be a visual obstacle, and thus this aspect will be considered during
                           preparation of detailed site plan of the solar farm. The candidate project sites visited during
                           preparation are neither in visual impact sensitive areas nor overlooked by significantly populated
                           area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Nine sites within NEA’s own territory have been identified as potential candidate for the solar
                           farms. NEA is collecting relevant technical, social and environmental information for comparison
                           of the sites. Final selection of the site will be made during early stage of implementation followed
                           by detailed engineering: avoiding or minimizing adverse environmental and social impacts will be
                           one of the guiding principles of site selection. ESMF provides ineligibility criteria/ negative list in
                           order avoid significant impacts/ issues. Community around the potential sites will be consulted
                           while finalizing the site(s).
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Solar farm sites as well as distribution loss reduction sites are not-known at the time of
                           preparation. Hence, borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) for use during implementation. The ESMF aims to: (i) ensure the social and
                           environmental sustainability of investments; (ii) ensure compliance with national environmental
                           and social legislation; and (iii) ensure compliance with the World Bank’s Environmental and
                           Social Safeguards Policies. The candidate sites have been visited by social and environmental
                           consultant in the process of preparing the ESMF. The ESMF has been prepared considering the
                           applicable World Bank social and environmental safeguard policies and country’s legal
                           requirements. The ESMF provides guidance; define process/procedures, institutional
                           responsibilities for assessing and managing the potential environmental and social risks and
                           impacts that may come up during implementation and throughout the project cycle. It identifies
                           potential social and environmental risks and proposes generic mitigation measures. The ESMF
                           identifies negative (ineligible) activities.

                           Each subproject will be subjected to detailed environmental and social screening, and appropriate
                           level of environmental and social assessment. Specific Environmental Management Plan will be
                           prepared for each site and activities. The ESMF provides sample Terms of Reference and
                           reporting structures for compliance with the ESA requirement. The ESA will determine the risk
                           and mitigation measures needed for the sub-project, including the preparation of detailed
                           Environmental Management Plans (EMP) and Social Impact Assessment and/or Resettlement


                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           Action Plan (RAP); Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) as applicable.

                           ESMF requires internal and periodic external monitoring. Routine environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           supervision and monitoring will be done by the respective Site Management Office, which, once
                           in a month, submits status/progress report to central PMT Office. The environmental and social
                           expert of PMT (deputed from ESSD) will carry out periodic (two-monthly) internal safeguard
                           compliance monitoring, verify report submitted by site office and submits its own report to central
                           PMT Office at NEA which shares the report with the World Bank. NEA will also engage an
                           external agency for mid-term and end term evaluation of the ESMF application and compliance
                           with social and environmental safeguard requirements.

                           The primary responsibility of coordinating work related to social and environmental safeguards
                           will rest with the Project assisted by the Environment and Social Studies Department (ESSD).
                           Currently ESSD is working on several Bank funded projects. ESSD over a period of time has
                           acquired skill and experience to address social and environmental safeguard issues.

                           The Project will establish an Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU). The ESMU
                           will be staffed with specialized social and environment professionals either hired from the marked
                           or on deputation from ESSD. ESSD, though, operates from central office; it establishes field
                           offices at every project site headed by senior professional as part of ESMU. ESMU model will be
                           followed as NEA is following this model in other projects as well and this is functioning
                           satisfactorily.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders include all Affected Persons (APs,) including vulnerable households (Adivashi/
                           Janajati and disadvantageous groups, project beneficiaries, political party representatives,
                           community leaders, and representatives of community based organizations; representatives from
                           recipient wards, local NGOs, and Officials of NEA and relevant government agency
Public Disclosure Copy




                           representatives.

                           During the preparation of ESMF, NEA carried out formal and informal consultations with various
                           groups. Field level consultations were carried out in 10 different locations around the proposed
                           candidate solar farm sites. The ESMF requires consultations at each site during implementation
                           stage through focus group discussions (FGDs), public meetings, community discussions, and in-
                           depth and key informant interviews.

                           Disclosure: The ESMF has been disclosed in NEA/Project web site on June 13, 2014 (Available
                           at: http://nea.org.np/publications.html). Executive Summary is in process of being translated into
                           local language and then willthen will be disseminated to subproject sites. The ESMF will be made
                           available to the concerned DDCs and VDCs/ Municipalities once sites are selected.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         13-Jun-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-Jun-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            13-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            13-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            13-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Rabin Shrestha
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Julia Bucknall (SM)                           Date: 10-Oct-2014




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
