                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5259
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                             Project ID:    P127086
                            Project Name:     Sustainable Groundwater Management in SADC Member States (P127086)
                            Task Team         Louise E. M. Croneborg
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Jan-2014                        Estimated   24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTN2                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              International waters
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (45%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                              protection (35%), Public administration- Information and comm unications
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (45%), Other environment and natural resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              management (20%), Climate change (20%), Regional integratio n (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      10.20           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                       8.20
                              Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                           2.00
                              Total                                                                                  10.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         To support sustainable management of groundwater at national and transboundary levels across
                         SADC Member States.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         Amongst different sources of water, groundwater is especially important for human wellbeing,
                         livelihoods, food production, ecosystems, industries and growing cities in the Southern African
                         Development Community (SADC) region. It is estimated that over 70% of the 250 million people
                         living in the SADC rely on groundwater as their primary source of water. Despite varying
                         dependency on groundwater across Member States, groundwater provides a critical buffer between
                         dry and rainy seasons. The role of groundwater as key to economic growth is exacerbated with the
                         expansion of commercial farming and industries. In response to such dependency, some SADC
                         Member States are actively integrating groundwater in their water resources management policies
                         and laws (e.g., Botswana and South Africa). On the whole, however, institutional frameworks to
                         manage water at both national and transboundary levels do not feature groundwater prominently. In
                         spite of unequal attention between surface and groundwater, the economic role of the latter is
                         significant.

                         Many future water-challenges facing SADC Member States know no administrative boundaries and
                         cannot be fully resolved through sovereign action. In the next 25 years, the population of southern
                         Africa is expected to double. Demand for water will rise as will pressure and reliance on
                         groundwater. Pollution of aquifers is of growing concern where mining and factories continue to
                         degrade groundwater; alongside widespread use of on-site sanitation in rural and urban areas.
                         Reoccurring droughts of shallow groundwater cause social upheaval and distressed ecosystems.
                         Groundwater is essential for wildlife and other biota. The region is known for climatic variability that
                         translates into reoccurring drought and floods. The impact of climate change will pose substantial
                         challenges to water resources management. By 2050, temperatures are expected to rise with 1.5-2.0°
                         C on average in the north of the region, and by 2.5-3.0°C in the south (compared to 1961-1990
Public Disclosure Copy




                         average).

                         The inter-governmental organisation of the SADC has the goal of fostering cooperation and mutual
                         benefit from shared waters amongst its 15 Member States. Recognising the important role of water in
                         fostering economic growth, the SADC Member States signed the “Protocol on Shared Watercourse
                         Systems in the SADC Region” in 1995. The Protocol was later replaced by the legally binding
                         “Revised Protocol on Shared Watercourses” in 2000 with the objective “to foster closer cooperation
                         for judicious, sustainable and coordinated management, protection and utilisation of shared
                         watercourses”. The operationalisation of the Revised Protocol and the SADC Regional Water Policy
                         is agreed in the SADC Regional Strategic Action Plan for Integrated Water Resources Managemetn
                         (RSAP). The current SADC RSAP III (2011–2015) acknowledges the importance of groundwater to
                         the region with a dedicated Groundwater Management Programme of Action (GMP, Programme No.
                         11). The GMP has four project interventions: policy and institutional frameworks; transboundary
                         aquifer management; awareness raising; and regional cooperation and groundwater management.

                         To support SADC Member States develop more sustainable management of groundwater, at both
                         national and transboundary levels the implementation and adherence to the Revised SADC Protocol
                         on Shared Watercourses and the RSAP III programme on groundwater, the Global Environment
                         Facility (GEF) and the multidonor trustfund Cooperation on International Waters in Africa (CIWA)
                         are providing grants of US$10.2 million available for the proposed Project (US$8.20 million from


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         GEF and US$2 million from CIWA).

                         The custodian, and grant recipient of the Project is the SADC Secretariat located in Gaborone,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Botswana, through its Water Division (in the SADC Directorate for Infrastructure and Services).
                         Implementation of the Project will be done through a hosting arrangement with the University of the
                         Free State (UFS) located in Bloemfontein, South Africa. With the support of an earlier SADC
                         Groundwater and Drought Management Project (GDMP), also supported by the World Bank and the
                         GEF ($7.00 million, 2005-2011), the SADC Member States sought to establish a regional center of
                         excellence in groundwater situated within the region. It was agreed that an existing institute would
                         host the new SADC Groundwater Management Institute (SADC GMI) and that the SADC GMI
                         would apply for SADC Subsidiarity Status. After a competitive process, the University of the Free
                         State was selected as the hosting agency of the SADC GMI. In June 2011, the SADC GMI was
                         established and legally registered as a not-for-profit company under South African law. The proposed
                         Project will help operationalise the SADC GMI.

                         The Project components and activities build on the achievements of the SADC GDMP and on the
                         potential of SADC GMI to serve as an interlocutor for groundwater initiatives at national, basin,
                         regional and international levels. The Project has four components. Through the first Component A,
                         the SADC GMI will be operationalised to serve as a center of excellence for groundwater in the
                         region. Through Component A, the remaining three components will have greater impact in the areas
                         of institutional, information and infrastructural aspects of groundwater management among SADC
                         Member States. All components and activities will be financed by the GEF Grant, apart from
                         Activities A2 and C1 which will be financed by the CIWA Grant.

                         Component A. Operationalisation of the SADC Groundwater Management Institute Component A
                         will finance: A1) Coordination and administration, including staff to enable starting and day-to-day
                         running of the SADC GMI during project implementation. This includes, amongst others, enforcing
                         governance structures, setting up and managing organisational functions (including the Project
                         Implementation Manual, and Monitoring & Evaluation framework), management of staff, progress
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reporting and project implementation/work planning. The activity also includes fulfilling the
                         ‘interlocutor’ role of SADC GMI towards the SADC Secretariat and the UFS, facilitating the
                         meetings and input of the SADC Subcommitte on Hydrogeology (who also fulfill a project steering
                         committee function), and building partnership and extended ownership through national focal groups
                         through to international groundwater initiatives; A2) Raising awareness, knowledge management and
                         communication involving the critical activities to inform, engage and maintain dialogue with key
                         stakeholders of at all levels – i.e., implementing a graphic profile and communication activities,
                         setting up and running SADC GMI and project websites, disseminating information and knowledge,
                         and developing a research programme etc.; A3) Regional capacity building and training programme
                         which will include the necessary scope of training offered by the GMI to technical groundwater
                         practitioners, students and decision makers in SADC Member States (in and outside of
                         governments); and, A4) Mobilising and soliciting financing for SADC GMI, including design of
                         small grants scheme that will entail developing and implementing a plan to ensure the GMI grows
                         and sustains itself as a regional center of excellence in the long-term future. The activity also
                         includes setting up and running a small-grants scheme to support national level small-scale activities
                         related to the Project (for example, convening national focal groups and implementing small scale
                         infrastructure pilots), in line with the agreed Small Grants Manual to be prepared at the onset of the
                         Project .

                         Component B. Strengthening institutional capacity for the sustainable management of groundwater in

                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                         SADC Component B will finance: B1) Legal, policy and regulatory frameworks which will address
                         prevailing gaps in institutional groundwater management tools at national and transboundary levels.
                         Activities could range from modernisation to harmonisation of laws, policies and regulatory tools
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through technical assistance for Member States; B2) Compliance and advocacy will focus on
                         assisting Member States in following up on implementation of existing institutional management
                         tools to enhance compliance of groundwater governance; B3) Guidelines, standards and management
                         tools that will enable groundwater practitioners in Member States to access and compare up-to-date
                         practical management tools with proven applicability in the region (including assessment and
                         verification of suitable tools, taking into consideration new innovations in the sector); B4)
                         Strengthening groundwater monitoring and data management systems will support Member States in
                         how to strengthen and integrate monitoring of groundwater into national level efforts and access
                         guidance on best-practice and affordable monitoring and data management schemes; and, B5)
                         Transboundary cooperation that will facilitate the integration and harmonisation of groundwater
                         provisions between the national and basin level commitments, addressing gaps in knowledge or
                         mechanisms of cooperation as well as promoting standards for groundwater data collection and open-
                         data solutions.

                         Component C. Advancing knowledge on transboundary and national groundwater Component C will
                         finance: C1) Support to Transboundary Aquifer Management in Member States and in collaboration
                         with relevant government authorities and associated River Basin Organisations in finding solutions
                         to shared groundwater challenges through Transboundary Diagnostic Analysis (TDA) and Strategic
                         Action Plans (SAP) alongside mechanisms for data collection and sharing. TDAs will be selected on
                         the basis of the outcome from the 2012 SADC-ISARM analysis and the transboundary aquifer
                         management needs assessment by British Geological Survey a.o. (2013). Potential transboundary
                         aquifers (TBAs) are: the Ramotswa Dolomite Aquifer (Botswana & South Africa), the Shire Valley
                         Alluvial Aquifer (Malawi & Mozambique), the Tuli Karoo Basin Aquifer (Botswana, South Africa,
                         Zimbabwe), the Eastern Kalahari Karoo Basin Aquifer (Botswana, Zimbabwe), and other TBAs
                         classified with priority B in recent research on critical TBAs; C2) Research on groundwater
                         challenges will involve studies/pilots, information exchange on findings, training and implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of solutions to emergent and priority groundwater management challenges. Priorities include: climate
                         change, recharge, drought, pollution protection, expanding agriculture and food security, the role of
                         remote sensing and geophysics technology, validation, groundwater buffering opportunities,
                         mapping, monitoring and early warning systems, and others; and, C3) Information and
                         Communication Technologies for knowledge sharing platform to build an integrated data
                         management system interlinked with a GIS platform and the project websites; involving storing,
                         connecting and collecting information from various regional and global groundwater initiatives and
                         data sources.

                         Component D. Promoting groundwater infrastructure management and development Component D
                         aims to promote the role of infrastructure as a means to develop opportunities for more sustainable
                         management of groundwater and addressing growing challenges related to issues such as drought,
                         recharge, conjunctive land-water management, water and food security, pollution, climate change
                         etc. in Member States. Component D will support: D1) Infrastructure for improved groundwater
                         utilisation, management and protection that involves developing, making available and training on
                         design-tools related to: assessment, selection, mapping, siting, costing and designing of appropriate
                         groundwater infrastructure solutions reflecting the geological and landscape aspects of groundwater
                         in priority areas of Member States. Attention will be given to rehabilitation, operation &
                         maintenance, environmental and social management, modernisation, and innovation. The types of
                         small-scale groundwater infrastructure may include: small sand-dams and other small-scale

                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         infrastructures; D2) Operational support for groundwater infrastructure development which will
                         involve developing and disseminating manuals for infrastructure solutions that can improve
                         groundwater management (e.g., for small infrastructures such as sand dams, infiltration banks and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         shallow wells) and guidance tools for siting of wells and/or mapping and siting of water buffering
                         systems, cost-effective well drilling, as well as technical assistance in applying these manual and
                         guidance tools; D3) Impact evaluation to help monitor impacts, trouble-shoot and report on results
                         taking into consideration community and gender; and D4) Support to partnership development and
                         securing funding within governments, with private sector parties or with bi/multilateral partners and
                         others to allow for supporting successful solutions. If appropriate, the SADC GMI may implement
                         demonstration civil works. Small grants will facilitate Member States developing infrastructure
                         pilots, in accordance with the procedures and obligations outlined in the future Small Grants Manual
                         and the Environmental Management Framework with the Resettlement Policy Framework.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The SADC Secretariat, located in Gaborone Botswana, will be the custodian of the project and a
                         number of activities, such as consultations and trainings will take place in Gaborone. The University
                         of the Free State, located in Bloemfontein South Africa, will host the project and enable the
                         operationalisation of the SADC Groundwater Management Institute in Bloemfontein. From there, the
                         activities of the Project will be coordinated and delivered.

                         The proposed Project includes a number of activities that improve the base of knowledge on
                         transboundary aquifers in the SADC region. Component C, includes the preparation of
                         Transboundary Aquifer Diagnostic Analyses (TDAs) wholly within the SADC region, and are shared
                         by Botswana, Malawi, Mozambique, South Africa, and Zimbabwe. The TDAs will include studies,
                         research, consultations and other activities aimed at enhancing the shared knowledge base of
                         transboundary aquifers. Strategic Action Plans then build on these TDAs, and lead to better
                         management approaches integrated into national policy frameworks. Such positive interventions
                         support and enhance existing mechanisms for transboundary cooperation (i.e., river basin agreements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         or organizational platforms such as ZAMCOM and ORASECOM).

                         Component D aims to enhance the capacity of technical staff and decision-makers in SADC Member
                         States by providing access to tools for groundwater infrastructure planning and design that can
                         translate into more sustainable management, recharge of groundwater and management of challenges
                         to groundwater. Example of generic designs could include better recharge basins, improved
                         infiltration structures through river alluvium, more efficient well designs to improve yield while
                         reducing contamination threats, etc. The proposed Project will not finance extensive on-the-ground
                         investments that follow on from such guidance, except for the case of any small demonstration civil
                         works as noted in below.

                         To tailor and demonstrate the validity of the above mentioned plans and designs for more sustainable
                         groundwater management, the proposed Project may finance demonstration works and small pilots at
                         a small number of locations across the region (approximately 15). These pilots will only affect very
                         localised areas without significant transboundary impacts on groundwater availability or quality. In
                         the previous GEF-funded project, a number of pilots were completed in the upper Limpopo River
                         Basin (Botswana, South Africa and Zimbabwe). The activities under Component D will draw on the
                         lessons learnt, including the way they incorporated environmental and social impact considerations
                         and mitigation actions and developed management plans for environmental, social and cultural
                         impacts.


                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ronald N. Hoffer (AFTN1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The project will finance largely studies and
                         BP 4.01                                         assessments. A limited number of small civil
                                                                         works (at approximately 15 sites) could be
                                                                         included as demonstration/pilots to refine plans
                                                                         and designs for enhancing groundwater
                                                                         management (e.g., infiltration structures to
                                                                         enhance recharge in seasonal streams, associated
                                                                         shallow boreholes, catchment re-vegetation, and
                                                                         sustainable community use of groundwater).
                                                                         These are expected to pose minimal risk.
                                                                         Promotion of infrastructures solutions for more
                                                                         sustainable groundwater management will be
                                                                         done alongside mitigation guidance on potential
                                                                         environmental and social impacts. Localised
                                                                         environmental impacts would be manageable by
                                                                         the Project’s Simplified Environmental
                                                                         Management Framework and Plan (EMF-EMP)
                                                                         including provisions for screening and standard
                                                                         rules for contractors.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            There are numerous opportunities to establish the
                                                                         small number of pilot locations (approximately
                                                                         15), so impacts on natural habitats can be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         identified and avoided. The EMF-EMP will
                                                                         reinforce good practices in this regard on natural
                                                                         habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The policy is not triggered as the project
                                                                         envisions no investments in management or
                                                                         destruction of natural forests or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                         procure pesticides nor result in their use.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The policy is triggered as a safeguard to any
                         BP 4.11                                         chance finds in relation to the small-scale
                                                                         infrastructures. During the detailed design of any
                                                                         pilots/demonstration civil works, the EMF-EMP
                                                                         outlines mitigation steps and efforts to avoid
                                                                         known physical cultural resources, and includes
                                                                         measures to be taken should they be encountered
                                                                         (for example provisions for identifying and
                                                                         protecting “chance finds”).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   Not applicable.



                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The civil works either indirectly promoted by the
                            4.12                                           Project or directly financed by any small scale
                                                                           demonstration/pilot works would avoid negative
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           social impacts. Should these be identified (guided
                                                                           by the EMF-EMP/RPF), loss of income or
                                                                           requirement for land acquisition if any would be
                                                                           guided by the Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                           (RPF).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            No construction/rehabilitation or use of waters
                                                                           from a medium or large dam is envisioned in this
                                                                           project.
                            Projects on International        Yes           The Policy is triggered because the planned
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           investments relating to diagnostics of select
                                                                           transboundary aquifers within the SADC region.
                                                                           This project will also finance a number of
                                                                           technical assistance activities focusing on: pilot
                                                                           demonstrations for improved groundwater
                                                                           infrastructure that could take place in/over
                                                                           transboundary aquifers solely within SADC
                                                                           Member States. Guidance on scaling-up will
                                                                           include provisions for notification as prescribed
                                                                           through the Revised SADC Protocol on Shared
                                                                           Watercourses, relevant River Basin Agreements
                                                                           as appropriate.

                                                                           The riparian notification process is considered
                                                                           satisfied, since all riparian SADC Member States
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           are beneficiaries of the project and involved in
                                                                           project preparation and implementation through
                                                                           participation in the SADC Subcommittee of
                                                                           Hydrogeology (also responsible for strategic
                                                                           project guidance). Thirteen Member States have
                                                                           submitted GEF Endorsement Letters
                                                                           acknowledging their awareness of the key design
                                                                           elements and specific components of the project
                                                                           (GEF Requirement). The Endorsement Letters are
                                                                           on file. Furthermore, the Revised SADC Protocol
                                                                           on Shared Watercourses (2000) is in force and the
                                                                           SADC Secretariat, which oversees compliance
                                                                           with the Protocol is itself mandated to implement
                                                                           the project by SADC Member States. Under these
                                                                           circumstances, the requirement for notification of
                                                                           other riparians does not apply.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            No project activity will be implemented in
                            7.60                                           disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Activity D will entail the promotion of groundwater infrastructure solutions in SADC Member
                           States (primarily small scale infrastructures such) through firstly technical assistance and
                           secondly, minor demonstration works (approximately 15).

                           At the stage of preparation, the exact location of demonstration sites and potential future
                           infrastructure works that follow recommended improved plans and designs has not determined. In
                           the previous SADC Groundwater Project, the exact sites were defined during implementation after
                           a comprehensive process of research and consultation with affected communities. Furthermore, the
                           location of any demonstration or pilot civil works should be chosen so as to make it easy for
                           people to visit, learn and monitor the efficiency of any works. This experience will be reflected in
                           this new project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Indirect or long-term impacts are expected to be very local in nature, and mitigation efforts of any
                           adverse impacts will be guided by the simplified Environmental Management Framework –
                           Environmental Management Plan & Resettlement Policy Framework during implementation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Not applicable.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The SADC Secretariat is an inter-governmental organisation with headquarters located in
                           Gaborone, Botswana. The Secretariat has established structures for consultation and sharing of
                           information related to water; i.e. through the SADC Council of Ministers of Water, the SADC
                           Water Resources Technical Committee, and the SADC Subcommittee on Hydrogeology. Through
                           the proposed Project, however, support will be provided to expedite the timeliness and disclosure
                           of consultation regarding environmental and social management aspects. The implementing
                           agencies are also expected to be reinforced with staff and external experts that will oversee the
                           technical, environmental and social considerations.

                           Amongst the International Cooperation Partners (ICPs), the World Bank engages actively with
                           other donors on consultation and harmonisation of support. The ICPs also participate in the Water
                           Resources Strategic Reference Group in collaboration with SADC Secretariat
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Jan-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      03-Feb-2014



                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Botswana                                                           15-Jan-2014
                           Comments: The draft EMF/EMP & RFP were circulated for comments to the SADC Member
                                         States representatives on the SADC Subcommittee on Hydrogeology. The drafts
                                         were also published and made available for open, public view on the SADC
                                         Secretariat external website in January 2014. The drafts were also consulted and
                                         discussed at a workshop of the SADC Subcommittee on Hydrogeology in Gaborone
                                         on February 11, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     05-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Botswana                                                           15-Jan-2014
                           Comments: The draft RFP was circulated for comments to the SADC Member States
                                         representatives on the SADC Subcommittee on Hydrogeology. The drafts were also
                                         published and made available for open, public view on the SADC Secretariat
                                         external website in January 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Name: Louise E. M. Croneborg
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 18-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Gustavo Saltiel (SM)                            Date: 20-Mar-2014




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
