INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12694
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Feb-2015, 19-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P147367
Project Name: China:Xinjiang Technical and Vocational Education and Training Project
(P147367)
Task Team       Liping Xiao
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Feb-2015                Estimated    01-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Vocational training (80%), General education sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Education for all (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     102.68            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   52.68
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      50.00
Total                                                                     102.68
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Improve the quality and relevance of project schools to produce students' skills that respond to the
labor market demand in Xinjiang.
3. Project Description
The project will have two main components: (i) school-based reforms and innovations; and (ii)
Page 1 of 7


﻿provincial level policy development, school twining partnership, monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
and project management. School level reforms will improve the quality, relevance of TVET
provision in five selected project schools and their respective partner schools through a set of
innovations centering around school-industry linkage and competence-based teaching and learning.
O
U         Provincial level activities will promote project management through knowledge sharing and
monitoring and evaluation, and enhance governance through policy making and school twining
partnerships.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be carried out in Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, where 60 percent of total
population is ethnic minorities. The project will include five project schools, namely: Xinjiang
Agricultural Vocational Technical College, Xinjiang institute of Light Industry Technology;
Xinjiang Institute of Engineering; Urumqi Vocational University and College of Xinjiang Uygur
Medicine. The Agriculture College locates at Changji City; the Uygur Medicine College locates at
Hetian City; and the other three colleges locate at Urumqi City. While ethnic minorities account for
only 27.3 percent and 26.9 percent of total population in Changji City and Urumqi City, 96.3percent
of total population is ethnic minorities in Hetian City.
The primary beneficiaries of the project will be the students, especially those who are from poor
households in rural areas and from minority families. 71 percent of project school students are from
rural areas. About 60 percent of the students are from poor households who are eligible for subsidies
from the government. On average 44 percent of the total number of students are from minority ethnic
groups ranging from 30 percent to 98 percent. In the College of Xinjiang Uygur Medicine most of
the students are from ethnic minority groups. These data shows that the proposed TVET project will
meet the education needs from students in poverty, and students from ethnic minority groups is a
significant part of the beneficiaries.
The students from poor households and ethnic groups will have better employment prospects and
higher wage incomes after graduation. The proposed project will help promote shared prosperity and
mitigate income inequality through providing the required skills for students from lower income
households and from ethnic minority groups in Xinjiang.
Ethnic minorities in the project area will benefit from the educational improvement of the vocational
colleges. During the preparation stage, social assessment was carried out among five project schools
and extensive consultations were conducted among students and faculty there, including minority
students and faculty. Following the consultations, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) has
been developed for the project, under which issues concerning minority students and faculty are
identified and concrete measures for improvement are proposed. They are incorporated in the project
design and included in the EMDP. By doing so, the project will ensure the inclusion and promotion
of ethnic minorities.
In particular, the inclusion of the College of Xinjiang Uygur Medicine into this project demonstrates
the project design emphasizes inclusiveness. The College is the only institute in China aiming at
inheriting and developing the Uygur medicine and pharmacy through cultivation of applied technical
talents. Uygur medicine and pharmacy had been recognized as national intangible culture heritage in
2011 due to its long history, high effect, low cost, and wide outreach serving minority people in
remote and poor region. In addition to all school reform activities, the project will support the
College to translate and publicize some ancient Uygur medical literatures. Hence, the local Uygur
Page 2 of 7


﻿people will not only benefit from better health care services from more and higher skilled graduates,
but also enjoy the public goods produced by the project.
Urumqi City is located in the hinterland of the Eurasian continent, along the northern slope of
O
U         Tianshan Mountains and in the middle of southern margin of the Junggar Basin. Urumqi belongs to
the temperate continental arid climate with a wide scope of diurnal temperature difference, and
dramatic changes from summer to winter; it features little rainfall while high degree of evaporation,
the annual rainfall is 236mm with annual evaporation of 2616.9mm, the annual average temperature
is 7.6 ??. Hetian County is of typical warm temperate arid desert climate. The annual average
temperature is 12.2 ?? with four typical seasons. The annual rainfall is only 33.5 mm per year.
Changji is in the temperate zone, the annual average temperature is 6.8 ??, and the average annual
rainfall is 190mm per year.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Yiren Feng (GENDR)
Zhefu Liu (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project is classified as Category B due to the potential
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                impacts that are small scale and limited to the site. An
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared for
the civil works of the five schools to cover the
environmental management activities of the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The civil works of the project are within the existing
4.04                                 campuses, sites visit confirmed that the project will not
affect any natural habitats or critical natural habitats as
defined under the policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Project activities will not affect forest areas; it will not
involve any logging or planting activities in forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not procure pesticides or increase use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No           There are no any physical cultural relics within the
a         Resources OP/BP 4.11                 campuses. Chance finding procedure was included in the
EMP, and relevant clauses will be included in all
construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          According to initial social screening by task team, the
BP 4.10                              policy is triggered as ethnic minorities in the project area
will benefit from the educational improvement of the
vocational colleges. Among five project schools, 44%
percent of students and 3 1%percent of faculty are ethnic
minorities.
A Social Assessment and Ethnic Minority Development
Plan (EMDP) ? commensurate to the project issues ? had
been undertaken during project preparation to ensure that
the project design and implementation takes into account
the specific requirements of ethnic minorities groups that
are covered by the Bank definition. Based on extensive
Page 3 of 7


﻿consultations, issues concerning minority students and
faculty were identified and concrete measures for
improvement are incorporated in the project design and
included in the EMDP, which has been disclosed locally
and through the InfoShop.
 Involuntary Resettlement No       The proposed project will finance new construction of
OP/BP 4.12                          school buildings, workshops, and laboratories. Based on
the information provided by clients all civil works will be
within the existing campuses and no involuntary land
acquisition will be involved. It is anticipated that no
people will be adversely affected by the civil works
supported by the project. Based on the due diligence
review, the task team concluded that the proposed project
will not involve any land acquisition and the project will
not trigger the Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement
OP 4.12.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                of any dams as defined under this policy.
Projects on International  No       The project is not located in any international waterways
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                as defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed    No          TThe project is not located in any known disputed areas
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    as defined under the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
OP4.01 Environmental Assessment.
The proposed project will finance the construction of new school buildings for additional training
space and skills training. All planned civil works will be built on the existing land within the
campuses of 5 schools. The project is classified as Category B by considering the type, location,
sensitivity, and scale of the proposed project, and the potential environmental and social impacts.
The project will have very limited adverse impacts during the construction and operation phase.
The negative environmental impacts of the project are the construction related impacts. These
include negative impacts on ambient air, water, acoustic environments, solid wastes, and worker
safety. These negative impacts will be limited, short-term, temporary and site-specific. During the
operational stage, main environmental impacts are expected from domestic waste management.
OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples
The policy is triggered as 44percent minority students and 31 percent minority faculty in five
project schools will benefit from the project activities. The project will bring positive social
impacts to students and faculty from project schools. Issues concerned to minority students and
faculty, like bilingual education, were identified and concreted measures for improvements are
incorporated in the project design and included in EMDP developed for the Project.
OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement
Page 4 of 7


﻿The policy is not triggered as all new school buildings are located within the existing campuses of
project schools with no new land acquisition.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
This project will play a significant role in improving the quality and relevance of Xinjiang
vocational education, which will have great benefits for the project schools, teachers and students,
and also for the industries in Xinjiang. The project implementation can not only directly improve
the employment prospects for youth especially ethnic youth, but also can promote enterprises and
industries cooperated with the project schools. By improving the living standards especially for
ethnic minorities, in the long term, harmonious relations among ethnic groups would be developed
and sustained in Xinjiang, which is one of the goals of the development strategy from Xinjiang
government. Overall, the World Bank's support for Xinjiang Technical and Vocational Education
and Training Project is of positive social significance.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was selected as the EA instrument due to the nature of
the project. The project owner engaged accredited EIA consultant to prepare the EMP. EMP was
prepared based on national norms, practice proven in other Bank financed projects and the practice
recommended in Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines. It specifies each aspect of
the environmental management during the whole project cycle, including but not limited to, site
preparation, construction dust management, air pollution control, noise impact control, water
pollution control, waste management, public and workers?? health and safety. It also includes the
institutional arrangement, the training and capacity building, reporting, monitoring and supervision
arrangements for the implementation phase of the project. Proper implementation of the mitigation
measures required by the project will minimize the impacts to acceptable level, or eliminate them
entirely. Given that 44percent of students and 3 1percent of faculty of project schools are ethnic
minorities, extensive consultations had been conducted to ensure their concerns and requirements
were identified and included into the project design. An Ethnic Minority Development Plan
(EMDP) was developed for the project based on broad consultation with concrete measures,
detailed budget and responsible agencies. The EMDP and EMP were reviewed by the Bank team
and found satisfactory to the Bank safeguards requirements. The EMP will be included in the
bidding documents and the corresponding contracts.
The World Bank has supported several projects in Xinjiang; this is the first investment project in
education and vocational training. The project will be managed by the provincial Project
Management Office (PMO) established under Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region Education
Department. However, there are no major safeguards policy issues as noted above. The Bank
assessment indicates that the borrower has reasonable capacity to conduct construction and project
implementation consistent with the EMDP and EMP. The PMO is staffed with 6 fulltime staff; one
staff will be responsible for safeguard-related work. The Bank??s safeguards specialists will
provide further training on safeguards during the project implementation phase.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the project preparation, the project schools, PMO, environmental and Social Consultants
Page 5 of 7


﻿carried out information disclosure and public consultation through posters, questionnaire survey,
interviews and public meetings in project cities. The key stakeholders include staffs and students
of the schools, communities nearby, and local relevant government agencies. Public opinions were
incorporated into the project design and safeguard reports including EMDP and EMP properly.
O
Q)          Prior to project appraisal, the social assessment report, EMDP and EMP were disclosed locally on
January 5, 2015 and are publicly available. These reports were also disclosed at the World Bank
Infoshop on January 12, 2015. Updated reports were disclosed at the World Bank Infoshop on
March 12, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               08-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            12-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                     05-Jan-2015
Comments: Updated reports were disclosed in county on March 10, 2015.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                               08-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            12-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                     05-Jan-2015
Comments: Updated reports were disclosed in county on March 10, 2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Page 6 of 7


﻿If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes[X]  No[  NA
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Liping Xiao
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)       Date: 19-Mar-2015
Manager:
0
Page 7 of 7


