INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1039
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P133000
Project Name: Huainan Mining Area Rehabilitation Project (P 133000)
Task Team       Xiaokai Li
Leader:
Estimated       10-Dec-2014                Estimated    29-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (60%), General agriculture,
fishing and forestry sector (40%)
Theme(s):       Other environment and natural resources management (65%), Other urban
development (35%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     166.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   66.00
P           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      100.00
Total                                                                     166.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to support environmental remediation and redevelopment of the
JiuDa mining site in Huainan city.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 12


﻿The project would have three components and be implemented over five and half a years. These
components are: Environmental Remediation and Water Management, Infrastructure Improvement
and Site Utilization for Community Development, and Capacity Building and Technical Assistance.
The project components and activities are selected based on detailed site investigation and
monitoring study, environmental and geo-hazard risk assessment as well as risk management and
business planning.
o
Component 1. Environmental Remediation and Water Management (US$85.71 million)
*         This component aims at remediating and preserving the overall environment at JiuDa subsidence site
through cleaning up and greening the site, containing the pollution sources, improving the water
quality and drainage system. It has three main sub-components.
Subcomponent 1.1. Environmental remediation: This component supports site clean-up,
environmental and landscape rehabilitation. The key activities for environmental remediation
include: (a) cleanup of the waste dump sites, involving waste material removal and soil/vegetation
restoration, and closed mine shaft reinforcement; (b) re-vegetation of the project area with a variety
of trees, shrubs and low vegetation; and (c) a site-wide green path, with basic sanitation service
facilities such as public toilets and dust bins.
Subcomponent 1.2. Water Stream Rehabilitation: This sub-component finances rehabilitation of the
local water system for storm water drainage, rainwater harvesting and landscaping. The main
activities include: (a) rehabilitation of storm water drainage channels; (b) construction of connecting
streams, storage ponds and cross structures; and (c) building irrigation facilities for the trees and
vegetation at the site.
Subcomponent 1.3. Datong Dumpsite Closure. This sub-component supports proper closure of the
Datong waste dumpsite to prevent further pollution from the waste dump. The main investment
activities include: (a) reshaping and final capping to the dumpsite; (b) constructing a dump boundary
dike around the dump cells; (c) building a vertical barrier wall to prevent lateral migration of leachate
off site; (d) constructing a leachate collection and treatment system; and (e) constructing a landfill
gas collection and treatment system.
O
Component 2. Infrastructure Improvement and Site Utilization (US$31.95 million)
This component has two sub-components, and it is intended to help improve the accessibility of the
project area and connection between the central district and the new Shannan district with an
emphasis on increasing non-motorized transport (including walking and biking). It is also intended to
utilize the remediated site and local resources available for community livelihoods development and
generate revenues towards meeting the project O&M costs.
Sub-component 2.1. Urban Infrastructure Improvement. This sub-component finances construction
of 4 roads and associated urban environmental service facilities which are to be used by different
income level groups. The roads include Zhongxing, Yanshan, Wanxiang and Jiukong roads. The
associated facilities to be built under the project include pipelines for water supply, sewerage
conveyance and storm water drainage.
Subcomponent 2.2: Site Utilization for Community Development. This sub-component finances
several redevelopment activities. These include: (a) a tree nursery and associated facilities for
maintenance of the environmental remediation areas and sales; (b) a flower market and associated
facilities; (c) a Bonzai area and associated facilities; and (d) two visitor service centers.
Component 3. Capacity Building and Technical Assistance (US$17.82 million)
This component provides support in project implementation and management, O&M of project
facilities, and long-term management of subsidence areas. The main activities include: (a) project
Page 2 of 12


﻿management, implementation support services, related training and capacity building activities; and
(b) technical assistance for long-term management and redevelopment of coal mining subsidence
areas in Huainan Municipality, and for developing the implementation plan of Shungengshan Scenic
Area for the project area.
0
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located in Huainan city, in the central north of Anhui Province, China and in the
middle reach of Huai River. Huainan city has a population of 2.45 million people with a land area of
2,596 km2. The project activities will take place over an area of some 9.3 km2 in Datong District of
Huainan city. There are enterprises, closed mines, villages, and clumps of second-growth trees,
farmland, and water ponds in the project area. The area features ground subsidence and
environmental degradation caused by coal mining from decades ago. In addition, an abandoned
domestic waste dump site covering an area of 11 hectare within the subsidence site poses a
significant risk to the local environment and wellbeing of the local communities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Zhefu Liu (GSURR)
Chaogang Wang (GSURR)
Feng Ji (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes         See Section II A(1)
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No          The project area has been deeply influenced by
human activities. The area consists of enterprises,
closed mines, villages, and clumps of second-
growth trees, farmland, and water ponds. There
are no endangered or rare species identified in the
project area. The project will benefit local
environment without the potential to cause
significant conversion (loss) or degradation of
natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes         There are 137 hectares of woodland scattered in
the project area. The woodland is either of planted
or second-growth trees consisting of common
local species. The project proposes to plant trees
in a big area (total 374 hectares) for soil
stabilization, greening and recreational purposes.
This investment will improve significantly the
landscape of degraded lands, reduce soil erosion,
and provide local residents with space for
recreation. The EA also identified some negative
risks (e.g. invasive species) may occur if the
plantation is not properly designed and
implemented.
See Section II A(1).
Page 3 of 12


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes         See Section II A(1)
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  Yes       See Section 11 A(1)
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4. 10  No         The TT visited the affected village and the local
communities. The social screenings to the IP were
conducted. It is concluded that the project area is
predominantly Han Chinese and there are no
ethnic minority groups as defined by OP4.10 such
as Hui, Manchu and Mongolian communities
present in, or have collective attachment to the
project area. Bank OP 4.10 policy is not triggered
and IPDP not requested. The resettlement impact
surveys and social analysis undertaken by the
national social safeguards consulting team also
confirmed that there are no any ethnic minorities
to be affected by the project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes        The project will involve permanent and
4.12                                       temporary acquisition of land, and relocation of
some residential houses and industrial workshops.
Along with the project implementation, the
people who are currently live in the project area
will have to be moved out. To mitigate the
resettlement impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan
and a Resettlement Policy Framework have been
prepared and disclosed both locally and at the
InfoShop. Due diligence review also was carried
out for the linked activities and the findings of the
review are included in the RAP.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No          The project will not finance construction or
rehabilitation of any dams as defined under the
policy. Thus, this policy is not triggered.
Projects on International      No          The project is not associated with any
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No        The project is not located in disputed areas.
7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment (OP4.01): The project area consists of enterprises, closed mines,
villages, and clumps of second-growth trees, farmland, and water ponds, and wasteland. The
project area has been deeply influenced by human activities. There are no endangered or rare
species identified in the project area. The project is expected to substantially improve local
environment without the potential to cause significant conversion or degradation of natural
Page 4 of 12


﻿habitats. The closure of the Datong Dump will effectively alleviate leachate pollution of ground
water and surface water, and emissions of greenhouse gas, and other air pollutants from the
Datong Dump. The clean-up of waste deposits will reduce pollution sources, while re-vegetation
in the project area reduce soil erosion and carbon dioxide emission, and improve the landscape of
O
the subsidence area. Rehabilitation of the drainage channels will improve the flood management
capacity in the project area, increase open water surface area, in which storm water will be
collected and re-used for vegetation irrigation. The project also has the potential to bring about
great social benefits to local communities. The environmental restoration, the provision of basic
infrastructure (e.g. road, water supply pipes, sewers, and drainage channels) and amenities (e.g.
green lanes, vegetation, open water surface) are expected to improve living conditions of local
residents, attract tourists, and increase the property values in the area.
Adverse impacts/risks of the project mainly include (i) the controllability of landfill closure on the
emission of leachate; and (ii) the geo-hazard/ instability in the project area caused by the past
mining activities. The first risk can be mitigated by the design of the closure taking into account
international good practices and following relevant national regulations/standards. Adequate
mitigation measures for the closure have been incorporated into the project design and the ESMP,
including, among others, (i) constructing a dump boundary dike (wall) around the dump cells, and
a vertical barrier wall to prevent lateral migration of leachate off the site; and (ii) installation of a
boundary leachate removal system. A modeling study has been conducted for the Datong Dump
closure showing that the migration of leachate into the environment will be greatly contained after
the completion of the closure works, with an expected 99% reduction in pollution loads. Post-
closure ground water monitoring at and around the dumpsite will continue during implementation
and after project completion, to ensure that the pollution from the waste dump is adequately
contained.
With respect to the second risk, a geo-hazard study was undertaken to thoroughly delineate the
extent of the risks associated with existing landforms and ground conditions, and a risk map
prepared showing the areas identified with different degree of geo-hazard/instability. The results
have been taken into account in the project design, including that (i) no urban infrastructure or
public areas will be established within the risk zones, without adequate ground stabilization
measures; and (ii) dumpsite closure footprint is to be adjusted to avoid unstable areas. In addition,
Huainan Municipality has developed a city master plan, making the project area as a green space.
No urban infrastructure shall be established within the risk zones. The master plan will be
enforced by the Huainan Municipality
Project construction will cause general construction related impacts on nearby villages and
surrounding environment. These impacts include disposal of dredged materials (total 7,680m3
non-hazardous materials) and spoil; construction nuisances such as dust, noise, wastewater;
increased traffic; and safety issues. But these impacts are not considered significant and can be
readily mitigated with good engineering design and construction management. Environmental
Code of Practices (ECOPs) and specific mitigation measures for construction have been prepared,
and will be included in bidding documents and civil work contracts.
During operation the Datong Dump will generate leachate (23m3/d) and landfill gas. The
collection and treatment of leachate and landfill gas are specified in the ESMP. In addition, the
operation of four new roads will cause some nuisance (e.g. noise, vehicle emission) and road
safety issue, for which mitigation measures (e.g. road safety design) have been proposed in the
ESMP.
Page 5 of 12


﻿Forests (OP4.36): There are 137 hectares of woodland scattered in the project area. The woodland
is either of planted or second-growth trees consisting of common local species. The project
O
Q)          proposes to plant trees in a big area (total 374 hectares) for soil stabilization, greening and
recreational purposes. This investment will improve significantly the landscape of degraded lands,
reduce soil erosion, and provide local residents with space for recreation. The EA identified some
negative risks (e.g. invasive species) which may occur if the plantation is not properly designed
and implemented. Under the support of forest consultants, the project has selected a variety of
indigenous species, which are compatible with local soil characteristics and are not prone to pest
and disease.
Pest Management (OP4.09): While the project will neither finance the procurement of pesticides
or equipment for pesticides application, the reforestation and nursery construction and operation
will result in an increase in the use of pesticides for these project activities. Consistent with the
provisions of Pest Management Policy (OP4.09), a Pest Management Plan, as part of the ESMP,
has been developed for the project to improve capacity of operating entities and farmers concerned
in minimizing the use and safe application of pesticides; and promoting integrated pest
management.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP4. 11): A PCRs survey, as part of the EA, has been conducted. The
EA shows that the construction of one of the two tourist service stations is in the vicinity of a
Church with a separation distance of 51 meters. The church is not registered as cultural relic.
However, it is considered as PCRs due to its religious significance to local communities. The
project will not cause any significant impacts to the church. Instead, it will provide much
improved environment for the local communities. Consultation has been conducted with the
church and related stakeholders such as local cultural protection agency. Specific mitigation
measures have been proposed in the ESMP including, (i) installation of noise barrier and
prohibiting the use of high noise-generating equipment during religion events; and (ii) chance
finds procedures.
Social safeguards:
The project has significant environmental and social benefits, as it supports environmental
a          remediation of JiuDa mining site and environmentally friendly redevelopment. Based on the
family income sampling survey, the income of the bottom 40% of the population in Datong
District is about RMB 8,000 in Year 2012 while the average urban family disposable income of
Huainan city is about RMB 20,733 in the same year. The cumulative frequency graph shows that
about 92% of the population in Datong District is relatively poor. They are in a comparatively
disadvantaged position in terms of living conditions and income level. This project would
contribute to improve the living environment of those communities and provide opportunities for
livelihoods development and income generation.
The project will affect one village, two residential communities and an enterprise in Datong
District. Some old buildings from four other enterprises which are closed down, will be abolished
and compensated, which will not affect any people. Implementation of project facilities and
activities under different components will require permanent acquisition of 82.2 hectares of land,
including 11.8 hectares of collective cultivated land and 70.4 hectares of State owned land
currently being used by Huainan coal mining company. The State owned land will be transferred
from Huainan coal mining company to Huainan municipality. The land acquisition will affect 33
rural households with 266 people. Further, the project will require the relocation of 9,632 m2
Page 6 of 12


﻿structures, including 2,552 m2 of private houses and 7,080 m2 of enterprise structures. As a result,
6 households and 26 people will need to be resettled under this project.
To mitigate the impact, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared, providing details on
resettlement policy, procedures and requirements to be followed during project implementation,
O
Q)          including compensation rates, mitigation measures to restore livelihoods, institutional and
monitoring arrangements. The RAP was disclosed locally on July 17, 2014.
The task team conducted due diligence reviews of the projects (works) which are linked to the
Bank financed project. The Bank loan will finance construction (upgrading) of four roads. These
four roads will be connected with three existing roads (National Road G206, Huaishun south
Road, and Linchang Road) completed in 2002, 2012 and July 2014 respectively), to form a local
road network. The two roads, including Huaishun south road and Linchang road are considered as
associated projects as their construction was completed after the date of project identification. The
National Road 206 is not considered as associated projects because its construction was completed
12 years ago. The land acquisition and resettlement of the two linked roads were completed in
accordance with the national land law and consistent with the requirements of Bank Policy on
Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.
In addition to the roads, two pumping stations and one flood drainage were identified as associated
projects. They are Zhongxing south road water supply pumping station, Jiulonggang sewage
pumping station and Longwang drainage. The detailed resettlement impacts are included in the
RAP. The two pumping stations do not involve in any involuntary resettlement impacts. The
resettlement impacts of the Longwang drainage are covered by a separate resettlement action plan
of a project financed by the Asian Development Bank. In any case, the resettlement external
monitoring agency will closely monitor these associated projects to ensure that involuntary
resettlement impacts are adequately mitigated.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
As it is expected that the number of tourists will gradually increase in the project area, necessary
mitigation measures have been built into project design, including provision of sanitation facilities,
parking lots, and trash collection bins. After the project area is remediated and becomes a
recreation and tourist site, it is anticipated that recreation and tourism may be promoted and
developed, while the enterprises now operating at the site would likely be closed or moved out of
the project area gradually.
There is a population of 13946 in the area which has potential of land value increase as a result of
project implementation, including 2212 of rural population (Chenxiang village, Xiacai Village,
Qingfeng community and Datong Street) and 11734 of urban population. The size of the area is
195.21 hectares, including 49.36 hectares of collective land distributed in Chengxiang village,
Xiacai village, Qingfeng community and Datong Street and 145.85 hectares of state-owned land.
Measures have been taken to ensure both urban and rural residents in the area to benefit from the
potential land value increase. The detailed measures (including reflect land appreciation in the
compensation standards, yearly cap on land to be expropriated, allocation of 5-10% of
expropriated land to village collectives, and relocation within the project area) and monitoring
arrangements, as part of the Resettlement External Monitoring Agency's responsibility, are
included in ESIA executive summary and ESMP.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Feasibility Study and EA include a review of the alternatives considered during the project
feasibility study and project design. The alternative analysis mainly focused on options for Datong
Page 7 of 12


﻿Dumpsite: (i) business as usual without proper closure; (ii) excavating and relocating waste from
the dumpsite to the city's sanitary landfill and/or waste-to-energy (WTE) facility for disposal; (iii)
In-situ closure and remediation of dumpsite; and (iv) dumpsite mining to recover recyclable
materials with residual disposal at sanitary landfill or WTE facility. The analysis of these options
O
Q)          resulted in the selection of in-situ closure and remediation (option 3, above). The alternative
analysis also included options for other activities such as leachate treatment; alternatives for
landscape and urban infrastructure (see EA for details). The layout and technical design of
different infrastructure are optimized taking into account technical and economic factors as well as
environmental and social considerations, particularly land acquisition.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental: The PMO has engaged an experienced environmental assessment consulting firm
to conduct the project EA. A stand-alone ESMP for the project has been developed based on the
fmdings of the EA. The ESMP describes the measures needed to minimize, mitigate or
compensate for expected environmental impacts of the project and the monitoring plan; defines
institutional responsibilities for the implementation of mitigation measures; and proposes capacity
building activities and a budget for the ESMP implementation. The ESMP specifies the following
major mitigation measures:
(i) Environmental Code of Practices will be included in all bidding documents and contracts
for construction activities, including management of wastes, erosion control, disposal sites, control
of dust and nuisance, management of hazardous materials and wastes, de-commissioning of
existing facilities, worker's camp management, health and safety issues, community relations,
chance find procedures, and environmental supervision during construction.
(ii)   Mitigation measures have been incorporated in the design for the closure of Datong
Dump, including the installation of a dump boundary dike around the dump cells with concrete
storm water collection drain at the edge of the dump footprint to contain the waste cells; HDPE
lining system, and vertical barrier wall to prevent lateral migration of leachate off site; leachate
collection, storage and treatment system, landfill gas collection and treatment system, etc.
(iii)  Under the support of forest consultants and through consultation with local forest
management authority, a variety of indigenous species have been selected, which are compatible
with local soil characteristics and are not prone to pest and disease.
O
(iv)   Pest Management Plan, as part of the ESMP, has been developed for the project to
improve capacity of operating entities and farmers to minimize use and to safely apply pesticides;
and promote integrated pest management.
(v)    Leachate will be collected and trucked away for proper treatment at the leachate treatment
facility of an existing sanitary landfill site which is located at approximately 6.5 km from the
Datong Dumpsite. Landfill gas will be collected and flared. Due diligence on associated facilities
(e.g. existing leachate treatment facility and wastewater treatment plant), has been conducted,
confirming that these facilities are in compliance with Chinese EA regulations.
(vi)   Specific mitigation measures for other types of project activities have been incorporated
into the project design and the ESMP, such as disposal of dredged materials, road safety design,
sustainable drainage design, and provision of sanitation facilities (e.g. trash bins, public toilets)
and service stations for tourists, etc.
(vii)  A Social Impact Management Plan has been development and included in the ESMP.
Huainan city has experience in the projects financed by the World Bank and Asian Development
Bank. The Huainan Agriculture and Water Investment Company (HAWIC) and four other
government agencies: municipal construction commission, municipal sanitation bureau, Datong
Page 8 of 12


﻿district government and Mining Subsidence Management Office, will be the implementing
agencies (PIAs) for the Bank supported project. A Project Leading Group (PLG) chaired by the
executive vice-mayor has been established to provide policy guidance and oversight in project
preparation and implementation. A Project Management Office (PMO) headed by the director of
O
Huainan Finance Bureau has also been established to be responsible for project management and
coordination of project implementation.
The PIAs have designated staff to coordinate and manage the safeguards assessment and
instrument implementation, and received training on the Bank safeguard policies during project
preparation. Capacity building for the PIA and PMO staff and targeted training on related Bank
policies and different aspects of project management have been carried out during project
preparation, and will be continued in implementation stage. Qualified consulting firm with Bank
project experiences will be engaged to assist the implementation of the ESMP.
Social: The PMO contracted an experienced institute (firm) to guide the social safeguards
assessment and resettlement implementation office establishment. The PMO and PIA staff has
been trained on Bank social safeguards policies and instruments, and have attended exposure visits
to other on-going Bank projects with resettlement ongoing. They are now familiar with the Bank
safeguards requirements.
A RAP covering the key resettlement information, mitigation measures and plan for the affected
village and communities has been prepared. The social safeguards consulting firm worked closely
with the feasibility study team to optimize the project design and minimize negative social
impacts. Public consultations were undertaken by the consulting team and the project staff to
involve the local communities in the project design and seek feedbacks and suggestions on project
interventions and RAP. The public consultation also provided on-the-job training opportunities for
the PMO and PIA staff and community leaders.
A competent firm, independent to the PMO and the implementation agencies, will be contracted to
monitor and report on the implementation of the RAP for review by the Bank twice a year.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
O
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental: In accordance with Bank requirements and Chinese regulations, public
consultations were conducted from May 2013 to June 2014, including public consultation
meetings and questionnaire survey, with project affected persons and other stakeholders (e.g.
enterprises, village associations, local communities, governmental agencies). Their opinions and
concerns have been taken into account in the EA and in the project design. The EA and the ESMP
were locally disclosed on June 11, 2014 through announcements published on the local website
and newspaper and re-disclosed on September 5, 2014. The EA safeguards documents were sent
to the Bank InfoShop for disclosure in November 2014.
Social: The project will provide significant benefits to the people who are living in the project and
the adjacent areas. The key project stakeholders include the local villages and communities who
are informed and consulted about the project through community meetings, interviews and
different media. The affected people believe that the project will provide them with opportunities
to have better living environment and develop their businesses. There are 6 urban communities
and one village in and around the project area, these groups would directly benefit from the project
investments. As indicated above a total of 39 households will be affected by resettlement, those
families were consulted and involved during the entire process of RAP preparation including the
formulation of skills training program.
Page 9 of 12


﻿The RAP and social impact analysis included a gender analysis. The social safeguards consultant
team with support from local agencies, conducted a disaggregated gender analysis in affected
village/communities, and consulted the women group on their expectations and ideas. The
O
recommendations have been taken into account in the project design. Gender disaggregated
information was also collected and used in the RAP development to ensure that women's interests
be safeguarded during resettlement implementation. For example, women-specific skills training
has been included in the RAP which has been locally disclosed through announcements published
on the local website and newspaper.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  10-Dec-2014
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    05-Sep-2014
Comments: June 11, 2014 anad September 5, 2014
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    17-Jul-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
0
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              05-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    05-Sep-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[      NA
report?
Page 10 of 12


﻿If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes[X]  No[       NA
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes[  No[X]      NA
does it include provisions for certification system?
o         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Xiaokai Li
Approved By
Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                   Date: 09-Dec-2014
Advisor:
Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)              Date: 09-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


