                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA7248
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Zimbabwe                         Project ID:    P124625
                            Project Name:     Hwange-Sanyati Biological Corridor Project (P124625)
                            Task Team         Douglas J. Graham
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         04-Feb-2014                      Estimated   16-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTN2                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (45%), General public administration sector (20%), Sub-national
                                              government administration (20%), Central government adminis tration (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (30%), Land administration and management (25%), Climate
                                              change (20%), Environmental policies and institutions (15%), O ther
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              environment and natural resources management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      19.11           Total Bank Financing:               0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              Borrower                                                                              13.22
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                      5.65
                              TerrAfrica Leveraging Fund                                                             0.25
                              Total                                                                                 19.11
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                     Page 1 of 9
                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         To develop land use and resource management capacity of managers and communities in the
                         Hwange-Sanyati Biological Corridor (HSBC).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will have four closely inter-related components:

                         Component 1: Protected area (PA) management and community livelihoods (US$1.795 million of
                         GEF financing). The aim of this component is to improve management of the Hwange National Park
                         and the livelihood of communities involved in stewardship of the natural resources in the buffer area
                         of the HNP. The component will focus primarily on Hwange and Tsholotsho districts, the only
                         districts in the HSBC that share boundaries with HNP.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Improved management of Hwange National Park. This subcomponent would
                         finance investments for improving park management, improving water and game water supply
                         management, and supporting essential research and monitoring.
                         Sub-component 1.2: Improved community livelihoods through wildlife management. This
                         subcomponent would support investments in the buffer areas of HNP through the restocking of
                         wildlife areas; mitigating human and wildlife conflicts (HWC); provision of appropriate training to
                         environment sub-committees and communities; and conducting research on HWC mitigation and
                         will support the CAMPFIRE system that will open new opportunities to communities to allow them
                         to become custodians of their natural resources (largely through trophy hunting quotas that creates
                         employment for local populations as well as revenue for infrastructure projects).

                         Component 2: Improved forest and land management (US$3.24 million of GEF financing). The aim
                         of this component is to improve forest and land management across the HSBC by developing tools to
                         address land degradation, land use change, and deforestation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2.1: Improved forestry management. Five of the country’s 24 gazetted indigenous
                         forest areas are found within the project area: Sikumi, Ngamo, Mzola, Kavira and Sijarira. The
                         project will focus specifically on the Sikumi and Ngamo Forests that are adjacent to the HNP and
                         consequently provide continuity for wildlife movement within the corridor. The subcomponent will
                         support better forestry management and implementation of REDD+ pilot project.
                         Subcomponent 2.2: Land Rehabilitation. The root causes of land degradation, which include both
                         natural and man-made factors, include: extensive change in land use, deforestation, intensive farming
                         of riverbanks and hillsides, and soil composition and structure. The project area straddles the Gwayi
                         (87,960 km2) and Sanyati (74,534 km2) catchments. These catchments receive 450 to 650 mm of
                         rainfall per annum. Most of the catchments’ inhabitants depend on agriculture for survival, growing
                         crops such as maize, small grain cereals, and cotton under rain fed conditions and tend to cattle and
                         goats. In order to attain these goals the project will undertake studies, development of land
                         management models, and investments in targeted catchments primarily to control gullies.

                         Component 3: Corridor Sustainability (US$0.335 million of GEF financing). Specific activities to be
                         undertaken under this component include:
                         a)       Mapping of land use patterns within the biological corridor; technical support to the units
                         within the ministries to develop a strategy for landscape-based approaches for good management of
                         forests and wider landscape in the HSBC.
                         b)       Review and systematically package relevant tools developed in the different project


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         components for wider dissemination and up-scaling to corridor level.
                         c)       Support to develop and implement a communication strategy on this integrated approach for
                         the HSBC that encompasses branding of the HSBC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         d)       Further solidify the links with KAZA in support of the transboundary nature of the HSBC;
                         bolster Coordination with KAZA Partners through regular meetings with practitioners and sharing
                         practical experiences on transboundary conservation issues.
                         e)       Use experiences from greenhouse gas emission related work to support national and regional
                         institutional capacity in climate change and natural resource use analysis, capacity building,
                         awareness creation and establishment of an information system supported by targeted workshops and
                         meetings.

                         Component 4: Project Coordination (US$0.275 million of GEF financing). Manage and provide
                         oversight of the project, including financial management and audits, procurement, and monitoring
                         and evaluation
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         To have a meaningful impact on the ground, and given resource limitations, the project will have a
                         limited geographic coverage. Accordingly, the project will operate in northwestern Zimbabwe,
                         specifically in the Hwange-Sanyati Biological Corridor (HSBC). The HSBC is rich in biodiversity
                         and consists of a mosaic of land uses under different tenure arrangements. The region is home to
                         three national parks; two Safari areas; six gazetted forest areas; four communal lands and private and
                         resettled lands. In terms of rehabilitating degraded land, the project will focus on the Sanyati
                         catchment located at the northeast border of the HSBC.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kristine Schwebach (AFTCS)
                         Amadou Konare (AFTN1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              In Components 1 and 2, the Project will finance
                          BP 4.01                                             small infrastructure investments such as park
                                                                              buildings and gully-control measures. Minor
                                                                              adverse environmental impacts are expected as
                                                                              the potential impacts will be small-scale and site-
                                                                              specific, typical of category B projects. An ESMF
                                                                              has been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes              The project will help conserve natural habitats
                                                                              and will ensure that specific project activities
                                                                              avoid habitat degradation. No negative impacts to
                                                                              critical or sensitive natural habitats are expected.
                                                                              However, subprojects will be screened for their
                                                                              impact on natural habitats during their
                                                                              preparation. The ESMF includes mitigation
                                                                              measures for impacts on natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 Yes              One of the goals of the project is to reduce
                                                                              deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                                                              contributing to the well-being of forest-dependent


                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                                                                         communities. Potential impacts of the project on
                                                                         natural forests and mitigations measures
                                                                         commensurable to those impacts have been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         formulated in the ESMF. The forest reserves
                                                                         under the project are not managed for timber
                                                                         production; local communities access only some
                                                                         non-timber forest products. There thus is no need
                                                                         to develop certifiable forest management plans as
                                                                         described under the OP.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The policy is not triggered because the project
                                                                         does not procure any pesticides nor does it
                                                                         support any activity involving the use of
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project triggers OP 4.11 because the project
                         BP 4.11                                         will involve ground works (under the gully
                                                                         management subcomponent) which may impact
                                                                         on underground resources of archaeological or
                                                                         paleontological significance. The environmental
                                                                         baseline shows that the Gokwe North area is rich
                                                                         in fossils, which are of national, regional and
                                                                         perhaps of global importance. Other types of
                                                                         cultural resources, such as sacred sites might be
                                                                         identified during the course of the project
                                                                         although none were identified during preparation
                                                                         as being potentially impacted by the Project. The
                                                                         ESMF includes measures for dealing with
                                                                         physical cultural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           A community of San peoples who have the
                                                                         characteristics of IPs as per the Bank policy, live
                                                                         in Tsholotsho District, within the project area. OP
                                                                         4.10 is therefore triggered. An IPPF has been
                                                                         prepared, consulted upon and disclosed.

                                                                         The team notes that the project area -- the
                                                                         Hwange-Sanyati Biological Corridor -- is
                                                                         dominated by the Ndebele who have been living
                                                                         in northwestern Zimbabwe since the mid-19th
                                                                         Century. While they are not indigenous as per the
                                                                         Bank’s policy, the project design seeks to ensure
                                                                         that they are not adversely impacted by the
                                                                         project or fail to reap the project benefits.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Under Component 1 of the project,
                         4.12                                            implementation of a management plan for
                                                                         Hwange National Park may result in the
                                                                         involuntary restriction of access to a legally
                                                                         designated park which in turn may result in



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                                 adverse impacts on the livelihoods of adjacent
                                                                                 communities. It is not envisioned that new parks
                                                                                 or park extensions will result from project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 activities.

                                                                                 The project will not finance any activities that
                                                                                 will result in involuntary loss of land or shelter,
                                                                                 involuntary resettlement, loss of assets or access
                                                                                 to assets, or loss of income sources or means of
                                                                                 livelihood (other than those noted above).

                                                                                 A Process Framework has been prepared and
                                                                                 submitted for Bank review and was approved.
                                                                                 The ESMF also covers an assessment of local
                                                                                 communities and issues relevant to OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               TThe project does not involve in any way any
                                                                                 dams.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project does not result in any effect on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project does not involve any disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed project is considered an environmental category “B” project since the anticipated
                              impacts will be small-scale and site-specific and can be mitigated. There will be no large scale,
                              significant, or irreversible impacts.

                             From an environmental standpoint, the main issues include: (a) subproject investments in the HNP
                             and in the forest reserves (such as buildings, track maintenance, fire breaks, etc.) could have very
                             minor impacts; (b) water hole management investments if poorly implemented could potentially
                             result in depletion of groundwater resources (the project itself will be supporting development of
                             groundwater management strategies); and (c) the community livelihood investments under
                             Component 2 will involve intra-community relations which will need to be managed (close liaison
                             with the local community and its leadership will be important mitigation measures) and they could
                             involve minor social impacts.

                             From a social point of view, Components 1 and 2 will support existing restrictions of access to the
                             Hwange Park and to adjacent forest reserves in order to prevent illegal activities such as poaching.
                             These will be mitigated in part by project activities intended to develop alternative livelihood and
                             promote conservation. The project pilot investments are outside of the San territory. Component 3,
                             however, will concern San communities as it intends to map land use patterns within the corridor
                             from which a strategy can be developed for better landscape based management of resources. This
                             component will also implement a communication strategy for outreach activities. Once the project


                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                           is at the stage for developing a strategy, an IP Plan will be prepared to ensure San people will be
                           involved in ways which are culturally appropriate and inclusive.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           It is not anticipated that any negative indirect or long term environmental or social impacts will be
                           caused by the project. The project is expected to bring lasting positive benefits to communities, by
                           improving PA management effectiveness and providing alternative livelihoods to communities
                           living within the biological corridor. In addition, it will improve biodiversity management, as well
                           as the livelihood opportunities of communities involved in stewardship of the natural resources.

                           Other environmental and social benefits that will accrue to local communities include, but not
                           limited to the following: (i) land use pattern studies and mapping to determine the root-cause of
                           land degradation; and (ii) strengthening communities capacity in sustainable land management and
                           environmental rehabilitation and mechanical conservation works; and (iii) support to the
                           rehabilitation of the most affected area in Sanyati - Chireya locality.

                           If the project is successful, it will promote new activities in which adjacent communities can
                           improve their livelihood through conservation, rather than poaching, and benefit from increased
                           tourism.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           As no significant adverse impacts have been identified, no project alternatives were considered.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address potential environmental and social issues under the project, the Recipient has prepared
                           the following instruments: an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); an
                           Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); and a Process Framework (PF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           To successfully identify and manage potential adverse impacts on the environment from project-
                           funded activities, since the subproject-specific sites and works are not yet finalized, the borrower
                           has prepared an ESMF following a broad-based consultation approach with project stakeholder
                           groups. The ESMF formulates standard methods and procedures of impact evaluation and
                           mitigation, along with clear institutional arrangements for screening, review, approval,
                           implementation and monitoring of subproject-specific safeguards instruments (ESIAs or ESMPs),
                           as necessary. The ESMF contains ample provisions to guide assessment and management of
                           impacts on natural habitats as required as well as on forest resources in the context of the Bank’s
                           Forests Policy.

                           The ESMF includes chance finds procedures to identify possible impacts on physical cultural
                           resources. These procedures will ensure that ESIAs/ESMP consultants and contractors are able to
                           do due diligence, or are teamed up with Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) experts to ensure that
                           impacts on PCRs are assessed and mitigation measures commensurate to those impacts, including
                           proper handling of chance finds, are implemented in the design, in accordance with national and
                           World Bank policies.

                           The IPPF describes the relationship of the Project to the San people, who live in an area adjacent
                           to the HSBC and lays out provisions for development of an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           (IPDP) during project implementation if this proves necessary. The Process Framework describes
                           how the HNP will be managed to ensure adequate participation of local communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A Process Framework has been prepared. The ESMF also covers an assessment of local
                           communities and issues relevant to OP 4.12.

                           Zimbabwe has implemented few Bank-funded projects. However, the institutions involved in
                           environmental management and safeguards due diligence, as described in the ESMF, are
                           considered to have adequate environmental management capacity. The ESMF also provides
                           specific capacity strengthening measures for better preparedness of the actors involved in
                           safeguards implementation,
                           monitoring and supervision.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The preparation of the safeguard documents followed a broad-based and in-depth consultation
                           approach that included interviews and surveys of relevant project stakeholder groups, including,
                           but not limited to: district administrators, rural district councils, Ministry of Lands and Rural
                           Resettlement; Ministry of Women Affairs, Gender and Community Development; Ministry of
                           Youth Development, Indigenization and Empowerment; Department of Public Works;
                           Environmental Management Agency; Forestry Commission; local communities (the San in
                           particular for the IPPF); and the Parks and Wildlife Authority. Details of the consultations and
                           their results are described in each of the three safeguard instruments.

                           The consultation approach was based on principles of inclusivity, openness and transparency,
                           relevance and fairness and responsiveness on the part of stakeholders. Local leaders and
                           communities were consulted through meetings and questionnaires administered to each of the
                           participants. The Government departments were consulted through questionnaires that were
                           augmented by follow up discussions. Newspaper notices were also placed in the local dailies to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capture submissions from a wide range of stakeholders. Consultations were segmented into the
                           specific project areas of the subprojects. Issues raised in the consultations are described in the
                           safeguard documents and are reflected in the planning, implementation, monitoring and
                           supervision of project activities.

                           All the safeguard documents have been disclosed locally in Zimbabwe (see details in individual
                           documents) and will be disclosed by the Bank at the InfoShop. The subproject-specific safeguard
                           instruments, following the screening process, will also be reviewed by the Bank and then disclosed
                           in-country and at InfoShop when required, as per the procedures in the ESMF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         09-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      10-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zimbabwe                                                            27-Jan-2014
                           Comments:


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zimbabwe                                                         27-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zimbabwe                                                         27-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?

                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Douglas J. Graham
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 26-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)                       Date: 10-Apr-2014




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
