                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3933

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sierra Leone                     Project ID:      P133070
                            Project Name:      REVITALIZING EDUCATION IN SIERRA LEONE (P133070)
                            Task Team          Kaliope Azzi-Huck
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Aug-2013                      Estimated        19-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Pre-primary education (10%), Primary education (40%), Secondary education
                                               (20%), General education sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for all (60%), Education for the knowledge economy (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     23.40                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                    17.90
                              Revitalizing Education Delivery in Sierra Leone (REDiSL)                      5.50
                              Total                                                                        23.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Education Sector Plan (ESP) has identified three strategic objectives under which the Ministry
                           will move forward with interventions: (i) access, equity and completion; (ii) quality and learning
                           outcomes; and (iii) systems strengthening.
                           The Project Development Objective is to (i) improve school readiness and learning in targeted areas,
                           and (ii) monitor for better education outcomes. To do this, the Project will finance elements of the
                         Education Sector Plan that deliver intermediate results while simultaneously addressing critical
                         issues in the system to build the foundation for better management and efficiency within the sector.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The REDiSL is a US$23.4 million grant processed under the Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                         instrument available to the GoSL from the GPE Fund as well as the Sierra Leone Multi-Donor TF. It
                         builds on the progress achieved through the previous EFA-FTI operation,and finances the activities
                         in the ESP (2013-2018).

                         Component 1 – Improving the learning environment and opportunities in targeted areas (US$11.9
                         million)

                         1.1 Performance-based School Grants (US$4 million): The objective of the performance-based
                         school grants component is to improve the learning environment and opportunities in primary and
                         junior secondary schools in targeted districts. Financial incentives (grants) will be provided to
                         schools in most marginalized districts based on the criteria outlined in the table below related to
                         poverty and education outcomes. Schools must meet agreed outputs or outcomes to receive funding.
                         This is a new approach for the education sector in Sierra Leone (see Table 4), but it has been tested
                         with some success in the health sector.

                         The project will provide grants to schools in three phases, and the amount disbursed to schools will
                         be based on the number of results that schools achieve. The specific objectives of the system are to:
                         (1) provide additional resources at school level to cover the cost of delivering services and removing
                         the need for ‘informal’ charges in primary school; (2) increase educational equity, since Local
                         Councils (LCs) with the lowest educational outcomes and highest poverty levels are targeted; (3)
                         improve the learning environment and opportunities in selected schools – by strategic selection of the
                         indicators and targets; and (4) strengthen capacities of LCs, district education staff, and heads of
                         schools in the administration of the grants.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The performance-based grants incentivizes schools to focus on providing a basic opportunity to learn
                         by rewarding schools that are open a high percentage of the time, schools with high student and
                         teacher attendance etc. The school receives a pre-determined amount of money for each indicator
                         met. The Table below provides a list of indicators proposed by MEST and their targets. A baseline
                         assessment will be collected in schools in targeted districts before project start to ensure a baseline
                         figure for each of the indicators. This may lead to refining some of the targets.

                         The funds will be disbursed using the same procedures MEST currently uses to send school-fee
                         subsidies (capitation grants) to schools. In Phase 1, all approved government-assisted schools in
                         selected districts (Kambia, Pujehun, Tonkolili and Kenema district) who meet pre-determined basic
                         record keeping requirements will receive initial grants of up to US$1000. In phase 2, schools may
                         receive up to US$2000 depending on number of agreed targets they meet from the menu posted
                         above and must have sufficient bookkeeping to show they have received the phase 1 funds. For
                         phase 2, they will get an amount for each indicator met. Depending on the number of schools that
                         receive funding in phase 2, a third phase of performance-based competition will be feasible,
                         focusing this time on schools that improve the most throughout the project. It is noted that schools
                         that miss targets in phase 2 can apply to receive up to $2000 in the third year of the project, when
                         others are competing for phase 3. This will incentivize those close to meeting targets.
                         Using the performance-based financing mechanism, the REDiSL will support the delivery of
                         education services while obtaining reliable data at schools, and building a results-focused culture in
                         the education sector. The systems and processes for administrating grants to schools already exists in
                         Sierra Leone through the school fee-subsidies - an input-based grant that is provided to primary
                         schools whereby schools receive about US$1.2 per each student enrolled. However, this amount is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         not enough to provide quality improvements and it usually reaches the school very late.

                         1.2 Piloting approaches to increase school readiness (US$1 million): Improving access to ECCE is in
                         accordance with the aspirations of the Government as identified in the White Paper on the Gbamanja
                         Commission of Enquiry Report 2010, the draft National Education Policy (2010) (which calls for 2-3
                         years of preprimary school for all children), the ESP and the latest Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
                         (PRSP). A tradition of ECCE exists in Sierra Leone and good models of service provision are in
                         operation (though targeted to higher income populations); this sub-component will build on these
                         existing practices and pilot a cost-effective approach to ECCE and develop quality assurance
                         standards.

                         The project would support the establishment of approximately 50 pre-primary classrooms; 30of these
                         will be attached to Government supported primary schools and the rest hosted in Community
                         Learning Centers, which are established in select communities and managed by the Department of
                         Non-Formal Education within MEST. These are conservative estimates of classrooms to be
                         established due to budget constraints; should the construction/rehabilitation turn out to be less costly
                         than currently estimated and/or additional external funding become available these numbers can be
                         raised.The classrooms will primarily serve children age 5, many of whom are currently enrolling in
                         Grade 1 and adding to the already challenging learning environment at that level

                         In addition to the classrooms, the Project will support teacher and caregiver training for those who
                         will be teaching in the pre-primary classrooms. This will include initial 3 weeks of training and then
                         ongoing training throughout the school year. Approximately 110 teachers will be directly trained
                         through the project, but materials will also be made available to teacher training institutions
                         throughout the country for use by teachers and caregivers considering working in ECCE. This will
                         add another 150-200 teachers indirectly trained through the materials provided by the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To ensure the quality of service delivery, the project will also support the capacity building of the
                         MEST to establish Minimum Quality Standards for ECCE. These Minimum Quality Standards
                         would be applied to the classrooms established under the pilot, along with a sustainable system for
                         monitoring and supporting compliance. They would include simple infrastructure and safety and
                         sanitation standards, level of education and qualifications for teachers and caregivers, student-teacher
                         ratio and guidance on curriculum and classroom management. To achieve this and ensure
                         sustainability of efforts and commitment to ECCE, a pre-primary focal person will be identified to
                         help MEST develop pre-primary education services and address quality standards. This position will
                         be created in MEST, funded by the Ministry and will help address ECD issues separate from
                         primary level responsibilities (which is the current arrangement).

                         It is understood that the GPE funding will serve as a catalyst for the expansion of ECCE services in
                         Sierra Leone. Given the competing demands on the sector, it is not feasible to expect the GoSL to
                         scale up the pilot effort immediately upon project closing. However, there are several other potential
                         sources of funding that may become available, including private foundations, local and international
                         organizations who have expressed interest in follow-on funding once results are delivered through
                         this project. External funding has also been requested to conduct and impact evaluation of the ECD
                         activities implemented under this project. It is therefore critical that the piloted efforts show results
                         and scale-up potential.
                         1.3 Strengthening reading outcomes at early grades (US$6.9 million): To support the ESP’s aim of
                         improving the pedagogical methodologies used by teachers to improve learning outcomes, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operation will support a comprehensive national reading program intended to improve literacy in
                         early grades and create a culture of reading as a foundation for learning. Specific interventions would
                         include:

                         Reading books for primary classes (1-3) and relevant learning materials (teachers’ guides and
                         teaching support packets for trained teachers). The GPE would finance the production, and
                         distribution of approximately 1.8 million reading books for grades 1-3 for all primary schools
                         throughout the country. This would be an approximate ratio of 2 reading books per student though
                         they are developed to be used and re-used so students would be exposed to more titles throughout the
                         school year. These books would complement the current syllabus and would be selected using
                         criteria based on literacy-levels, literary value, and social-cultural relevance. Teachers and students
                         are expected to use the books as tools to complement literacy skill and fluency based instructional
                         goals, using strategies such as word family work, vocabulary learning, comprehension teaching,
                         reading aloud, storytelling, literary games, and individual silent reading. Books will be delivered to
                         the local councils. Incorporating expected costs into their annual business plans and projections,
                         Local councils will be expected to pre-finance the delivery of books to schools. Upon submission of
                         signed delivery to schools, the project will transfer funds to the local councils using the funds-flow
                         mechanisms currently in place. Books selected for publishing will be cleared by the MEST prior. By
                         project effectiveness dates, at least four titles will be available for immediate publishing pending
                         minor modification (adding two poems at the beginning and an additional “informational” section at
                         the end, e.g. hygiene instructions in the book on bathing). This will increa se the number of
                         encounters children have with each book; raising the genres and vocabularies children engage. Three
                         more titles will be developed for lower level readers (grades 1 and 2).

                         Grade-level reading campaign. The project will support the roll out of a reading campaign using
                         multiple channels. At the community level, there would be Talking Drum Studio stories and similar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         events. At the national level, the Sierra Leone Broadcasting Corporation (SLBC) will be approached
                         to carry bi-monthly interviews and presentations about the importance of literacy and the ways in
                         which parents and schools work for children’s success together. At the school level, the SMC would
                         be asked to create regular slots for learning about literacy using proposed topics such as “importance
                         of learning to read”, “why do we want our children to be able to read?”, and “how do children learn
                         to read”. Schools can also hold short storytelling events with print outcomes, or make alphabet books
                         with help from teachers.

                         Training for teachers of early primary grades. The project will fund the development of a training to
                         help teachers understand effective teaching for quality outcomes. This training will include tools like
                         teacher lesson guides, pedagogical materials, as well as scope and sequence lists. These are part of
                         the teacher training initiative to support better quality of education and improved learning outcomes.
                         As demonstrated by initial results of a pilot training currently under implementation, enhanced lesson
                         planning and strategy guides show positive increases in teacher’s skills and student’s knowledge. The
                         training will be carried to 10 percent of the primary schools teaching workforce (about 3,800 teachers
                         over the three years and 600 pre-service teachers in training). To ensure sustainability of the practice,
                         the project will also work with the MEST and teacher training institutions to integrate the training on
                         the use of supplementary reading books into the pre-service and distance learning for initial teacher
                         training on college campuses where early primary school teachers are certified. To achieve this, the
                         cohort of trainers will include representation from all the Teacher Training College Departments of
                         Language Arts to insure their abilities to participate in the development of new practices with new
                         pre-service teachers in the second phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Strengthen education service delivery (US$8.9 million)
                         2.1 Improvements in teacher management (US$3 million): The Teaching Service Commission (TSC)
                         Act was enacted in 2011, with the following four broad roles for the Teaching Service Commission
                         with respect to Teacher Management (i) registration and licensing of teachers (ii) teacher
                         performance and development (iii) teacher management operations – recruitment, replacements,
                         transfers, promotions etc. and (iv) teacher / employer relations. In this context, the project will
                         provide funds to make the TSC functional and would be used to cover operational costs of the
                         Commission both at central and decentralized levels. The main output for this intervention would be
                         an effective and efficient management of the teaching labor force underpinned by a database which
                         would inform management decision making with respect to the promotion of professional
                         development and performance of teachers and reporting protocols from districts.

                         2.2 Building the foundation for better measurement of learning outcomes (US$1.1. million): Building
                         on previous outputs, the project would establish and operationalize a semi-autonomous assessment
                         unit within the Directorate of Policy and Planning of the MEST to coordinate the design and
                         execution of assessments at lower and upper primary and JSS. The project would fund a Class 4
                         assessment in Mathematics and English. Sample selection, data collection, data processing and
                         editing, weighting and variance estimation would be sub-contracted to Statistics Sierra Leone or
                         another entity that has experience in the work to be carried out and does not require much, if any,
                         capacity building to incorporate the learning assessment into their work programs. Though the length
                         of the project does not allow for repeated assessments, the ultimate goal will be realized once Sierra
                         Leone is able to carry out national learning assessments regularly to understand patterns in students’
                         learning and modify the curriculum as needed to gain improvements. The Assessment Unit would
                         involve those responsible for pre-service and in-service teacher training, curriculum development
                         experts and the Inspectorate in the analysis and dissemination of assessment findings to all levels of
                         the system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.3 Robust and consistent school data collection (US$.4 million): The Ministry has successfully
                         carried out an annual school census over the past three years. However, the process is quite
                         cumbersome and exhausts significant time and resources. The REDiSL will build on the system
                         already in existence to support the Ministry in mainstreaming a briefer version of the school census
                         in off years so not all data is collected annually but ensuring that those indicators relevant for
                         monitoring purposes of the project are included. This component will also provide financing for the
                         enhancement of the financial management (FM), procurement, and monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) functions and decentralization of data collection and cleanup of data to the district levels
                         where real-time validation is more feasible. During the Project cycle, the “traditional” longer school
                         census will be carried out once (in 2016) and supported by REDiSL. It will provide the update to the
                         2013 data the Ministry will use as a baseline for this project.

                         2.4 Establishing a system for driving and monitoring the implementation of the Education Sector
                         Strategy ($4.4 million): A key lesson from the implementation of the last ESP is that setting up
                         systems and processes for delivering and monitoring key outcomes will be critical to improving
                         performance. This component will finance the setting up of a Change Unit (CU) to support the
                         Minister and Ministry to bring about desired improvements in education and to be more proactive
                         and effective in service delivery with a focus on the goals and targets spelt out in the ESP and to
                         monitor and evaluate progress in the implementation of the latter. The Change Unit (CU) will be a
                         temporary entity with an estimated maximum lifetime of 3 years by which time the Ministry would
                         be able to do without the support the unit is to provide. In this regard, the CU will ensure that all
                         departments within MEST are focused on delivery of key targets and milestones as outlined in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Education Sector Plan. It will also coordinate and provide on-going capacity development for MEST
                         officials at both the central and district level, based on the capacity development strategy (CDS).
                         Once executed, this setup should catalyze significant transformation in the education sector and
                         enable the Government to achieve the targets set out in its ESP.

                         REDiSL will co-finance a Donor and Project Coordination Unit (DPCU), which would serve as a
                         vehicle for donors to align their support to the MEST, using a best practice approach that has been
                         tested in the health sector. The DPCU will also provide administrative and operational support to
                         projects funded or implemented by local partners.

                         Component 3 – Project Management and Supervision (US$0.9 million)
                         Project Management and Supervision: The project would provide necessary and appraised support to
                         the MEST for the upgrade of the supervision mechanism, financial audits, qualitative audits, and
                         impact evaluations for interventions supported by GPE and MDTF funds. During implementation,
                         interim reporting will be required from district inspectorates in districts targeted under specific
                         components and will be established and supported under this component.
                         This component will also provide the necessary funding for the operations of the project
                         implementation unit to be housed within the MEST, specifically the DPCU. In addition to funding
                         the administrative costs associated with implementation of the components above, it will also support
                         fiduciary management, procurement, and auditing (Details are noted in Annex 3). It will fund the
                         day-to-day costs of operation and systems needed including accounting systems, FM audits, capacity
                         building workshops, and field visits. As such, the Project is expected to finance the following
                         positions: DPCU Coordinator, GPE Project Manager, Finance Officer, M&E Officer, procurement
                         specialist (consultant), and project assistants.

                         Overall, there is an unallocated amount of US$1.7 (equivalent to 13.8%) to be used as a contingency
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for all components, but in particular for the schools grants component, where the remaining funding
                         will determine the amount to be received by schools as well as the number of schools eligible in
                         phase 3. In additional, potential additional training for SMCs is currently under discussion.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Some aspects of the project are national and be spread throughout the entire country. Specific sites
                         will however be identified prior to implementation. There are no salient physical characteristics
                         relevant to safeguards. The safeguards issues for the project are minor.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Project will be under the auspices of the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology. The
                         Ministry has implemented World Bank financed projects before but it is not clear the level of
                         capacity they have on World Bank safeguards issues. Consequently, they will need some support to
                         ensure that they are on course with regards to safeguards compliance and due diligence. On the other
                         hand, the Country's Environmental protection Agency (EPA) has very strong experience and
                         knowledge about the Bank's safeguards policies and requirements and has been collaborating with
                         the Bank on capacity programs for safeguards. The EPA can therefore support the Ministry and
                         participating entities to ensure effective implementation of safeguards in the project's area of
                         influence.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Beatrix Allah-Mensah (AFCW1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered. This is because the
                                 4.12                                                                                            project activities implementation will not lead to
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition that will affect people's
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods, assets or limit access to assets. They
                                                                                                                                 will also not lead to any displacement or
                                                                                                                                 relocation temporary or permanently that will
                                                                                                                                 cause social hardship to people. Even though
                                                                                                                                 there will be provision to provide toilet facilities
                                                                                                                                 for girls, these facilities will be on the same
                                                                                                                                 school compound and will require very small
                                                                                                                                 amount of land space with no impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      tbd
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Kaliope Azzi-Huck

                                 Approved By:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)   Date: 07-May-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)   Date: 07-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
