                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC9849

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:       P151072
                            Project Name:      National Agricultural Higher Education Project (P151072)
                            Task Team          Edward William Bresnyan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          03-Aug-2015                      Estimated         27-Oct-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Agricultural extension and research (50%), Tertiary education (30%), Agro-
                                               industry, marketing, and trade (10%), Public administratio n- Education (5%),
                                               Information technology (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for the knowledge economy (35%), Managing for development
                                               results (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Improving labor markets
                                               (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    165.00                      Total Bank Financing:         82.50
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            82.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   82.50
                              Total                                                                        165.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to increase educational relevance and quality in selected State
                           Agricultural Universities.
                         Equity, especially gender and caste-based equity, is a cross-cutting theme of the proposed project and
                         would be tracked through the key performance indicators.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project addresses strategic reforms in agricultural higher education at the state level
                         (targeting SAUs) and the central level (focused on ICAR). Selected SAUs would pilot a range of
                         innovations in education, research and extension under diverse settings. In so doing, these SAUs
                         will test options to create 21st century educational institutions to successfully meet the current and
                         future challenges facing India’s agricultural sector. These institutions will attract a diverse cadre of
                         high-quality students, train them with labor-market relevant skills, nurture research talent and ensure
                         knowledge flows between lab and land. The second set of reforms will empower ICAR by
                         strengthening its capacity to provide strategic support to SAUs nationwide.

                         The project would likely consist of three components:

                         Component 1 – Support to State Agricultural Universities – addresses the need to raise educational
                         quality and relevance in SAUs and create knowledge and technology hubs for priority themes in
                         support of agricultural transformation. The component, which would absorb most of project finance,
                         would have two sub-components:

                         Sub-component 1a – Investments toward 21st Century State Agricultural Universities – would target
                         reform-ready SAUs and States (applying verifiable criteria) and support Institutional Development
                         Plans (IDPs), developed through multi-stakeholder processes, that undertake key governance
                         reforms, finance new and refurbished research and teaching facilities, curricula and faculty
                         development, training for administrators, strengthening locally relevant research, student placement
                         and technical assistance. Supported IDPs would also emphasize universities’ exploring of alternative
                         income streams, such as: tuition; alumni contributions; competitively-selected research projects;
                         patents; joint ventures; extension services; consultancy services; and special courses for mid-career
                         professionals. These diverse activities would not only generate own financial resources for SAUs,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         but also link them to the national and global knowledge economy, thereby further enhancing their
                         relevance. By focusing on income-earning capacity, SAUs would also create openings for sustained
                         private sector participation. Suitable twinning arrangements with foreign universities would also be
                         explored, as would innovative pilots for research dissemination and mechanisms for internal revenue
                         generation.

                         Sub-component 1b – Investments in Centers for Advanced Agricultural Science and Technology –
                         would support SAUs in establishing interdisciplinary centers for teaching, research and extension on
                         critical agriculture and rural development topics (e.g., agricultural adaptation to climate change; land
                         and water use efficiency, scalable technology and mechanization, agro-industry, agro-
                         entrepreneurship). Multi-stakeholder consultations would inform the selection of geographic
                         locations and core themes under the sub-component. The sub-component would finance research
                         and teaching equipment, faculty and scientist development fellowships, scholarships, and costs
                         associated with twinning arrangements with similar centers outside and within India.

                         Component 2 – Investments in ICAR for Leadership in Agricultural Higher Education – would: (a)
                         empower ICAR by financing its own internal reforms to enhance its effectiveness in coordinating,
                         guiding and managing agricultural research and education nationwide; and (b) support ICAR in its
                         interactions with SAUs and key stakeholders nationwide through interventions that increase the
                         quality and relevance of agricultural education. The component would have two sub-components:
                           Sub-component 2a – Investments in ICAR to support excellence in SAUs – would leverage ICAR’s
                           comparative advantage in assessing systemic challenges ac ross all SAUs and incubating solutions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Among the interventions financed would be: (a) digital information systems for SAU data collection
                           and analysis to improve quality metrics in agricultural higher education; (b) an improved curricula
                           review process to tighten its relevance in today’s dynamic job market; (c) enhanced methods to
                           consolidate and disseminate global best-practices (e.g., benchmarking) in agricultural higher
                           education; and (d) institutionalization of stakeholder and advisory inputs to better inform research,
                           education and extension across the SAU system.
                           Subcomponent 2b – ICAR innovation grants to SAUs – would be open to all SAUs nationwide and
                           support interventions that would include: (a) quality assurance (e.g., accreditation); (b) next-
                           generation management information and financial management systems to increase transparency and
                           administrative efficiency; (c) campus student placement offices to facilitate stronger linkages
                           between academics and future employment opportunities; (d) theme-based competitive grants to
                           students, faculty and academic departments to promote inter-state and international collaboration,
                           including matching funds from the private sector; and (e) needs-based equipment, training and
                           technical assistance.

                           Component 3 – Project Management and Learning – would support ICAR’s project management,
                           primarily through its Education Division, to administer, supervise, monitor and evaluate overall
                           project implementation. The component would also support the formation of an external advisory
                           board to guide ICAR throughout project implementation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project would target a subset of the 63 State Agricultural Universities (SAUs) across
                           India, based on selection criteria that are currently being developed and would form part of the
                           Project Operational Manual. Institutional Development Plans would finance goods, works,
                           consulting services and non-consulting services for these SAUs on existing campuses. All activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will take place on existing land and no new land acquisition is envisioned.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           IICAR is well versed with the Bank’s safeguards arrangements and has previously implemented
                           several Bank-funded projects (e.g., National Agriculture Technology Project, National Agricultural
                           Innovation Project). The safeguards performance for most of these projects was rated Satisfactory.
                           Apart from Bank-financed projects, ICAR operates a series of research laboratories, which have
                           standards in place for laboratory management and emergency protocols. Some amount of capacity
                           building would be required to ensure that disposal of biological material and other laboratory
                           chemicals adhere to prescribed norms. ICAR will undertake an Environmental Assessment and
                           lessons learned from previous and ongoing projects with ICAR will be incorporated in the safeguards
                           management plan for the proposed project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Anupam Joshi (GENDR)
                           Smrithi Talwar (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment                                    Yes                        This is triggered to screen the proposed investments
                                 OP/BP 4.01                                                                             against any potential adverse impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No                         The proposed project would not finance any activity
                                                                                                                        that may endanger any critical (or other) natural
                                                                                                                        habitat.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No                         The proposed project does not finance any activity
                                                                                                                        that involves forests.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     Yes                        Although the proposed project would not promote
                                                                                                                        pesticides or chemical fertilizers, any residual risk
                                                                                                                        emerging from using small amounts of pesticides or
                                                                                                                        other agrochemicals on farmer’s fields for research
                                                                                                                        activities prescribed in the project (e.g.,
                                                                                                                        demonstration plots) would be addressed through the
                                                                                                                        development of integrated pest management
                                                                                                                        practices for the project as a part of the management
                                                                                                                        plans.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No                         Small construction activities executed under the
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             proposed project would primarily involve retrofitting
                                                                                                                        existing buildings or developing laboratory extension
                                                                                                                        facilities in existing university campuses. Thus, no
                                                                                                                        excavations or deep digging would occur.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    TBD                        The societal composition of participating states (to
                                 4.10                                                                                   be determined) may trigger this policy. It may also
                                                                                                                        be triggered in the event of a request for academic
                                                                                                                        infrastructure, whose establishment may impact
                                                                                                                        indigenous communities. State-level targeting would
                                                                                                                        be finalized during project preparation, after which a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        final determination would be made regarding
                                                                                                                        triggering the policy.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No                         The proposed interventions would occur on existing
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                campuses of State Agricultural Universities and no
                                                                                                                        additional land acquisition would take place. There
                                                                                                                        are no issues of encroachment in any of the public
                                                                                                                        lands to be used.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         No dams are involved.

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      No international waterways are involved.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      No disputed areas would be covered under the
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                proposed project.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Jun-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             As the proposed project does not pose any major environmental issues, only an Environmental and
                             Social Management Framework would be prepared and completed by Appraisal. ESMF will: (i)
                             consider issues of civil works in refurbishing buildings and laboratory construction, upgrade, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             use; (ii) provide for screening of innovation grants if they are expected to have a physical footprint
                             or include use of hazardous materials; and (iii) include an assessment of the barriers that
                             vulnerable groups, such as scheduled tribes, scheduled castes and women, face in accessing
                             agricultural education, teaching and research opportunities; and propose measures to address these
                             barriers, given the project’s focus on ensuring equity.

                             The societal composition of participating states (once they are determined) may independently
                             trigger safeguards policies in relation to indigenous peoples. A firm assessment of whether OP/BP
                             4.10 is triggered is therefore postponed at this stage and would be confirmed during project
                             preparation.

                             A participation strategy would be developed to ensure that the multi-stakeholders consultations
                             planned to inform the selection of geographic locations and core themes under sub-component 1b
                             include representation from, among others, scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and women’s
                             NGOs. This will be important to ensure that social issues are considered in SAU selection and the
                             specific activities supported under the project.

                             During preparation, any proposed activities that could benefit Tribal Peoples (e.g., strengthening
                             locally relevant research, student placement and technical assistance) would also be identified as
                             would potential issues and appropriate measures, as relevant, regarding patents on indigenous
                             knowledge.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Edward William Bresnyan
                           Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                Date: 18-Mar-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                              Date: 01-Apr-2015
                           Manager:
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
