INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 103
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uganda                     Project ID:  P145309
Project Name: Skills Development Project (P145309)
Task Team       Elizabeth Ninan Dulvy
Leader(s):
Estimated       16-Feb-2015                Estimated    07-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Vocational training (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
U         Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               100.00
Total                                                                     100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to enhance the capacity of institutions to deliver high quality,
demand-driven training programs in target sectors.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Institutionalizing systemic reforms in skills development
Page 1 of 7


﻿1. As the Strategic Plan rightly points out systemic reform in the sector is critical to realigning the
delivery system without which investment in strengthening training institutions will eventually result
in further reinforcing the existing supply driven system. Therefore, systemic reform activities
proposed under Component 1 are critical to the success of Component 2 and achievement of the
O
project development objective. Sub-components under component 1 include Establishing the Skills
Development Authority (SDA), and Establishing sector skills councils (SSCs).
Component 2: Improving Quality and Relevance of Skills Development
Sub-component 2.1: Establishment of Centers of Excellence
2. Under this sub-component, three Uganda Technical Colleges (UTC) - Lira UTC, Elgon UTC,
Bushenyi UTC and the Bukalasa Agricultural College will be upgraded to Centers of Excellence
(COE). The targets set for Component 2 of the USDP will be achieved through the implementation
of the following key activities: (i) Improving institutional governance; (ii) Enhanced equity; (iii)
Design and adaptation of demand driven competency-based curriculum and assessment system to
international standards; (iv) Training for faculty and staff, and development of training and learning
materials; (v) Establish and upgrade physical infrastructure, including civil works and establishment
of modem workshops and classrooms with latest equipment and machinery and multi-media
facilities; and (vi) Support to improve management and monitoring mechanisms within the CoEs.
Key and of more relevance to safeguards are the following:
3. Design and adaptation of curriculum and assessment system to international standards. The SDP
under this sub-component will finance: (i) twinning arrangements between qualified international
consultants with the target institutions, through which competency-based curriculum for craftsman,
artisan and technician courses in construction, manufacturing and agriculture will be developed in
consultation with industries in Uganda and in accordance with international curricula standards; (ii)
development of related occupational health and safety and environment management curricula; (iii)
adaptation of competency-based curriculum packages in specific trades/occupations to the
requirements of the country as defined by the Sector Skills Councils of the Reform Task Force/Skills
Development Authority; and (iii) the development of appropriate assessment systems which are
administered by a third qualifying party and not the CoE itself.
4. Establish and upgrade physical infrastructure. The project will finance necessary civil works-
a         renovations and refurbishment of existing infrastructure and build new infrastructure, as necessary,
for workshops, classrooms, libraries, administrative blocks, common facilities for students, faculty
and staff; provision of water and sanitation in the institutions, augmented provision of electricity
supply with power back-up system, as necessary; improvement of campus environment, and low cost
boundary walls. All civil works will be disabled- friendly complying with national and international
standards. The project will also finance procurement of equipment and machinery in line with new/
revised curricula for diploma, craftsman and artisan training programs and their maintenance, and
tools, and training materials for students.
Sub-component 2.2: Support to public vocational training institutes (VIs).
5. This sub-component will support selected public vocational institutes (VIs) to strengthen their
capacity to respond to the needs and opportunities of the labor market, including delivery of short-
term training courses, and improve the quality of the training being offered. The training will
primarily be in artisan and craftsman trades that are lower down the value chain whereas component
2.1 focuses on training for craftsman trades and technicians.
Page 2 of 7


﻿6. The project will support basic civil works, selected trade- relevant equipment, machinery and
tools, training-learning resources both for students and teachers, training consumables, and partial
costs incurred for operations in the public network institutions.
O
U         Sub-component 2.3: Twining Arrangement for establishment of Centers of Excellence and networks
7. Technically qualified institutions will be selected through an international competitive process t o
act as twinning partners responsible for providing all necessary support to help selected Colleges
grow into "Centers of Excellence". The partner institutions will also be responsible for providing
support to the network institutions in order to improve quality of training. The partner institutions
will prepare a time-bound detailed plan of action with clear deliverables. Once approved by the
MoES and the IDA, the MoES will ensure that the partners do not face procedural bottlenecks in
implementing the approved work plan.
Component 3: Employer-led short-term training and recognition of prior learning
8. This component will be implemented through a Fund mechanism that will support training
activities that lead to improved productivity and competitiveness in the formal and informal sectors.
9. The competitive fund will have four 'windows': Window 1 will be addressing skills shortages in
the formal sector. Window 2 will assist self-employed and workers in the informal (jua khali) sector,
micro and small enterprises, master crafts-people and members of cooperatives. Window 3 deals
with innovative skills training. And Window 4 will fund initiatives by private sector/industry
organizations interested in participating in the development of a system for certification of skills and
competencies acquired through informal and non-formal means.
Component-4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
10. This component would finance: (i) management of the project including establishment of a
Project Coordination Unit within the MoES to manage the project, as well as implementation units
within the respective CoEs; (ii) a social marketing campaign to improve the image of the BTVET
sub-sector with the aim of increasing demand for technical and vocational training as well as
increasing equity in access by attracting more females and students from other marginalized groups
to technical and vocational education and training; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation under the
project including baseline studies, mid and end-term tracer studies, employer satisfaction surveys,
mid-term management review, and annual performance audits.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
11. The project will be implemented in 4 CoEs namely Lira UTC, Elgon UTC, Bushenyi UTC and
the Bukalasa Agricultural College and at 3-5 Network Vocational Institutions associated with each
CoE. Component 2 which involves establishment of CoEs with association to Network Vocational
Institutions shall entail civil works which among others include: renovations and refurbishment of
existing infrastructure and build new infrastructure, as necessary, for workshops, classrooms,
libraries, administrative blocks, common facilities for students, faculty and staff; provision of water
and sanitation in the institutions, augmented provision of electricity supply with power back-up
system, as necessary; improvement of campus environment, and low cost boundary walls. Key
Safeguards aspects relate to environmental, safety and social issues associated with construction
activities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)
Page 3 of 7


﻿Herbert Oule (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
S Environmental        Yes          The project will involve civil works which may generate
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmental, health and safety impacts. The project will
involve civil works which may generate environmental,
health and safety impacts. Since the specific sites and
locations are not yet known, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework was prepared to guide
implementation of the environmental and social aspects.
The ESMF was prepared in a consultative manner, and
disclosed both in-country....Nov. 2014 and at info-shop
...Nov. 2014 before project appraisal. Specific safeguard
instruments (ESIA, ESMPs) shall be prepared during
project implementation following guidance in the ESMF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will not affect natural habitats nor support any
4.04                                activities that affect any natural habitat.
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No           The project will not involve or affect forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will not involve the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural      Yes          The civil works involved in the upgrading and
Resources OP/BP 4.11                development of the COEs may impact on known and/or
unknown PCRs and therefore a Chance Finds Procedure
will be developed as part of the ESMF. As part of ESMF
compilation, PCRs inventory will be carried out in key/
major known institutions and appropriate management
measures recommended where necessary.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the four project areas
BP 4.10                             of Lira, Bushenyi, Mbale and Bukalasa.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The project will involve upgrading of institutions
OP/BP 4.12                          specializing in small and medium scale manufacturing/
construction and agriculture, which may require land take
and involve some involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods. A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared in a
consultative manner and disclosed before project
appraisal both in-country Nov. 2014 and at InfoShop Nov.
2014.
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No           The project does not involve dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No       N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
Page 4 of 7


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
)           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
12. The potential negative environmental impacts are associated with Component 2, specifically
involving civil works for establishment and upgrade of physical infrastructure (renovation &
refurbishment of existing infrastructure, build new infrastructure - workshops, classrooms,
libraries, administrative blocks), provision of water and sanitation facilities, augmenting provision
of electricity and improvement of campus environment and low cost boundary walls. Also relating
to safeguards are basic civil works in Public Vocational/Network Institutions. The likely
environmental impacts shall be largely encountered during construction of civil structures and
very minimal during operation phase. Therefore, the impacts that may be generated will be site
specific and readily mitigated. The impacts will typically include occupational, health and safety
issues. Other likely environmental impacts of the project include loss of vegetation where site
clearance is involved, air pollution due to dust emission arising from site clearance and
transportation of construction materials, noise nuisance during construction, generation of
construction debris/waste and site safety issues for both the workers and the school occupants
(school students, staff/teachers and their families). In addition Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP
4.11 is triggered because project investments will involve civil works and may potentially affect
unknown physical cultural resources in the area. The social impacts of the project may include
displacement of land uses. During construction, a limited number of workers are likely to be
hoarded on sites in selected benefiting schools which may lead to illicit behavior and spread of
HIV/AIDs affecting school and adjacent communities.
13. Because of the likely low environmental impacts, the project is assigned Environmental
Assessment Category B.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
14. None.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
o           15. Not Relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
16. The project impacts identified will be mitigated by, limiting vegetation clearance to
construction sites, vegetation cleared/degraded areas as a result of construction activities, planting
trees in the school compound, sprinkling water to suppress dust emissions, use of protective gear
such as nose masks, earmuffs, safety boots and gloves, proper disposal of construction debris and
general solid waste, fencing off the construction sites and limiting access by non-construction
personnel. A first aid kit shall be provided onsite.
17. Land acquisition will be limited to site- specific civil works for rehabilitation or construction
in the selected institutions. There will be no land acquisition because institutions without proof of
land ownership will not be supported by the project. In the event of land-use displacement, the
RPF will guide the preparation and implementation of RAPs including appropriate compensation.
The spread and infection of HIV/AIDs will be managed through training of school management
Page 5 of 7


﻿committees to carry out community awareness on HIV/AIDs and incorporate training on gender
issues in the school settings.
18. Both the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal
Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) have previously implemented and are also currently
implementing IDA financed projects and are thus aware of its safeguards policies. However, both
ministries lack safeguards human capacity that may be required to implement the safeguard
policies, for which will require strengthening. Under the proposed Global Partnership Education
Project, funded through the WBG, a PCU comprising of Environmental Specialist shall be
established at MoES and he/she will be required to oversee all Bank supported projects.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
19. The ESMF was prepared through a consultative process with implementing agencies - 4 CoEs
namely Lira UTC, Elgon UTC, Bushenyi UTC and the Bukalasa Agricultural College, Ministry of
Education and Sports, Ministry of Agriculture Animal Industry and Fisheries, Ministry of Works
and Transport, key government institutions such as National Environment Management Authority,
Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC), Uganda National Roads Authority
(UNRA), Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD), District Local
Governments (Lira, Bushenyi, Mbale, Wakiso) where CoEs are found, respective sector players
key in manufacturing and construction companies,- Mukwano Group of Companies, Alam Group
of Companies, Roofings Group (Roofings LTD and Roofings Rolling Mill), agricultural -
Mukwano Group of Companies and communities in the neighborhood of the respective UTCs/
CoEs, most notably the Local Council Leaders. The safeguards instruments have been cleared and
disclosed in-country ....Nov. 2014 and at infoshop ....Nov. 2014 as per the requirements of the
World Bank safeguard policy - OP/BP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Uganda                                                   04-Feb-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Uganda                                                   04-Feb-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 6 of 7


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
a          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[     NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Elizabeth Ninan Dulvy
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Sajitha Bashir (PMGR)              Date: 04-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


