                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC7135

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                    P149049
                                                                           Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     Forest Dependent Communities Support Project (P149049)
                            Task Team       Loic Jean Charles Braune
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       08-Sep-2014                       Estimated         15-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN1                              Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), Public
                                              administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (25 %)
                            Theme(s):         Participation and civic engagement (20%), Land administration and
                                              management (20%), Other environment and natural resources manageme nt
                                              (20%), Decentralization (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      6.00                    Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                6.00
                              Total                                                                       6.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to empower targeted Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities
                           (IPLC) to benefit from and engage in REDD+ policies and FIP activities.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will implement activities that are a national declination of the Thematic Areas
                         and Potential Activities for Sub-Component 1 and 2 from the DGM Framework Operational
                         Guidelines. They will be geared towards strengthening community capacity to: engage on policy;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participate in land-use planning, production practices, and organization; and to develop as
                         entrepreneurs and businesses. It will also finance demand-driven local investments hold by
                         community organizations. This approach complements, and contributes to, the Government’s
                         ongoing efforts to engage non-state actors, in particular local communities in sustainable natural
                         resource management.

                         The proposed project components are as follows:

                         •       Component 1 –Reinforce the role of IPs and LCs in the REDD+ process. This component
                         will provide tailored support including on administrative and financial management issues and
                         improve dissemination of information about REDD+ and its impact on IPs and LCs (including a
                         communication strategy and workshops). The activities that could be financed out this component
                         will support both capacity building and knowledge exchanges. They may include: (i) large audience
                         trainings and seminars for the communities; (ii) study tours, virtual discussions, development of
                         community/farmer demonstration plots, community-level internships to support a practical transfer
                         of knowledge nationally, regionally, and internationally; (iii) selected scholarips, technical training in
                         specialized institutes; and (iv) setting up cultural centers to support knowledge transfer among
                         generations and promotion of the forest-dweller culture.

                         •        Component 2 – Small grants aiming at promoting economic activities and rural livelihoods
                         that enhance climate change adaptation and support the sustainable management of forest landscapes,
                         including non-timber products. Those activities will provide grants to communities to engage in
                         alternative livelihoods or in making their current livelihood more sustainable, such as: (i)
                         community-led sustainable management, development, natural regeneration and restoration of forest
                         landscapes; (ii) traditional farming and cultivation practices that enhance local agro-biodiversity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including medicinal and aromatic; (iii) agro-forestry production systems, agro-ecology tillage
                         practices, reforestation and plantations; (iv) collection and processing of non-timber products
                         (medicinal plants, essential oils, etc.); (v) indigenous/traditional landscape management practices
                         including water and soil conservation. (vi) energy-efficient or energy-saving practices including
                         wood energy plantations, sustainable charcoal/briquette production, biogas/other renewable energy
                         supply projects, in every case in a locally adapted form, operating at a community and family level.

                         •        Component 3: Monitoring & evaluation This component will finance the costs of the
                         National Executing Agency (NEA) which will implement the project. The NEA will be selected
                         through a competitive process (see also section on Implementation Agency Assessment). The NEA
                         will be charged with tasks including developing review and risk assessment criteria, disbursing the
                         grants to projects, ensuring appropriate use of DGM funds, maintaining documentation of country
                         projects, and reporting to the WB on use of DGM funds. In addition, under this component the NEA
                         will undertake monitoring and evaluation activities of the various pilot activities.

                         Components and related activities will be further developed during project preparation and in
                         consultation with communities in the target areas and with the support of the National Steering
                         Committee.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The project area for the investments is following the analysis from the FIP Investment Plan, which
                           identified three supply basins: (i) Kinshasa (WB project); (ii) Kananga/Mbuji-Mayi and (iii)
                           Kisangani (AfDB projects). While the FIP activities will only focus on portions of each of 3 basins,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the area selected for the investments in this project will include surrounding sectors and territories in
                           order to fit with the indigenous people (IP) and local communities (LC) living territories.
                           At local level, locations of activities to be funded by the project will be decided in consultation
                           processes with the local communities, and are therefore yet to be identified. Consequently, the
                           precise locations or the potential physical impacts of project activities will first be known at the time
                           of sub-project identification and preparation at local level.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           At national level, the DRC has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good
                           environmental management. In addition, the DRC has signed a number of international treaties and
                           conventions. However, implementation capacity is weak. Environmental policies and their
                           compliance are governed by the Ministère de l’Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du
                           Tourisme (MENCT) – (Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Tourism). The MECNT has
                           three departments in charge of environmental monitoring and management: i) Le Groupe d’Etudes
                           Environnementales du Congo (GEEC); ii) le Centre National d’Information sur l’Environnement
                           (CNIE); and iii) La Cellule Réglementation et Contentieux Environnementaux (CRCE). The GEEC
                           is responsible for safeguards compliance of all projects in the country, but with emphasis on
                           environmental category A project. The unit is understaffed and has limited capacity. Despite several
                           donor-funded capacity building initiatives, the unit still largely relies on donor funds to carry out its
                           field supervision duties.

                           The Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism (MENCT), which will oversee
                           implementation (but will not implement itself), has prior experience with the Bank’s Safeguard
                           Policies and a variety of safeguard instruments, including an Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework that was finalized in 2013 for the REDD+ activities and for the FIP project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A programmatic Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared at
                           the global level for the DGM and can be reviewed during preparation for any country-level
                           specificities. In addition, an ESMF has been established for the 2 FIP projects for similar investments
                           anywhere in the country. OP 4.12 has been triggered as a precautionary measure to manage impacts
                           that may result from restrictions of access – a Process Framework will be prepared for the FIP and
                           may be adjusted for the DGM. The specific safeguard instruments for this project will be therefore
                           local adaptations from broader safeguard instruments that focus either on REDD+ or on the DGM
                           projects. The REDD and the FIP are strengthening the capacity of the MECNT with the assistance of
                           consultants, the DGM will benefit from that capacity building.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The project under component 2 expects to
                           BP 4.01                                                support forest management activities in selected
                                                                 sites. These activities may have environmental
                                                                 impacts on a limited scale. An ESMF will be
                                                                 prepared based on the FIP ESMF and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 national ESMF for REDD+ activities, consulted
                                                                 upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The ESMF will provide guidance on the kind of
                                                                 Habitat in the project area and on the actions for
                                                                 avoiding or mitigating impacts on natural
                                                                 habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Forest policy and management are a primary
                                                                 focus of this project. The ESMF will include
                                                                 guidance on managing forestry issues.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This policy could be triggered if the project
                         BP 4.11                                 activities promote actions in areas containing
                                                                 sites deemed physical cultural resources by the
                                                                 local communities (e.g. holy/secret sites such as
                                                                 sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.). Though it is
                                                                 not anticipated that the project will have
                                                                 negative impacts on any such sites, the
                                                                 existence of any such sites and the
                                                                 corresponding need to trigger this policy will be
                                                                 determined once the targeted zones are
                                                                 confirmed further guidance will be sought
                                                                 during the review meeting.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project main purpose is to support
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Indigenous People and their communities. As
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples will be the overwhelming
                                                                 majority of direct project beneficiaries, as
                                                                 project preparation will be carried out in a
                                                                 broadly participatory way including an intensive
                                                                 process of consultation with Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples, and as ruled by this Safeguard Policy
                                                                 (OP 4.10, paragraph 12), no separate Indigenous
                                                                 People Policy Framework (IPPF) or Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples Plan (IPP) is required. A Social
                                                                 Assessment will also be performed during
                                                                 preparation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   No taking of land is anticipated, however as for
                         4.12                                    any REDD+ activity, limitation of access may
                                                                 happen and will be discussed at village level.
                                                                 Also, the project may require land gazetting to
                                                                 the benefits of indigenous people
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During preparation, the team will build and organize consultations on the programmatic ESMF
                                      that is being prepared for the Global component of the Dedicated Grant Mechanism (P128748).
                                      Additional and country-specific data will be embedded in the Project implementation Manual.
                                      Both instruments (programmatic ESMF and the additional information will be consulted upon and
                                      disclosed by appraisal.

                                      In addition to the consultation with IP communities to select the representatives for the Steering
                                      Committee, an in depth Social Assessment will be performed to ensure the project will match with
                                      the main priorities of the communities – in particular regarding the share between CDD sub-
                                      projects and empowering activities to reinforce their impact on land governance.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Loic Jean Charles Braune

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 13-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 14-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
