                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8238
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P145533
                            Project Name:      China Contaminated Site Management Project (P145533)
                            Task Team          Qing Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Oct-2014                        Estimated   30-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Persistent Organic Pollutants
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):         Other industry (70%), Public administration- Industry and trade (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (80%), Environmental policies
                                              and institutions (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      75.00           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   60.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          15.00
                              Total                                                                                      75.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (also the global environmental objective) is to improve the
                           country’s capacity for managing site contamination, and demonstrate identification and cleanup of


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         sites contaminated with POPs and other hazardous chemicals in an environmentally sound manner.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will include activities at both national and provincial levels. Chongqing municipality and
                         Liaoning province as pioneers with strong commitment and ownership for managing contaminated
                         sites have been selected as the two demonstration areas among four municipalities or provinces
                         (Requests of Expression of Interest were sent to 11 provinces and municipalities), which expressed
                         interest to participate in the Project.

                         The Project will support investment, technical assistance (TA) and administration measures and
                         technical guidelines development for the cleanup of contaminated sites (control of contaminated
                         sites). Sites for pilot cleanups will be POPs (and other hazardous chemical) contaminated sites. The
                         Project will also include TA and administration measures and technical guidelines development for
                         prevention of industrial contaminated sites and agricultural contaminated land.

                         From contamination identification to cleanup closeout, risk assessment helps form management
                         decisions made at each stage of a site or land’s life cycle. The goal of the human health and
                         environmental evaluation process is the development of risk information to determine whether a
                         removal action and/or remedial action is necessary, or conversely, whether the site may be closed out
                         with no further action. The Project will introduce and transfer knowledge on human health risk-based
                         remediation approach.

                         The Project consists of three components described below:

                         Component 1: Capacity Development for Prevention and Control of Site Contamination

                         Sub-component 1.1: Development of Administrative Measures, Technical Guidelines and Financing
                         Options for Contaminated Site Cleanup. As MEP is working on the Soil Pollution Prevention and
                         Control Law and its Implementation Rules and has issued four Technical Guidelines on cleanup of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contaminated sites, this sub-component will focus on development of other necessary technical
                         guidelines for both prevention and control of site contamination. These will include: (i) technical
                         guidelines for pollution risk prevention and control at the producing industries; (ii) technical
                         guidelines for prevention and control of environmental pollution during industrial enterprise
                         relocation; and (iii) Best Available Techniques (BAT) list of remediation for POPs contamination.
                         This sub-component will also include development of administrative measures on professional
                         qualifications of site cleanup companies, information disclosure and public participation at the
                         national level. In Chongqing and Liaoning, this sub-component will include development and
                         issuance of administrative measures for management of contaminated sites and environmental
                         supervision for site remediation, and environmental risk screening levels for contaminated sites. This
                         sub-component will also support studies on possible financing options (including public and private
                         partnership - PPP) and market incentives for contaminated site cleanup.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Knowledge Management and Awareness Raising in Support of Prevention and
                         Control of Site Contamination. This sub-component will develop and provide systematic training
                         courses for nation-wide government officials and cleanup practitioners on laws, regulations,
                         technical guidelines/standards, and environmental and social safeguard requirements for
                         contaminated site cleanup (including occupational and community health and safety), and for
                         polluting industries in Chongqing and Liaoning on establishment of environmental and social
                         management systems (ESMS) to prevent soil and groundwater pollution. Knowledge exchange and


                                                                     Page 2 of 12
                         experience sharing events or workshops will be organized. It is expected that a national training
                         system for prevention and control of site contamination established under the Project will continue
                         beyond the project life through the issuance of administrative measures for training.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component will also conduct public awareness activities for prevention and control of site
                         contamination, and community involvement (public consultation) activities for cleanup
                         demonstrations under Component 2.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Management Tools for Prevention and Control of Site Contamination. This sub-
                         component will develop a national database for POPs contaminated sites by carrying out initial site
                         investigation and risk assessment of POPs sites in China: mainly POPs pesticides, e-waste and PFOS
                         contaminated sites, as well as mercury contaminated sites (as relevant) and developing a national
                         database. The national database is expected to be expanded and used by MEP and other ministries
                         after the project life for monitoring and managing contaminated sites in China. A national priority list
                         of these POPs sties will be produced based on environmental and health risks and other factors.

                         This sub-component will also support feasibility study for constructing a knowledge and remediation
                         center in Chongqing by collecting information on all potential contaminated sites in Chongqing,
                         assessing currently available in-situ and ex-situ remediation approaches and technologies, and
                         presenting the business potential forsuch a center. Based these results, a business plan will be
                         prepared considering possible PPP to make sure that the center will be able to operate efficiently and
                         competitively. It is expected that the center in Chonqing will provide advisory services and
                         contamination treatment services resulting from future cleanup of many of municipalities
                         contaminated sites.

                         This sub-component will also, for the purpose of demonstration, support establishing regional soil
                         and groundwater contamination prevention and warning system at the Changshou Industrial Park in
                         Chongqing. This will include identification and investigation of the soil and groundwater
                         contamination risks (including POPs) of the Park and assessment of these risks to determine risk-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acceptable, risk-warning, and risk-mitigation areas, which can provide a risk source layout for the
                         Park. Based on the risk source identification and assessment, an integrated environmental
                         management system, including hazardous material tracking and information reporting system,
                         environmental safety planning, early risk warning, emergency management, and impacts and
                         remediation option assessment after pollution incidents will be developed. Experience learned will be
                         shared with other industrial parks in China for potential replication.

                         Anxiety is growing in China about contaminated soil in the country’s agricultural centers (such as
                         Hunan province) and the potential effects on the food chain. Some farmland soil in suburbs of most
                         cities is polluted with heavy metals and organic pollutants (mainly POPs) as indicated by the national
                         soil survey results. Hunan has requested a loan from the World Bank (to be delivered in FY 2017) to
                         support its efforts on improving agriculture production base safety and quality by cleaning up heavy
                         metal (such as cadmium, lead and arsenic) and organic pesticide contaminated farmland, cutting off
                         polluted water irrigation, reforming cropping system, and applying integrated pest management for
                         reducing chemical use. This sub-component will also support screening cost-effective remediation
                         technologies through small-scale field pilots and reviewing the policy gaps for prevention and
                         control of agricultural land contamination in Hunan. These outputs will support the technical design
                         of the lending project in Hunan and will be shared with other provinces. This activity will be
                         managed by FECO with technical support from the Hunan Provincial Agriculture Department.



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         Sub-component 1.4: Technical Expert Team and Project Monitoring and Evaluation. This sub-
                         component will support hiring of international and national technical experts with both site cleanup
                         knowledge and remediation engineering experience, to support FECO and the two Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Management Units’ (PMU) daily management of the project. This sub-component will also support
                         monitoring and evaluation of the project outcome indicators and results by collecting evidence-based
                         information and data, as well as organizing the project launch and completion workshops.

                         Component 2: Cleanup Demonstrations of Sites Contaminated with POPs and Other Hazardous
                         Chemicals

                         This component will demonstrate the cleanup of several sites (estimated 5-6 in total) contaminated
                         with POPs (and other chemicals). Before a site is ready for remediation action, site investigation, risk
                         assessment to determine remediation goals, remediation program, environmental and social
                         management plan (ESMP), and public consultation and information disclosure will be carried out,
                         prepared, approved and documented. The first demonstration site, which used to be a pesticides
                         warehouse in Chongqing (Ganshui site), has been identified and confirmed during project
                         preparation. According to the construction planning 2003-2020 for Guanshui Town Qijiang County,
                         the site is planned for residential land in future. A site-specific cleanup Environmental Assessment
                         (EA) report has been prepared for this site with detailed contamination scope and proposed
                         remediation plan (see Annex 2). The remediation process will include site clearing, protection of
                         building structure, wall surface peeling, excavation, packaging of contaminated materials,
                         transportation to and storage at the treatment site, treatment/disposal and remediation completion. No
                         aftercare of the site is needed because it will be fully cleaned up with the removal of contaminated
                         materials. Remediation of this site will be initiated as soon as the Project is approved.

                         The other sites will be confirmed during project implementation. A preliminary site selection has
                         been carried out, and identified another seven potential candidate sites from a total of 160 potential
                         POPs contaminated sites (mainly chemical and industrial production sites and some warehouse sites
                         and e-waste sites) . The sites were screened using such criteria as impact on human health and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environment, site contamination characteristics, location, size, redevelopment potential etc. The site
                         cleanup EA reports will be prepared for each site selected under this component and approved by the
                         Bank before initiating the bidding process for remediation. The EA report for the Ganshui site will be
                         used as a model EA for the other sites.

                         Component 3: Project Management

                         This component will support incremental operating costs associated with project management,
                         including day-to-day project implementation, procurement and financial management, and
                         environmental and social safeguards functions carried out by FECO, the Chongqing PMU and the
                         Liaoning PMU, including coordination and collaboration among national and local government
                         agencies, non-government agencies and the private sector (land owner, polluter or land redeveloper;
                         see Annex 3 for implementation arrangements
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is nation-wide with the focus on the two selected demonstration areas: the
                         Liaoning province and the Chongqing municipality. The policy and technical guideline development,
                         capacity building, development of national database of POPs contaminated sites, and TA activities
                         for the Industrial Park and arable land contamination under the Component 1 will be at both national


                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                         and local levels. For site cleanup demonstrations under the Component 2, it is expected that there
                         will be 5 to 6 sites in total to be cleaned up under the project. Before a site is ready for remediation
                         action, site investigation, risk assessment to determine remediation goals, remediation program,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental and social management plan, and public consultation and information disclosure
                         should be carried out, prepared, approved and documented. During the project preparation, one site
                         in Chongqing (Ganshui site) was investigated and a remediation program was proposed. Additional 7
                         candidate sites were identified, but will be confirmed during project implementation for participating
                         in the project. These sites are located in Chongqing, Liaoning, Guangdong, Hunan and Tianjin.
                         These sites are chemical (pesticide) production locations, storage warehouses and e-waste disposal
                         sites.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Peishen Wang (GTIDR)
                         Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project itself is an environmental remediation
                         BP 4.01                                              and risk reduction effort. While, given potential
                                                                              environmental and health risks of POPs and other
                                                                              hazardous chemical contamination and the
                                                                              possibility that hazardous materials will need to
                                                                              be excavated, packaged, and transported for ex-
                                                                              situ treatment as part of remediation works, the
                                                                              project is classified as Category A as per OP4.01.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              The contaminated sites are brown-field locations
                                                                              and unlikely to be located in any natural habitats,
                                                                              therefore the policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              The project will not affect any forests. The policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No              The project does not involve the procurement or
                                                                              use of pesticides. The policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes             Based on the information provided in the
                         BP 4.11                                              candidate site selection report, the project is not
                                                                              expected adversely impact physical cultural
                                                                              resources, as none of the identified sites is located
                                                                              in the area of physical cultural resources.
                                                                              However, during site remediation, contaminated
                                                                              soils will be excavated for either in-situ or ex-situ
                                                                              treatment. Physical Cultural Resources might be
                                                                              found during excavation. Therefore, the ESMF
                                                                              has included provisions for managing chance
                                                                              finds which will be included in the ESMP for
                                                                              each site.

                                                                              Chance finds procedure has been included in the
                                                                              ESMP for the Ganshui site.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes             The project is expected to have social impacts on


                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                                                                              local community and residents using or living
                                                                              near the contaminated sites, who might be
                                                                              indigenous peoples. Therefore, the policy is likely
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              triggered but will be determined for each site
                                                                              during project implementation (except for the first
                                                                              site). Site-specific EA will address Indigenous
                                                                              Peoples if confirmed by the site investigation.

                                                                              This policy is not triggered for the first site -
                                                                              Ganshui site.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             The first site (Ganshui site in Chongqing) was
                            4.12                                              investigated, and a site-specific environmental
                                                                              assessment for this site has been carried out that
                                                                              also investigated social impacts. The Bank
                                                                              involuntary resettlement policy OP/BP4.12 is
                                                                              triggered because the household living on the site
                                                                              will need to be temporarily resettled during
                                                                              remediation of the site. An abbreviated
                                                                              resettlement action plan has been prepared for the
                                                                              affected household.

                                                                              Additional 7 candidate sites have been identified
                                                                              during project preparation stage; four or five of
                                                                              these 7 sites will be confirmed as demonstration
                                                                              sites during implementation stage. Site
                                                                              remediation of these sites is likely to involve land
                                                                              acquisition, house demolition and involuntary
                                                                              resettlement. An Environmental and Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                              prepared to define procedures for screening,
                                                                              analysis, consultation and determination and
                                                                              implementation of control measures in line with
                                                                              the Bank safeguards policies
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The project doesn't involve any dams. The policy
                                                                              is not triggered.
                            Projects on International        No               The project doesn’t involve any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              waterways. The policy is note triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               The project is not located in any disputed area.
                            7.60                                              The policy is not triggered

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project itself is an environmental remediation and risk reduction effort which aims at
                              supporting the Chinese government’s efforts to improve its capacity for managing contaminated


                                                                      Page 6 of 12
                          sites, and demonstrate identification and cleanup of sites contaminated with POPs and other
                          hazardous chemicals, and thus has significant positive environmental and social benefits through
                          eliminating POPs pollution sources at demonstration sites and enhancing environmental quality of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the project area.

                          The environmental and social safeguards issues are mainly related to the site cleanup
                          demonstration activities under the Component 2, including: potential environmental and health
                          risks involved in contaminated site excavation, building demolition, contaminated waste
                          packaging/ transportation/storage; possible land acquisition and resettlement of local residents;
                          social disturbance of site enclosure, excavation and traffic; nuisance of noise and dust; potential
                          environmental impacts of ex-situ contamination remediation at new locations and final disposal of
                          remediated soils. These impacts, though likely to be site-specific, could be significant to the
                          environment and community health if not well-managed. Therefore, the project is classified as
                          Category A as per OP4.01 Environmental Assessment.

                          For effective implementation, a first demonstration site has been identified and prepared for
                          implementation once the project is approved. It is a used pesticide storage house in Ganshui Town
                          of Qijiang District of Chongqing City. The warehouse was built in 1961, and used to store various
                          pesticides, including HCHs, DDTs, Methamidophos, Dimethoate, and Asomate. The sensitive
                          receptors near the site include residential houses, one school and three office buildings (with
                          distance of 30-360m). There are a couple living on the site as doorkeeper of the empty warehouse.
                          During site remediation, this couple needs to be temporarily relocated and will come back to their
                          house upon completion of remediation of the site. Based on the detailed investigation of the
                          Ganshui site area, there is no presence of indigenous people.

                           Preliminary and detailed site samplings have been conducted and contamination of arsenic and α-
                           HCH and β-HCH are confirmed, with soil concentrations over (a few times) the screening level of
                           the Beijing Contaminated Site Environmental Risk Screening Levels (DB11/T811 -2011) which is
                           the only soil pollution screening standard in China. Risk assessment has been conducted for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           site, based on which and environmental risk screening levels in several countries (Netherland, US,
                           etc.), the cleanup targets for this site is determined as 20 mg/kg, 0.2 mg/kg and 0.22 mg/kg
                           respectively, i.e the screening levels stipulated in the DB11/T811 -2011 for these chemicals. The
                           total contaminated soil to be remediated within the boundary of the warehouse covers an area of
                           ca. 250m2 and maximum depth of 1.5m (total volume of ca. 150 m3). There is no indication of
                           groundwater contamination according to site sampling. It is concluded that the soil contamination
                           is limited within a certain area of the warehouse, with not very significant contamination.
                           Remediation of such a small site with small amount of contaminated soil is likely to have site
                           specific and readily manageable impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The selected pilot sites for cleanup demonstration under the project are likely to be used for
                           higher-value land development (e.g. real estate) after pollution remediation. These factors are
                           taken into considerations by the risk assessment of the project, where long-term land use
                           development is considered as exposure scenario analysis. It is also likely that for some
                           demonstration sites to be selected and remediated during project implementation, the site
                           contamination and optimal remediation solutions may guide the land use planning in the long-term
                           to ensure overall maximized environmental, social and economic benefits.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                           impacts.
                           Alternative remediation technology selection is an important key part of the site cleanup activity,
                           and has been incorporated into the ESMF for demonstration sites to be implemented during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project implementation stage.

                           For the first demonstration of site, i.e. Ganshui site in Chongqing, alternative technologies has
                           been conducted with consideration of over 20 in-situ and ex-situ remediation technologies in terms
                           of technical feasibilities, applicability, environment and economic aspects. Considering the
                           advantages and disadvantages of remediation technologies, time requirement of the Ganshui
                           subproject, Plan I (anaerobic biodegradation and phytoremediation) and Plan II (cement kiln co-
                           processing) were designed for treatment of the contaminated soils of Ganshui site, and if Plan I
                           fails to remedy the contaminated soil to the target level, then the alternative II will be the final
                           resolution. No aftercare of the site is needed because it will be fully cleaned up with the removal
                           of contaminated materials.

                           A protocol for switching from Plan I (alternative treatment) to Plan II (incineration) will be
                           developed before initiating the bidding process for site cleanup. The Project aims to introduce
                           alternative technologies. Due to the very small amount of waste of 150m3 in this site, the
                           alternative treatment is more expensive than co-incineration in the cement kiln. There are therefore
                           incentives that could quickly put pressure on switching to Plan II for various reasons. Therefore, a
                           strong protocol will be needed to make sure that everything that can be reasonably done to make
                           Plan I successful has been done, and that in case of set-backs or disappointing intermediate results,
                           first every effort is made to turn matters around before diverting to Plan II is even considered. The
                           protocol will therefore not only prescribe the efforts that are required to focus on Plan I to make it
                           work and adjust if needed, but also will set some rules for (a) under what conditions diverting to
                           Plan II could be considered, and (b) how this would be decided and who would need to authorize
                           this. This will be subject to a Bank no-objection.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project plans to conduct site cleanup remediation for 5-6 demonstration sites during the
                           implementation stage. To address the potential environmental and social impacts envisaged for the
                           demonstration sites cleanup and remediation, the ESMF has been prepared to guide the safeguards
                           preparation and implementation for demonstration sites. The ESMF specifies procedures for
                           environmental and social safeguards documents preparation as per requirement of World Bank
                           safeguards policies and national laws/regulations. Site-specific EA reports for the demonstration
                           sites will be prepared during project implementation stage following the ESMF requirements.

                           For the first demonstration site in Chongqing (Ganshui site), a full environmental assessment has
                           been prepared, which covers site investigation/monitoring, risk assessment, alternative analysis of
                           remediation technologies, remediation plan, environmental and social management plan and
                           public consultation and information disclosure. Based on site investigation, the site is found to be
                           contaminated with α-HCH, β-HCH and arsenic which, according to risk assessment, will cause
                           unacceptable health risks. Through comprehensive analysis of alternative remediation
                           technologies, a final remediation plan has been developed, i.e. anaerobic biodegradation +
                           phytoremediation as key pilot plan, and cement-kiln incineration as a backup plan.

                           For the temporary relocation of the one family (janitor family of the warehouse), consultation has
                           been conducted with the affected family and the warehouse owner. Based on consultations,


                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                          compensation is to be provided to the family for a temporary relocation of four months, with
                          budget included in the environmental and social management plan in the EA. Their house (and the
                          connecting warehouse) will be adequately protected by professional engineering design to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                          safety condition upon their return.

                          Besides the first demonstration site, there are additional 7 candidate sites have been identified
                          through a site selection study conducted during project preparation stage. Initial safeguards
                          screening has been conducted for these sites following the ESMF procedures to confirm the World
                          Bank safeguards policy applications as recorded in this ISDS. The detailed site investigation and
                          remediation will be conducted latterly during project implementation stage.

                          Activities under the project Component 1 are TA and capacity building activities. Environmental
                          and social safeguard issues will be integrated into the TA activities as needed following the Bank’s
                          Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance Activities in
                          Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank.

                          The project national implementing agency will be the Foreign Economic Cooperation Office
                          (FECO) of the Ministry of Environmental Protection. FECO has been designated as the national
                          lead implementing agency for all POPs activities for implementation of the POPs Convention
                          since 2002. It has prepared and implemented 12 POPs projects financed by the GEF, five of them
                          are supervised by the World Bank and three of the five have been completed. FECO has
                          accumulated experiences and capacity of managing POPs projects according to the Bank’s
                          safeguard and fiduciary requirements.

                          The selected two demonstration areas: Chongqing municipality and Liaoning province, are
                          pioneers in China who have taken early actions on contaminated site remediation (e.g. issuance of
                          local contaminated site regulations and implementation of site remediation etc.), and remains
                          highly committed to implement the project following Bank’s safeguards policies. Both have
                          previous experiences of managing remediation of large contaminated sites. The project may also
Public Disclosure Copy




                          involve provincial governments in other provinces for site cleanup demonstrations, and site
                          cleanups in other provinces will be managed by FECO.

                           However, the capacity of FECO and the two demonstration areas for assessing and managing the
                           potential environmental and social risks and impacts associated with the project is weak. In China,
                           the most commonly used but relatively expensive remediation practice is excavation followed by
                           ex-situ treatment, such as depositing contaminated soil in an off-site landfill, and/or neutralizing
                           with incineration treatment. In-situ remediation technologies which are often less costly whilst
                           taking more time to implement, are still in the early stage of research and piloting. Furthermore,
                           the concept of risk assessment and risk management for contaminated sites has not been accepted
                           widely and used normatively yet. Therefore, capacity building activities have been thoroughly
                           designed in Component 1 of the project to provide training to these local governments and site
                           remediation practitioners during the project implementation stage.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders of the contaminated site cleanup will include site owners, project affected
                           people, local community and government organizations and concerned NGOs, as well as project
                           management agencies (two PMUs and FECO). Public consultation and information disclosure is
                           an important part of the site cleanup process. Requirements of consultation with project affected


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           people are incorporated into the ESMF based on the World Bank safeguards policy requirements.
                           For each site cleanup project, at least two rounds of public consultation will be conducted with
                           participation of project affected people: (i) first round at TORs stage or at the preliminary site
Public Disclosure Copy




                           investigation stage during which local public shall be informed of the general information of the
                           project (site cleanups) and consulted on their concerns; (ii) second round when the site-specific
                           draft EA is available in which the key findings of environmental assessment and mitigation
                           measures are provided to public for comments and feedback. The draft and final site EA
                           documents will be locally disclosed in the project areas.

                           For the Ganshui site, public consultations were conducted during the EA preparation in November
                           2012 and March/ July 2014. Over 80 people in the nearby communities were consulted during the
                           process. All consulted public expressed broad support to timely implementation of the site
                           remediation. Main concerns from the public are traffic disturbance and noise/dust impacts, for
                           which due attention has been given in the environmental and social management plan. The full
                           draft Ganshui EA report has been disclosed in the website of Chongqing Environmental Protection
                           Bureau on July 11, 2014 with announcement published in the Chongqing Evening Newspaper
                           dated July 12, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      15-Oct-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            11-Jul-2014
                           Comments: In country" Disclosure: the website of Chongqing Environmental Protection Bureau
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         on July 11, 2014 with announcement published in the Chongqing Evening
                                         Newspaper.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            11-Jul-2014
                           Comments: In country" Disclosure: the website of Chongqing Environmental Protection Bureau
                                         on July 11, 2014 with announcement published in the Chongqing Evening
                                         Newspaper.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Qing Wang
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                          Date: 15-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                        Date: 15-Oct-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
