                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA6295

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Dec-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Indonesia                        Project ID:    P147658
                                                       Parent         P132585
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:      ID-TF ADDITIONAL FINANCING PNPM GENERASI PROGRAM
                      (P147658)
   Parent Project     ID-TF NATIONAL PROGRAM FOR COMMUNITY EMPOWERMENT IN
   Name:              RURAL AREAS HEALTHY AND BRIGHT GENERATION (PNPM
                      GENERASI) (P132585)
   Task Team          Robert Wrobel
   Leader:
   Estimated       16-Jan-2014                         Estimated   28-Feb-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: EASID                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Health (60%), Primary education (30%), Central government administration
                     (7%), Sub-national government administration (3%)
   Theme(s):         Education for all (24%), Child health (20%), Population and reproductive health
                     (20%), Nutrition and food security (20%), Participat ion and civic engagement
                     (16%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     266.60           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                114.90
     Indonesia - Program for Community Empowerment                                           151.70
     Total                                                                                   266.60
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                             Page 1 of 9
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The PDO is to empower local communities in poor, rural sub-districts in the project provinces to
   increase utilization of health andeducation services and foster accountability in local service
   delivery.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
In 2007 GoI launched the PNPM Generasi pilot program as part of its response to addressing certain
lags in health and education outcomes. The program addresses key Government of Indonesia (GoI)
priorities and Millennium Development Goals (MDGs): to reduce poverty, maternal mortality, child
mortality, and to ensure universal coverage of basic education. It does so through the use of
participatory planning and incentivized community block grant funds to reach targets for twelve
education and health indicators. Based on the successes of the 2007-2009 pilot, which was
accompanied by a rigorous impact evaluation, GoI began scaling up PNPM Generasi in 2010 from
164 pilot sub-districts (kecamatan) to the present 369 kecamatan. The proposed Additional
Financing will support the government to expand PNPM Generasi to three new provinces with low
use and access of basic health and education services and above-average levels of childhood stunting:
West Kalimantan, Central Kalimantan and South Sumatra. This would expand PNPM Generasi’s
total coverage from 3,600 villages in 369 kecamatan to approximately 6,000 villages in 500
kecamatan.

The Additional Financing will expand the project to locations with poor nutrition indicators, and
introduce significant design changes to improve project performance in areas identified through
qualitative research, implementation support missions, and the quantitative impact evaluation. These
include (a) the addition of two community level target indicators that incentivize pregnant women,
mothers, fathers and caregivers to participate in enhanced nutrition counseling sessions delivered
through integrated community health posts (posyandu);; (b) changes to community level education
target indicators to incentivize communities to focus project resources on hard to reach school aged
children, including drop outs and children with disabilities, and on the period of transition from
primary school to junior secondary school; and (c) a refined gender strategy that focuses on the role
of men in household level decision making on investments and behaviors related to health, nutrition,
and education.

The Additional Financing will support the implementation of GoI’s vision of PNPM Generasi as part
of an integrated, multi-sector package of demand- and supply-side interventions aimed at improving
maternal and child nutrition, referred to as the Community-Based Stunting Reduction Program.
PNPM Generasi’s efforts at stimulating community demand for maternal and child health services
will be accompanied by a series of supply-side interventions implemented by the Ministry of Health


                                             Page 2 of 9
(MoH), local governments, Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), and the
Millennium Challenge Account-Indonesia (MCA-I), including training for health workers and
community health volunteers; provision of micronutrients and height measurement equipment; a
communications campaign; and community-led total sanitation (see Annex 2 for further details). This
package of interventions will contribute to GoI’s objectives of reducing low birth weight and the
prevalence of stunting for children aged zero to two. These objectives are tracked through a Results
Framework overseen by National Development Planning Agency (Bappenas) and which draws data
from PNPM Generasi intermediate results and Project Development Outcome (PDO) level outcome
indicators.

There are no changes to the PNPM Generasi’s project development objective. Likewise, fiduciary
management, safeguards, and procurement arrangements would not change. The PNPM-Generasi
project will retain an Environmental Category B classification.

The project consists of the following components:

Component 1: Kecamatan Grants (US$217.2 million, US$111.1 million in additional financing).
This component will provide funding for:

a)      Grants to project kecamatans to finance investment activities that improve the use of, and
access to, health and education services.
b)      Planning and preparation of sub-project proposals; and
c)      Training and capacity building activities for communities.

Component 2: Community Empowerment and Facilitation Support (US$20 million, US$20 million
in additional financing). This component will provide technical assistance for:

a)       Community empowerment and facilitation, including training to improve community skill
levels in diagnosing and overcoming constraints to health and education service utilization;
b)       Strengthening community health volunteer activities;
c)       Improving communications with, and linkages to, local government health and education
offices and service providers and communities; and
d)       The management of the Management Information System database.

Component 3: Implementation Support and Technical Assistance (US$29.4 million, US$ 20.6 in
additional financing). This component will provide funding for:

a)       Strengthening the management and oversight capacity of the PNPM Generasi Secretariat,
including the carrying out of workshops, coordination activities with line ministries, and field
supervision activities;
b)       Technical assistance for health and education planning and database management, including
the financing of salaries, travel and field supervision costs of PNPM Generasi National Specialists
and PNPM Generasi Provincial Specialists; and
c)       Training for Facilitators, PNPM Generasi National Specialists and PNPM Generasi
Provincial Specialists at all levels of program delivery, including refresher training for existing
facilitators and specialists, pre-service training for new facilitators and specialists, specialized
training for district database operators, and regional evaluation workshops.




                                             Page 3 of 9
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
PNPM Generasi currently operates in eight provinces (West Java, East Java, North Sulawesi, West
Nusa Tenggara (NTB), East Nusa Tenggara (NTT), Maluku, Gorontalo and West Sulawesi). The
Additional Financing will expand PNPM Generasi to three new provinces: West Kalimantan, Central
Kalimantan and South Sumatra, bringing total program coverage to approximately 6,000 villages in
500 rural kecamatans.

The project primarily finances social investments in education and health, with a relatively small
percentage, less than 10 percent, used to construct or rehabilitate education and health infrastructure
(e.g. early childhood development centers). The project also provides kecamatan grants to support
sub-district and village level planning processes, including the provision of training and technical
inputs to strengthen planning and implementation readiness. Planning includes a simple, community
assessment of environmental impact where infrastructure projects are proposed.

Overall safeguards compliance has been rated as Satisfactory in the latest project implementation
status and results report. PNPM Generasi will continue to use the 2012 PNPM-Rural
Implementation Guidelines for Social and Environmental Safeguards (IGSES) as its safeguards
instrument. IGSES is based on implementation experience of both, PNPM-Rural and PNMP
Generasi. The IGSES also includes good-practice principles for the indigenous peoples’
participation.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Juan Martinez (EASIS)
Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASIS)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
 BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
 4.12
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

 Projects on International           No
 Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                              Page 4 of 9
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     This project will not create any large-scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social
     impacts, therefore the safeguard issues and impacts associated directly with the proposed project
     are insignificant, reversible, and site-specific. Mitigation measures are carried out through
     community participation and community-based sub-project management.

    Safeguards guidelines for PNPM-Generasi are contained in the Implementation Guidelines for
    Social and Environmental Safeguards (IGSES) developed under the PNPM-Rural 2012-2015
    program, which is an annex to the operations manual (PTO). The IGSES was revised during the
    preparation and appraisal of PNPM-Rural 2012-2015 to reflect recent lessons in implementing
    environmental and social safeguards, the set of environmental code of practices for rural
    infrastructure as well as health and safety standards for community sub-projects.

    Environmental Assessment: PNPM Generasi investments are primarily social investments in
    education and health. From 2007 to 2011, investments in health and education infrastructure
    averaged less than $2,500 per village. These investments are small, discrete, and non-cumulative.
    As the umbrella program PNPM-Rural covers all rural sub-districts in the country with a wide
    range of activities proposed by communities, it is anticipated that there could be environmental
    impacts, and therefore PNPM-Rural triggers the Bank’s policy on Environmental Assessment.

    In the sub-districts where PNPM Generasi operates, a team of three sub-district facilitators—two
    specialize in community empowerment and one is a civil engineer—assists local communities to
    identify, plan, design, and implement sub-projects that improve community access to health and
    education services. Technical sub-district facilitators, with the support and oversight from district
    technical consultants, are trained to assist communities to screen for possible environmental and
    social impacts. If environmental impacts are anticipated, facilitators provide guidance to the
    communities for developing and implementing measures to address and mitigate them. Measures
    for mitigating negative impacts are included in the revised PNPM Generasi operations manual
    (PTO), which includes the IGSES, training procedures, field supervision and Safeguards criteria
    that consultant civil engineers use to screen sub-projects.

    Indigenous Peoples: Indonesian communities covered by the World Bank's policy on indigenous
    people can generally be classified in two categories:

    a) Masyarakat Adat (MA)/ Adat communities/ customary law communities. These are based on
    lineage or locality and are bound by customary law. Characteristics of these communities include:
    (i) self-identification as a distinct indigenous cultural group, (ii) collective attachment to ancestral
    territories and to the natural resources in the territories; and (iii) customary cultural, economic,
    social, or political institutions.

    b) Komunitas Adat Terpencil (KAT)/ Isolated and Vulnerable communities (IVPs). This is a


                                                 Page 5 of 9
government-designated category of customary law communities that live in isolated areas. The
characteristics attributed to these communities include: (i) collective attachment to ancestral
territories and to the natural resources in the territories; (ii) customary cultural, economic, social,
or political institutions; (iii) an indigenous language. They are also identified by government as: (i)
having a subsistence economy, (ii) using simple tools and technology, (iii) having a high
dependence on the environment and local natural resources, and (iv) having restricted access to
social, economic, and political services.

The implementing agency should screen locations using the list of geographical distribution of
IVPs (based on “Komunitas Adat Terpencil” or “KAT”) in Indonesia, as presented in the
"EGIMap - Strengthening IPs Screening in Indonesia", 2010, World Bank. The PNPM Generasi
Program Secretariat in PMD will use this as a reference for carrying out the screening in PNPM
Generasi locations. The Program Secretariat will ensure that the list is disseminated to provincial,
district, and kecamatan consultants and facilitators. In locations in which IVPs are present,
kecamatan facilitators will ensure that the standard social mapping process applies cultural criteria
to identify IVPs and involving them in program planning, decision-making, and implementation
processes as stipulated in the IGSES. PNPM-Rural , of which PNPM Generasi is a part, has
already utilizied good-practice principles for indigenous peoples’ participation and involvement,
including: recruitment of and tailored training for facilitators from the same ethnic groups; the use
of local languages where needed; independent reviews by socio-cultural specialists; and
modifications to the planning process to ensure free prior and informed consultations with broad
community support.

PNPM Generasi benefits from the work by PNPM-Rural to further strengthen the capacity of
program facilitators to address IP concerns through additional facilitator training, and screening of
locations for indigenous peoples. Furthermore, due to non-participation of some isolated
communities in PNPM-Rural, a rapid social assessment was carried out during the preparation of
PNPM 2012-2015, and the IGSES has been updated to take the recommendations into account.

Land Donations: There is no involuntary acquisition of land or involuntary resettlement in PNPM
Rural and PNPM Generasi. , whether financed by loans, grants, or other sources. The IGSES
contains detailed procedures to regulate the planning, documentation and verification procedures
for voluntary donation and voluntary donation with compensation. All land requirements for
project activities will be done through land donations and under the community consent with
appropriate informed consent and documentation. There is no possibility of the use of eminent
domain and persons have the right to refuse to donate or be compensated for their land. The
compensation provided to individuals for land donation are given by the community on a
voluntary basis as a gift not as a market or replacement value compensation payment for the
acquisition or transfer of the land.

Gender: PNPM Generasi is designed to specifically engage women as participants in program
planning and decision making and respond to women’s basic needs by increasing access to health
and education services. The project MIS shows that women have been the dominant participants in
village-level participatory planning and decision-making (averaging over 60% of participants
since 2007). Under the proposed project, PNPM Generasi’s target beneficiaries would continue to
be pregnant women and those who have recently given birth, children under five, and primary
school-aged children. PMD will work to expand engagement of the entire community in issues of
maternal and child health, notably husbands and caregivers (e.g., grandparents and other extended
family members) through partnerships with local civil society organizations and local health

                                            Page 6 of 9
 facilities.

  The PNPM-Generasi project will retain an Environmental Category B classification.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  There are no potential significant long-term adverse impacts triggered by this project. Mitigation
  against any negative impacts can be managed through community-based approaches with good
  engineering design and construction practices.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  As a special program of PNPM-Rural, all updated safeguards policies and mitigating measures
  defined in the IGSES are applicable and will be enforced through PNPM Generasi and are updated
  from time to time based on safeguards recommendations that emerge from joint World Bank and
  Government implementation support missions. For PNPM Generasi, the GOI updated the existing
  safeguards guidelines and included the revised IGSES (2012) as a supplement to the PNPM
  Generasi Operations Manual (PTO).

 Disclosure is Mandatory. The PNPM Rural and PNPM Generasi Operations Manuals, including
 the IGSES, are disclosed in Bahasa Indonesia on the PNPM-Rural website http://pnpm-perdesaan.
 or.id/. An executive summary of the IGSES in English is available through the Bank’s InfoShop.
 Additional English-language material is available upon request.

 A recent thematic safeguards support mission has found that PMD needs to increase its effort to
 disseminate the IGSES and provide more effective training for the facilitators. This will be
 monitored during project implementation. The mission also reviewed the effectiveness of
 cooperation with PNPM-Rural consultants and facilitators to ensure the quality of the initial
 screening and mitigation processes conducted at the village, sub-district and district levels.

  Facilitators receive a 21-day pre-service training prior to deployment, as well as an annual nine
  day refresher training. The pre-service and refresher trainings include sessions on safeguards and
  the IGSES. These trainings were conducted for PNPM Generasi facilitators in October 15 – 21,
  2012 and November 1-9, 2012 and again in November and December 2013. The training modules
  have been updated to comply with the latest IGSES version (2012).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders and decision makers are villagers in rural areas. PNPM-Rural/PNPM
  Generasi social and environmental objectives and procedures are explained at inter-village
  meetings and during community-level trainings for village facilitators and for the TPKs (Village
  Implementation Teams).

 There are several ways in which PNPM-Rural/PNPM Generasi addresses indigenous and
 vulnerable groups:

 a.       Developing dissemination and facilitation materials that are culturally appropriate, in


                                            Page 7 of 9
  collaboration with local communities;

  b.      Using appropriate, inclusive decision-making mechanisms in environments where
  indigenous groups are politically and culturally marginalized, including free, prior and informed
  consultations leading to broad community support at the community level;

  c.       Introducing innovative and effective ways to involve groups that tend to be excluded from
  traditional institutions, such as women. In PNPM Generasi, these include the mobilization of
  “mother’s groups” (kolompok ibu) in each participating sub-village that are involved in project
  planning, counseling, and parenting activities. PMD is aware that men play a key role in
  determining household decisions that affect nutrition and education of children. Project facilitators
  therefore also make efforts to involve husbands and fathers in local nutrition and parenting
  counseling sessions supported by the program;

  d.       Addressing concerns that marginalized indigenous groups are especially vulnerable to
  problems of elite domination and corruption. Adaptations include recruiting and training
  facilitators from marginalized communities, providing additional transport allowances for
  facilitators to reach isolated areas), employing two village facilitators (one man and one woman)
  in all locations who are trained and mentored to gradually take charge of village planning and
  accountability meetings, proposal writing, and oversight.

  Participatory consultation takes place in the form of inter-village, village, and sub-village
  meetings. Environmental and social screening and mitigation measures are identified and agreed
  among the beneficiaries during the preparation of the sub-project proposals and discussed during
  community meetings. The need and mechanisms for obtaining land (although rare in PNPM
  Generasi) are identified and agreed upon by program participants through the consultation process
  during the preparation of subproject proposals. Facilitation and verification of these processes, as
  presented in the IGSES, are documented in sub-project proposals by project facilitators, though the
  quality of documentation needs to be improved and will be closely monitored through PNPM
  Generasi.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Aug-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Oct-2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                           17-Sep-2013
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Aug-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Oct-2012
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                           17-Sep-2012
  Comments:


                                             Page 8 of 9
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
    Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
    Indigenous Peoples?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
    Development Unit or Sector Manager?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Name: Robert Wrobel
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:         Name: Susanne Holste (SM)                           Date: 16-Dec-2013




                                               Page 9 of 9
