                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA10663
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Aug-2014, 02-Sep-2014, 02-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mexico                             Project ID:    P147212
                            Project Name:     MX Social Protection System (P147212)
                            Task Team         Francesca Lamanna
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         18-Aug-2014                        Estimated   24-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSPDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (60%), Other social protection and risk management (20%),
                                              Other human development (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     350.00           Total Bank Financing:                350.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    350.00
                              Total                                                                                    350.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objectives are to support the Government’s effort to: (i) increase
                           access of PROSPERA beneficiaries to social and productive programs, and (ii) develop instruments
                           for an integrated social protection system.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         Component 1 - Support to PROSPERA Program and its linkage with social and productive programs.
                         The objective of the first Component is to support PROSPERA’s efforts to improve beneficiaries’
                         social and economic wellbeing by promoting investment in human capital and strengthening the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Program’s linkage with other social and productive programs while ensuring continued
                         improvements in the Program’s service delivery to its beneficiaries.

                         Sub-Component 1.1. Promoting the investment in human capital through the provision of
                         Conditional Support to PROSPERA Beneficiaries. Sub-Component 1.1 would provide conditional
                         support to PROSPERA beneficiaries for education, health and nutrition.

                         Sub-Component 1.2. Strengthening PROSPERA’s operational capacity to promote beneficiaries’
                         access to social and productive programs. Sub-Component 1.2 would support the strengthening of
                         PROSPERA’s operational structure and of existing inter-sectoral coordination bodies to enhance the
                         Program’s effectiveness and promote greater access of beneficiaries to social and productive
                         programs. In particular, Sub-Component 1.2 would provide technical assistance to: (i) define roles
                         and responsibilities of PROSPERA staff working in the implementation of the Program to support
                         the coordination with social and productive programs; (ii) design capacity building activities to
                         strengthen the implementation of PROSPERA , and align Program operation with the new
                         objectives of promoting greater linkages with complementary social an productive programs; (iii)
                         strengthen the Program’s communication strategy towards beneficiaries to update the content and
                         tailor the approach to specific groups (e.g., youth and indigenous populations), increasing its
                         effectiveness; and (iv) design and pilot coordination models for the inclusion of PROSPERA
                         beneficiaries in social and productive programs.

                         Sub-Component 1.3. Strengthening PROSPERA’s Monitoring and Evaluation tools and strategy.
                         Sub-Component 1.3 would support the strengthening of PROSPERA's monitoring and evaluation
                         tools and strategy, to build the evidence base that will be critical to assess the implementation of the
                         Program’s reforms to increase linkages with social and productive programs and adjust program
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design accordingly. In particular, Sub-Component 1.3 would provide technical assistance to: (i)
                         update Program targeting and recertification methodology through inter alia: revising the targeting
                         formula and monitoring PROSPERA beneficiaries that have concluded their participation in the
                         Program; (ii) develop a digital platform containing information on PROSPERA beneficiaries and
                         social and productive programs supply to support and monitor the implementation of the
                         coordination models designed under Component 1.2; (iii) support the linkages and coordination
                         between PROSPERA and the social and productive programs through, inter alia: the carrying out of
                         studies and the production of evaluation reports, and data collection on the PROSPERA beneficiaries
                         perception of the coordination between PROSPERA Program and social and productive programs;
                         and (iv) carry out the evaluation of the long-term impact of the Program.

                         Component 2 – Strengthening the social protection system. The objective of the second Component
                         is to support SEDESOL to develop new technologies and policies that will allow for better planning
                         of social and productive interventions based on the needs of the population, improving efficiency and
                         effectiveness of spending.

                         Sub-Component 2.1. Developing and implementing an integrated social information system (SIS).
                         Sub-Component 2.1 would support the design, development and implementation of an integrated
                         Social Information System (SIS). This technological platform will integrate, administer and exploit
                         the socioeconomic data of beneficiaries and information on the supply of social programs that will


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         enable better planning, coordination and targeting of social policy. This Sub-Component would
                         support the following activities: (i) carrying out an assessment of the ICT infrastructure needs for the
                         development of the SIS; (ii) developing the SIS; (iii) supporting the implementation of the SIS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through, inter alia, the acquisition of software and the provision of ICT services; (iv) developing of
                         an operational manual documenting the processes involved in the operation of the SIS; (v)
                         developing capacity building mechanisms for the use of the SIS including, inter alia, the
                         development of capacity building software; and (vi) reviewing of the existing legal framework and
                         development of protocols for the exchange of information through the SIS among the Borrower’s
                         ministries and agencies responsible for the implementation of social and productive programs.

                         Sub-Component 2.2. Supporting the development and implementation of SEDESOL’s Regional
                         Social Development Strategy (RSDS). Sub-Component 2.2 would support the definition and
                         implementation of the Regional Social Development Strategy (RSDS). This Sub-Component would
                         support the following activities: (i) carrying out diagnostic studies to identify the challenges facing
                         localities in the development of social interventions and the role that SEDESOL could play, as input
                         to the RSDS, and develop the RSDS based on the recommendations of the diagnostic studies; (ii)
                         defining SEDESOL’s organizational structure needs to implement the RSDS; (iii) developing
                         institutional capacity to support SEDESOL’s implementation of the RSDS including, inter alia, the
                         development of capacity building modules and related software; (iv) developing the technological
                         infrastructure required to obtain and analyze information on the supply of social programs and the
                         social needs of the population at the local and regional levels; and (v) developing and implementing a
                         monitoring and evaluation system for the RSDS including, inter alia, the acquisition of software and
                         hardware and the provision of ICT services.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Nationwide. Because of the nationwide scope and the focus on poor population, the Project targets
                         indigenous peoples, generally located at the poorest marginalized localities in the country.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
                         Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               This policy is not triggered as Project’s activities
                          BP 4.01                                              are not expected to cause any environmental
                                                                               impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               This policy is not triggered as Project’s activities
                                                                               are not expected to cause any impact on natural
                                                                               habits.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               This policy is not triggered given that Project’s
                                                                               activities will not impact the welfare of forests
                                                                               nor impact forest dependent communities.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               This policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                                                               not finance the purchase or significant use of
                                                                               pesticides.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               This policy is not triggered given that Project’s



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         BP 4.11                                        activities are not expected to impact physical
                                                                        cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           This policy is triggered given that the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        supports efforts to strengthen the PROSPERA
                                                                        Program’s performance in states where
                                                                        indigenous people are present. The Indigenous
                                                                        Peoples Plan prepared and implemented under the
                                                                        Support to Oportunidades Project (2008) and it’s
                                                                        additional financing (2010) has been updated
                                                                        building on this experience. While it is
                                                                        understood that the Project has a broader scope,
                                                                        beyond PROSPERA, the IPP has focused
                                                                        primarily on this Component because the
                                                                        activities supported directly impact indigenous
                                                                        people, and therefore needs to be delivered in a
                                                                        culturally appropriate way. To this end, the World
                                                                        Bank team has assessed the strengths and
                                                                        weaknesses of PROSPERA’s performance in
                                                                        states with indigenous population, and supported
                                                                        the Government to incorporate lessons-learned in
                                                                        the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) to guide
                                                                        implementation under the proposed new
                                                                        operation. During preparation, the World Bank
                                                                        team agreed with the Government on key
                                                                        instruments to ensure an adequate implementation
                                                                        of the IPP. The IPP was discussed with the
                                                                        Secretariat of the Consultative Board of the
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples National Commission (CDI).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        In addition to updating the IPP, the plan analyzes
                                                                        alternatives for indigenous beneficiaries to access
                                                                        and benefit from other programs defined under
                                                                        Sub-Component 1.2. The IPP includes measures
                                                                        to address barriers hindering participation and to
                                                                        ensure these programs are culturally appropriate
                                                                        and indigenous peoples can reap the benefits from
                                                                        these programs.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No            This policy is not triggered as the Project is not
                         4.12                                           expected to cause any impacts covered under the
                                                                        involuntary resettlement policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                                        will not finance the construction of dams nor will
                                                                        rely on the operations of existing dams.
                         Projects on International        No            This policy is not triggered since the Project does
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           not affect international waterways as defined by
                                                                        the policy.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            This policy is not triggered as the Project will not



                                                                Page 4 of 7
                            7.60                                                  finance activities in disputed areas as defined by
                                                                                  the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Because the Project involves conditional support to PROSPERA beneficiaries and technical
                              assistance, there are no large scale, significant, and or irreversible impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Because the Project involves conditional support to PROSPERA beneficiaries and technical
                              assistance, there are no potential indirect or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Because the project involves conditional support to PROSPERA beneficiaries and technical
                              assistance, it was not necessary to consider other Project alternatives to help avoid or minimize
                              adverse impacts.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The IPP includes two specific programs:

                              •Indigenous Communication Plan, which is conducted by the National Commission of Social
                              Protection in Health in support of PROSPERA beneficiaries in indigenous regions. This plan is
                              intended to encourage health education, better nutrition, and self-care through: general training in
                              health self-care, information dissemination in indigenous languages, and individual guidance. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                              communication plan incorporates an intercultural perspective and promotes a more flexible
                              approach among health practitioners combining formal with traditional medicine and
                              communities’ perspective on health.
                              •Bilingual promoters: This Program is the responsibility of the Dirección General de Atención y
                              Operación (DGAO) in PROSPERA. This Program is intended to develop a strategy to provide
                              support to operational personnel in their interaction with indigenous beneficiaries in regions with a
                              high percentage of indigenous population.

                              The management information and monitoring systems are strong and continue to be strengthened.
                              The PROSPERA Program and SEDESOL have sufficient institutional capacity for the application
                              of the indigenous safeguards policy. During the implementation of the World Bank financed
                              Project Support to Oportunidades, the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) was successfully
                              implemented and a number of key actions were undertaken to benefit inclusion and better quality
                              support for indigenous people in the Program. PROSPERA has identified efforts to improve the
                              functioning of the Program in indigenous communities as a priority area to be supported under the
                              proposed Project. The institutional assessment carried out during preparation corroborated actual
                              capacity and an institutional strengthening program has been proposed accordingly.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                           The IPP was discussed prior appraisal with the Secretariat of the Consultative Board of the
                           Indigenous Peoples National Commission (CDI) and published in the PROSPERA and SEDESOL
                           webpages, as well as the World Bank Website. CDI confirmed that the Project and itsIPP are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           aligned with the consultations held on Indigenous People, Indigenous communities and afro-
                           descendent made in the context of the preparation of the National Development Plan and the
                           Special Program for Indigenous Population for 2014-2018 and fully consistent with the
                           Commission protocol for nationwide coverage of interventions.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Jul-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mexico                                                           30-Jul-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Francesca Lamanna
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Margaret Ellen Grosh (PMGR)               Date: 02-Oct-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
