INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 162
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Pacific Islands            Project ID:   P151159
Project Name:   Pacific Island Regional Road Safety Project (P151159)
Task Team       Christopher J. De Serio,Romain Pison
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Jan-2016               Estimated     29-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (50%), Public administration-
Transportation (50%)
Theme(s):       Injuries and non-communicable diseases (25%), Managing for development
results (75%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      10.00            Total Bank Financing:   10.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
o         IDA Grant                                                       10.00
Total                                                           10.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to improve regional capacity for road safety management, and
to strengthen the multi-sectoral coordination and integration of road traffic and crash data in the
Pacific Island Countries and Territories.
C. Project Description


﻿With a Regional IDA grant of US$10 million equivalent, the proposed project would implement the
following components:
Component A: Pacific Island Road Safety Observatory (PIRSO) - US$4.7 million
The component will fund: (i) goods and services related to the establishment of a regional road safety
observatory within SPC; (ii) technical assistance in conducting regional-level analysis using the
iRAP method in select countries; and (iii) consultant services and capacity building related to Pacific
Island Road Safety Observatory (PIRSO) staff, and national level transport departments. The
regional road safety observatory will provide a platform to introduce effective multi-sectoral and
multi-jurisdictional partnerships working at the regional and national levels to deliver a range of
international good-practice road safety measures, as well as enable road policing to identify
equipment, training, and other awareness interventions that will then be administered through
specific national investment projects and/or bettered coordinated donor programs. The creation of the
PIRSO facilitates a consistent, regional approach towards establishing appropriate institutional
mechanisms, data collection, and information management processes and tools (e.g., unified data
reporting format, collection and management methodologies, as well as performance indicators),
with a focus on using crash and health data. The PIRSO will assist the participating PICs to collect
road traffic fatality data and information (hospital and police data) and trauma records,
complementary to other sources. The goal is to create a results-based road safety culture across
governments in the region, which is supported by empirical evidence and through global knowledge
sharing and dissemination of impacts.
The regional observatory will collect data on crashes and victims consistent with the International
Road Traffic and Accident Database (IRTAD). The PIRSO will be aligned with IRTAD in applying
existing methodologies to collect road crash data, and regional level analysis can elevate
collaboration and benefit from economies of scale. In addition, consideration will be given to robust
epidemiological research that can assess the magnitude and key determinants of road traffic injuries
in the context of PICs and is essential to determining context-specific road safety initiatives that are
O
C.      relevant and affordable at the national level of the various participating PICs. Increased attention to
routinely collected data (e.g., hospital information systems and police road traffic accident/crash
statistics) to inform policy development and engineering practices is also paramount. The effective
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of data collection is also vital to ensure accountability, and to set
the regional basis of M&E for subsequent national replication. The component will therefore assist in
ensuring the sharing and monitoring of data and experiences across the region.
To consolidate a detailed database for PIRSO on the major roads of the targeted countries, a sub-
component will finance a regional level analysis conducted on the basis of International Road
Assessment Program (iRAP) surveys. This would form an initial basis of comparable iRAP results
for subsequent replication at the national level. This would provide further data on regional issues
and also help identify potential national level actions and institutional strengthening activities.
Capacity building associated with the development of the PIRSO for staff in road departments and
policy making divisions, including staff training related to data collection and processing at both the
regional and national levels, is considered in the component costs. Training will link international
good practice for the design, implementation, operation, and maintenance of road safety
infrastructure with the data that will be available through the PIRSO. Based on the results of the
technical diagnostic, a technical module for road safety engineering may also be developed.


﻿Component B: Road Safety Legislation and Enforcement - US$2.7 million
Component activities to be financed include: (i) technical assistance in developing a regional, scope-
O
U       based set of sample legislation for countries to consider adopting; (ii) police and stakeholder training
in the latest road safety technologies; and (iii) utilization of the road safety database for improved
decision making at the national level. With the support in the field and at the national level, the
existing police organizations within the International Road Policing Organization (RoadPOL) and the
Pacific Islands Chiefs of Police (PICP), will develop a regional approach to improve the governance
of road safety police enforcement and can leverage 'twinning' arrangements and peer-to-peer agency
reviews. Road safety campaigns, targeting speeding, drink-driving, as well as failure to use seatbelts
and helmets would be the key topics of the awareness programs to be further developed. These
campaigns will be adapted to the national challenges as needed.
The component is one of the cornerstones for establishing evidenced based policy making on road
safety management and improving road safety outcomes, as it requires cross-sector engagements in
key government agencies such as the police, Ministries of Health, Education and Justice, as well as
non-governmental organizations.
Component C: Health Services and Post-Crash Care - US$1.5 million
The component is intended to benefit the regional health sector by fostering dialogue on the health
portfolio across the Pacific Island Region, with common standards to be applied at the national level.
It would therefore finance:
(i)  Technical assistance to conduct a diagnostic of trauma capabilities and emergency care to
identify capacity and shortfalls. The main emergency medical response services in the PICs suffer
from inadequate means to effectively respond to accidents/crashes. Partnerships between transport
and health sectors (both at the Bank level and PICs levels) will help to evaluate emergency response
capacity. The component may draw upon the Pacific Islands Emergency Management Alliance
(PIEMA) as a support mechanism and organization for the Regional Disaster, Emergency and Health
aspects; and
(ii) National level road safety awareness campaigns will also be included to raise public
o       knowledge on the main causes of road traffic injuries and trauma while increasing the understanding
of road safety in general.
Component D: Implementation Support and Regional Coordination - US$0.9 million
The component will provide resources to support regional partnership arrangements between SPC
(the implementing agency), PIRSO, IRTAD, RoadPOL, and the PICP. The component would help
regional inter-agency coordination to more efficiently implement a road safety strategy across the
Pacific Region. A results-focused road safety strategy, with a clear definition of roles and
responsibilities, supported by improved cross-sectoral capacity to manage road safety, will be
required.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) in located in Suva, Fiji. The project is primarily


﻿institutional capacity building and technical assistance, with only minor investments in Information
Communication and Technology related goods acquisition.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
While SPC has some limited exposure to implementing IDA-financed projects, the investments are
not expected to require preparation of stand-alone safeguard instruments.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    No           No civil works are anticipated at this stage.
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         OP 4.10 has been triggered, acknowledging that the
4.10                                     geographical coverage of the operation will be in
countries where the policy is ordinarily triggered (i.e.
Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Timor Leste
and Fiji) based on analysis by the EAP Regional
SafeguardsSecretariat. The use of local languages in
public awareness campaigns will be duly considered
when appropriate.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Oct-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The project is considered to be an environmental Category C, related document preparation is not
foreseen at this time.
IV. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christopher J. De Serio,Romain Pison
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                          Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                          Date:
Manager:


