                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA7192

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jan-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jan-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Uganda                           Project ID:    P145280
                                                      Parent         P115563
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (P145280)
   Parent Project    Uganda Health Systems Strengthening Project (P115563)
   Name:
   Task Team         Peter Okwero
   Leader:
   Estimated         16-Dec-2013                      Estimated   28-Feb-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTHE                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Health (80%), Other social services (20%)
   Theme(s):         Health system performance (70%), Population and reproductive health (30%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:         90.00                Total Bank Financing:      90.00
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                           90.00
     Total                                                                                 90.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                            Page 1 of 7
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objective (PDO) is to deliver the Uganda National Minimum Health
   Care Package (UNMHCP) to Ugandans, with a focus on maternal health, newborn care and
   family planning. This will be through improving human resources for health, physical health
   infrastructure, and management, leadership and accountability for health service delivery.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The revised project development objective is to increase utilization of the Uganda National
   Minimum Health Care Package, with a focus on maternal health and family planning.
 3. Project Description
The project comprises four components: (a) improved health workforce development and
management; (b) improved infrastructure of existing health facilities; (c) improved Leadership,
Management, and Accountability for health service delivery; and (d) improved maternal, newborn
and family planning services.

Component One: Improved health workforce development and management (US$5 million, AF US
$0). The component supports: (a) consolidation of central level human resources for health (HRH)
functions at the Ministry of Health (MoH); (b) strengthening human resource management functions
in the sector; (c) improving staff retention in remote and hard to reach areas; and (d) improvement in
pre-service and in-service training.

Component Two: Improved infrastructure of existing health facilities (US$85 million, AF US$65
million). The component supports (a) renovation of existing health facilities; (b) provision of medical
equipment; (c) improving capacity for operations and maintenance; and (d) strengthening the referral
system. The civil works component also involves construction of two incinerators in Buwenge and
Bukwo Hospitals. 15 other incinerators shall be constructed under the Dutch Government funding.
One incinerator has been constructed in Entebbe Grade B hospital under GoU funding.

Component Three: Improved Leadership, Management, and Accountability for health service
delivery (US$10 million, AF US$0). The objectives of the component are to (a) implement
performance based management approaches; (b) professionalize and strengthen the management of
hospitals; (c) develop and roll out implementation of the hospital policy framework; and (d) support
procurement, logistics, and supply chain management.

Component Four: Improved maternal, newborn and family planning services (US$30 million, AF US
$0). This component will: a) expand and improve quality of reproductive health and newborn care; b)
increase the availability and demand for family planning services through financing key Emergency
Obstetric and Neonatal Care (EmONC) equipment, contraceptives, and training and capacity
building activities to expand coverage of maternal health, newborn care, and family planning
services; and (c) support scale up of reproductive health output based aid (OBA) activities in the
health sector.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
While some interventions are national in scope, a number of key civil works interventions with


                                             Page 2 of 7
environmental and social implications in components 1-3 are centered around 22 general hospitals (2
of which mentioned above will be upgraded to Regional Referral Hospitals), 27 health center IV's
(type IV) and two incinerators to be built in Buwenge and Bukwo Hospitals. Management and
operation of the other 16 incinerators constructed under the Dutch and GoU funding will potentially
be of interest in terms of safeguards analysis. The main environmental issues include construction
practices and related safety issues both for the workers and the public/patients, management of
construction waste rubble, noise and dust pollution, general sanitation and management and
operation of the incinerators, including their situation/location and subsequent emissions and disposal
of the residual ash. It is useful to mention that the AF is meant to cover funding shortfalls caused by
cost overruns. As a result, no additional safeguard policies have been triggered. Before project start,
ESIA was undertaken and EMPs developed. Since this was undertaken in 2010, the ESMPs have
been updated as of Nov. 15, 2013. It is important to note that all works will take place within the
existing campuses of currently operating health facilities. It is also worth noting that there will be no
displacement of any land uses with the exception of portable kiosks that shall be relocated within the
hospital premises for continued provision of catering services to patients and health workers.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               The rehabilitation/expansion of basic health
BP 4.01                                               infrastructure and construction of staff houses
                                                      under first component triggers O.P 4.01
                                                      Environmental Assessment. Given the project
                                                      will support major civil works at 2 regional
                                                      referral hospital as well as minor civil works at 16
                                                      general hospitals and 29 health centers (HC Type
                                                      IV) which may have potential adverse
                                                      environmental impacts, the project needs to
                                                      comply with environmental assessment
                                                      requirements under the Uganda National
                                                      Environment Act (1995), National Environmental
                                                      Impact Assessment Regulations 13/1998, other
                                                      Ugandan environmental regulations, and the
                                                      World Bank safeguard policy OP 4.01 on
                                                      Environmental Assessment. Environmental due
                                                      diligence for the major civil works will be carried
                                                      out through preparation of an Environmental
                                                      Assessment including an Environmental
                                                      Management Plan. Environmental due diligence
                                                      for the minor civil works will be carried out
                                                      through preparation of site specific
                                                      Environmental Management Plans.
                                                      Environmental due diligence for medical waste
                                                      management will be carried out through
                                                      implementation of the National Health Care
                                                      Waste Management Plan.


                                              Page 3 of 7
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

   Pest Management OP 4.09             No               There is no plan to use pesticides under the
                                                       project.
   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The project activities include the rehabilitation
   4.12                                                and expansion of existing 2 regional, 16 general
                                                       hospitals and 29 Health Center Level 4, including
                                                       construction of staff houses which may have
                                                       implications on both acquisition of land or
                                                       converting land uses, hence triggering OP 4.12,
                                                       Involuntary Resettlement. Depending on the
                                                       assessment, a Resettlement Plan (RAP) will be
                                                       prepared for each individual site.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Based on the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Report, the project will not have large
     scale or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts. The main environmental safeguard
     issues relate to civil works on existing grounds of hospitals and health centers. These include
     refurbishment or addition of specialized wards, construction of incinerators and staff houses, and
     connections to water, sewerage and power facilities for the functionality of the health facilities.
     Key environmental impacts are those associated with construction phase activities (e.g. noise,
     construction traffic, construction waste, visual impacts, and safety of both workers and patients).
     Some potentially adverse impacts are associated with operation of hospitals and health centers (e.
     g. medical waste generation and disposal through incineration, waste water disposal, general waste
     disposal).
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     Based on the project environmental due diligence studies, none are expected.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.


                                               Page 4 of 7
  Various incineration technologies were considered. The final selection of waste incineration
  technology was determined with environmental (air pollution) as well as operating (cost and
  sophistication) considerations in mind. The Ministry is in process of installing the incinerators.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  To ensure compliance with the relevant safeguard policies, an Environmental and Social Impact
  Assessment (ESIA) was commissioned under the original project. The findings of the field
  reconnaissance at each of the project site did not indicate environmental or social safeguard issues
  beyond those associated with local civil works. To manage the risks, Environmental Management
  Plans (EMPs) were prepared and disclosed (April 16, 2010) together with the National Health
  Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP, 2009/2010 – 2011/2012) under the original project.
  Project implementation would be in compliance with environmental assessment requirements
  under the Uganda National Environment Act (1995), National Environmental Impact Assessment
  Regulations 13/1998 and the World Bank safeguard policy OP 4.01 on Environmental
  Assessment.

  The civil/construction works for the phase 1 nine hospitals were due to commence in November
  2013 and the EMPs have since been updated but with no substantial change of identified impacts
  and mitigation measures, mainly because the sites remain the same. The only change has been
  occasioned by inadequate funds to cover all the planned civil structures, resulting in reduced
  project scope in terms of number of structures to be constructed. The EMPs were used to inform
  the detailed designs for the renovation works. The civil works Supervising Consultants have
  Environmental and Social Management Specialists on their teams and will be charged with
  supervision and reporting on implementation of environmental and social aspects such as HIV/
  AIDS, Gender, complaints, etc. The borrower has substantial experience in hospital renovation
  and construction in compliance with Uganda's National Environment Management Authority
  guidelines, and some experience with World Bank safeguards.

  The approved HCWMP (April 13, 2010) will apply to the project throughout the duration of the
  project, unless agreement is reached to adopt an updated or revised version of the HCWMP. The
  HCWMP was again disclosed July 12, 2013 under the Reproductive Voucher Project (P144102).
  The Ministry of Health and the decentralized health service delivery points have some experience
  with the formulation and implementation of the Health Care Waste Management Plan. In addition
  the sector has a Safe Injection Policy. The challenge continues to be the weak health care waste
  management system due to insufficient and inadequate equipment for handling of waste material,
  and the poor enforcement by the relevant authorities. The MoH is involved in several initiatives to
  manage health care waste in the sector, including: involvement of the private sector, infection
  control and the pilot scheme on the disposal of hazardous medical waste in Eastern Uganda. In
  order to monitor the National Health Care Waste Management Plan, the MoH will prepare
  quarterly progress updates as part of the quarterly progress reports.

  According to the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), OP 4.12 is not triggered by
  the project. The MoH and the relevant facilities provided acceptable proof of land ownership and
  there are no disputes over the land. Land taking for construction of health and ancillary facilities
  has not been a common occurrence.

  Environmental compliance is the responsibility of the Environmental Health Division of the
  Ministry of Health which is charged with executing the environmental health plans under the


                                             Page 5 of 7
  overall policy guidance of the National Environment Management Authority. Under the project,
  the division will work together with NEMA to strengthen efforts in handling all environment
  related issues, including those under civil works. The safeguards instruments (ESIA/EMP,
  HCWMP) include capacity building activities with the aim of improving compliance and building
  capacity to monitor environmental and social mitigation measures. Cost of mitigation measures,
  including costs associated with civil works and medical waste management are included in the
  project and financed by IDA.

  However, in order to strengthen close supervision and follow up of UHSSP safeguards
  implementation, MoH has agreed to hire an Environmental Health expert with immediate effect.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Local consultations were done as part of the ESIA preparation at each of the project sites. The
  consultations included the full spectrum of directly affected local stakeholders, were recorded and
  factored into preparation of the ESIA and EMPs. The ESIA was disclosed under the original
  project (April 16, 2010). The Key stakeholders included selected District Local Governments,
  Hospitals Medical Superintendents, NEMA, Ministry of Water and Environment, National
  Medical Stores, National Drug Authority, Development Partners including WHO, JICA, USAID,
  and GiZ.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        14-Apr-2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     16-Apr-2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                            Page 6 of 7
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Peter Okwero
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 05-Jan-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)                          Date: 06-Jan-2014




                                             Page 7 of 7
