INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1053
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ghana                       Project ID:  P148183
Project Name: Ghana FIP - Enhancing Natural Forest and Agroforest Landscapes Project
(P148183)
Task Team       Timothy H. Brown
Leader:
Estimated        12-Dec-2014                Estimated    27-Feb-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Forestry (60%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (40%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Other
rural development (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
0                                                                               .0
Total Project Cost:      32.50             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      3.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                 29.50
Total                                                                        32.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve forest and tree management practices by cocoa
farmers, CREMA communities and forest reserve managers to reduce forest loss and degradation in
selected landscapes in Ghana's High Forest Zone.
Page 1 of 10


﻿Key PDO indicators include :
(i) People in targeted forest and adjacent communities with increased monetary or non-
monetary benefits from forests (number), of which female (number)
(ii)   Area under improved CREMA management and climate smart cocoa management practices
O
U         in targeted landscapes due to Project interventions (ha), disaggregated by CREMA management and
climate smart cocoa management practices
(iii)  Area of forest in targeted landscapes (ha), disaggregated by closed forest, open forest, and
crop land
(iv)   Total greenhouse gas emission reductions plus enhancement of carbon stocks, estimated in
tons equivalent CO2e/year (relative to 2012 reference level based on Ghana's REDD+ MRV system)
(v)    Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage)
The overall goal of FIP-fmanced activities in Ghana is to reduce GHG emissions from deforestation
and forest degradation, while reducing poverty and conserving biodiversity. The FIP finances three
inter-related projects in Ghana, implemented by the World Bank, the African Development Bank
(AfDB) and the International Finance Corporation (WBG), respectively. The FIP set of activities
collectively aim to (i) ensure the integrity, restoration, and sustainable management of forest reserves
by introducing more inclusive management and benefit sharing models, financial incentives, and
investments; (ii) restore forest cover in off-reserve areas by securing tree tenure and benefits, forest
plantations and landscape restoration, and rehabilitation of degraded forest land; (iii) increase trees
and enhance carbon stocks in the farming system by promoting sustainable cocoa and agriculture
practices; and (iv) develop viable alternative livelihoods for local communities by addressing a broad
range of technical, financial and market incentives, to reduce pressure on existing forests.
3. Project Description
Component 1. Policy Reforms and Institutional Strengthening
This component consists of efforts to advance implementation of reformed policies, improve the
enabling environment, and strengthen the institutional means to achieve sustainable landscape and
forest management. This will involve three main sets of activities: (i) improvements to policy
practice and incentives, (ii) improvements to the institutional guidance and procedures for
implementation, and (iii) support for multi-stakeholder governance platforms and consultative
processes.
Component 2. Pilot Investments for Improved Forest and Landscape Management
Field- and community-based investments are the core of this Ghana FIP project. These will aim to
establish and demonstrate improved forest and landscape management practices, while building the
case for wider replication in terms of results. These pilots represent up-front investments required to
restore/ protect/ reduce deforestation, and thus build on the REDD+ Readiness Process. Pilots will be
supported by efforts to consolidate lessons from implementation to improve policy implementation
and institutional practices, as well as outreach efforts that encourage replication to landscapes beyond
the target corridors. Pilot demonstration activities will be implemented in two main landscape areas:
on farms and in communities in a specific landscape corridor and on forest reserves.
Component 3. Innovation, Capacity Building, and Communications
This component will support communication, capacity building, and monitoring activities to support
innovation, engage communities, and provide information relevant for improved landscape
Page 2 of 10


﻿management practices. It will support the field demonstration activities described above by supplying
information, improved approaches, and training materials needed to achieve improved outcomes.
Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring, and Coordination
0
This component will support project management and oversight, project monitoring and evaluation
system, and wider coordination of the range of FIP-financed activities, including reporting at the
international level. This component provides support to the GoG in regular communication and
coordination among FIP-fmanced interventions and related activities, to promote synergies among all
FIP projects (WB, AfDB, IFC, and DGM) in a programmatic manner, as well as information and
knowledge sharing with other FIP countries. The activities to be financed include project
coordination, financial management, procurement management, contract management equipment and
supplies, and Monitoring and Evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project activities will be located in Ghana's high forest zone (HFZ), where deforestation rates and
carbon stocks are highest. The HFZ is also a core cocoa production area with significant degradation.
There is good potential to move toward more sustainable forest and land management (and reduce
emissions and store carbon) by enhancing policies, incentives, and practices for better stewardship,
agroforestry, and farming approaches. The Government of Ghana has initiatives to reduce the cocoa
frontier expansion by providing incentives for rejuvenating old cocoa plantations and bringing old
cocoa fallows under more sustainable agroforestry-based cultivation. The Government of Ghana also
promotes certification of sustainable cocoa production, but there are several different systems and
standards advocated by different organizations.
Financing from the Forest Investment Program (FIP) provides an opportunity to finance
transformative co-management and benefit sharing approaches. The FIP will finance policy and
institutional reforms, capacity building, and communication (building on Natural Resources and
Environmental Governance Technical Assistance (NREG TA) and the Forest Carbon Partnership
Facility (FCPF) funded activities). The FIP-supported program will also pilot test innovative
applications of community based planning and management, including tree management rights with
communities and farmers. The proposed FIP-financed project will also complement and enhance the
NREG TA effort (approved in June 2013), and build on consultation and measurement work for
REDD+ Readiness that began under the FCPF (approved in November 2012).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Kenneth M. Green (OPSOR)
Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes         The project will engage in a number of activities
BP 4.01                                    that use forest resources in selected sites and
potentially impact other environmental areas.
These activities may have environmental impacts
on a limited scale. An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) has been
prepared, consulted upon, cleared by the Bank
Page 3 of 10


﻿and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          Some of the forest and woodlands to be targeted
will contain critical ecosystems; the project will
enhance the quality of the management of these
critical ecosystems and reduce risks associated
with potential economic development. The ESMF
provides guidance on avoiding or mitigating
impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes          Forest policy and management are a primary
focus of this project, in addition to trees in the
agroforestry landscape. The project will explore
integrated and participatory forest management as
part of a strategy of increasing carbon
sequestration through sustainable forest
management. The ESMF includes guidance on
managing forestry issues.
Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes          The project will not directly finance the use of
pesticides but will promote IPM and application
of pesticide to minimize risks to human health
and the environment, particularly in situations
when pesticide use may increase in association
with the project, such as promotion of shift of the
existing cocoa farming practices towards climate-
smart and resilient 'shade' cocoa, and
establishment of experimental timber plantations
piloting mix of native species. The Project-
specific Pest Management Plan has been prepared
with this in mind, to ensure that the project does
not increase the environmental impacts of
pesticide use, and where possible these are
managed responsibly, in line with sound
environmental and human health protection
objectives.
It is also noted that the key environmental and
social issues and risks associated with chemical
applications in cocoa are part of the analysis
undertaken as part of the ESMF prepared for this
Project. The ESMF also provides identification of
IPM activities linked to the cocoa enhancement
activities that are considered important to be
supported. A Pest Management Plan has been
prepared, consulted upon, cleared by the Bank
and disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  Yes        Screening of sites for pilot activities will include
BP 4.11                                     specific screening under the ESMF to avoid
Page 4 of 10


﻿adversely affecting physical cultural heritage,
such as sacred groves.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
0
area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes         No involuntary resettlement is anticipated.
4.12                                        However, there may be cases where use and
access to resources may be restricted due to
changes in forest management and resource
management plans. Therefore, a Process
Framework was prepared and the Project,
together with the Dedicated Grant Mechanism,
will support community inclusion into the above-
mentioned planning processes. The Process
Framework has been prepared, consulted on,
cleared by the Bank and disclosed in-country and
at the InfoShop.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No           The project does not involve dams.
Projects on International      No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No         N/A
7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
0
The Project will have positive social and environmental benefits. There are potentially some
limited environmental and social risks and impacts associated with Component 2 activities.
Specific initiatives requiring attention to risks and impacts include improved forest and landscape
management practices to restore and protect forest cover and reduce deforestation. These activities
will be: (i) on farms and in communities in a specific landscape corridor and (ii) on forest reserves.
Changes to land use and access to and use of resources in protected forest areas may impact
livelihoods. The approach to managing land and forest resources will be based on broad
community consultation and decision making. The specific locations of interventions are still
being identified as part of the continued stakeholder dialogues and consultations, but are generally
indicated in maps that have been generated as part of Project preparation activities. The Project is
also benefiting from parallel environmental and social assessments and due diligence being
developed under the FCPF support to the REDD+ Readiness Process. This includes development
of a Social and Environmental Strategic Assessment (SESA) that has identified possible social and
environmental risks and impacts across the REDD+ Strategic Options. The FCPF has also
supported preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
Resettlement Policy Framework.
These processes and documents have provided significant inputs to the preparation of the FIP
ESMF, Pest Management Plan (PMP), and Process Framework. The ESMF, PMP, and Process
Page 5 of 10


﻿Framework identified specific safeguard activities, roles and responsibilities, capacity building and
budget requirements which have been incorporated into the project management framework as
discussed under Implementation Arrangements (IV.A.) A public consultation manual that will be
used for Project funded activities is also under preparation with NREG TA financing.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
0
The Project is contributing to improving and expanding forest biomass and introducing land
management schemes to reduce deforestation and degradation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Project has benefited from extensive consultation across many stakeholders to identify
possible REDD interventions and the FIP has built upon these processes to select appropriate
positive forest benefits.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A screening process and mitigation guidelines are included in the ESMF to address risks and
impacts of concern. The responsibilities for implementing these measures are described in the
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) that provides guidance to the Ministry of
Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR), the Forestry Commission (FC), the Ghana Cocoa Board
(COCOBOD), and the Forest Research Institute of Ghana (FORIG), as agencies involved in the
Project implementation, on procedures to be followed and standards to be met in implementing the
projects which should be in agreement with national and World Bank safeguard provisions. Roles
and responsibilities of the MLNR and FC and other beneficiary agencies are clearly defined as
well as monitoring protocols to be followed to ensure that the required provisions are adhered to.
Finally, budgetary estimates are provided to support the implementation of the ESMP, PF and
PMP.
The ESMP will be included in the Project Implementation Manual. The ESMP outlines
mechanisms for:
*      Screening of proposed project interventions, identifying potential environmental and
social impacts and management of safeguard policies implications;
*      Arrangements by the MLNR/ FC and other relevant institutions for implementation and
their capacity building;
*      Monitoring ESMP measures implementation;
Community consultations.
The formal environmental approval and permitting processes will be the Ghana EIA Regulations
(EPA, 1999), that also established a process to screen and evaluate all developments, undertakings,
projects and programs which have the potential to give rise to significant environmental impacts,
and the World Bank safeguard policies. The Ghanaian environmental permit procedures are
followed by all projects.
Those projects requiring Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) clearance will only commence
when an environmental permit has been obtained from the EPA. The Agency has provided the list
of projects for which an Environmental and Social Impacts Assessment (ESIA) is mandatory and
these are detailed in the ESMF and are consistent with the World Bank categorization of projects.
Page 6 of 10


﻿The Project will be implemented by the MLNR in collaboration with the FC, COCOBOD, FORIG,
and other agencies such as the Ministry of Environment, Science, Technology and Innovation
(MESTI) and the Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA). A National FIP Secretariat at the
MLNR will coordinate activities of the Project and ensure linkages and coordination with other
O
Q)         interventions under the REDD+ agenda, including the Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM). It is
anticipated that the MLNR and FC will coordinate environmental and social due diligence for the
Project and other interventions under the REDD+ agenda. The focal point in the MLNR and the
FC may work with the MOFA, COCOBOD, FOGIG, MESTI, as well as other relevant agencies to
ensure smooth implementation and the documentation sharing of the lessons learnt.
The main responsibility for implementing the ESMF, PMP, and the PF rests with the MLNR and
the FC Environmental and Social Focal Point and will be supported by, as needed, environmental
and social experts who will be recruited by the project. The FC regional managers will oversee the
implementation of all actions to mitigate adverse environmental and social impacts, and also
supervise their district managers to ensure sound management practices at the community level.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
A stakeholder engagement process was followed during project preparation which included
several interactions with affected communities. The methodology included desk studies and
qualitative and quantitative survey in the project areas. This was based on focus groups and in-
depth interviews with communities of the project areas, representatives of civic associations, local
NGOs, and representatives of local commercial enterprises and district assemblies as well as
gender advocacy groups.
The objectives of these meetings were to: (a) assess the existing social conditions; (b) determine
the potential negative impacts of the component, if any; (c) serve as a vehicle for community
consultations on the project; and (d) inform the ongoing project design.
The issues/ concerns arising out of the consultations in the Western and Brong Ahafo Regions for
both the FIP and the SESA for the REDD+ mechanism in Ghana are summarised in the ESMF
under four main headings: (1) Natural Resources; (2) Institutions; (3) Economic; and (4) Socio-
cultural Issues.
In order to engage the Project Affected Persons (PAPs) successfully, the strategies to be used will
include using the assembly men/ women to assist in accessing the chiefs and people of
communities and in the identification of PAPs/ contact persons/ stakeholders/ focal persons etc.
The methods to be employed will include: (i) National Newspapers, (ii) local FM stations, (iii)
beating of gong-gong and (iv) oral presentations at social gatherings (churches, mosques, funeral
grounds, durbars etc).
The safeguards documents will be disclosed in compliance with relevant Ghanaian regulations and
the World Bank safeguards policies. The public/ community will be allowed up to 21 days to
comment on any proposals prior to implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Nov-2014
Page 7 of 10


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                           28-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ghana                                                    28-Nov-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Ghana                                                    09-Dec-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Ghana                                                    28-Nov-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
O
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[X] No[      ]   NA [   ]
Page 8 of 10


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
a          property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader: Name: Timothy H. Brown
Page 9 of 10


﻿Approved By
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)        Date: 17-Dec-2014
Advisor:
Practice Manager/   Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                 Date: 17-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


