                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6816
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jul-2013, 28-Aug-2013, 27-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P129563
                            Project Name:      Anhui Yellow Mountain New Countryside Demonstration Project (P129563)
                            Task Team          Rabih H. Karaky
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Aug-2013                        Estimated   27-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General transportation sector (25%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                              protection sector (25%), Other industry (25%), General agri culture, fishing and
                                              forestry sector (15%), Sub-national government administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (58%), Cultural Heritage (18%), Rural non-
                                              farm income generation (10%), Other rural development (9 %), Municipal
                                              governance and institution building (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     145.19           Total Bank Financing:                 100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    100.00
                              Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                 45.19
                              Sub-borrower(s)                                                                            0.00
                              Total                                                                                    145.19
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the quality of services and income
                         generating opportunities available to rural households in selected villages of Huangshan
Public Disclosure Copy




                         municipality. This would be achieved by investing in: (i) upgrading infrastructure services, (ii)
                         restoring and preserving the existing cultural heritage assets, and (iii) promoting high value-added
                         agriculture and countryside tourism.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Anhui Yellow Mountain New Countryside Demonstration Project will finance investments in 68
                         villages across four counties and three districts of Huangshan municipality. An asset based local
                         development approach that combines the conservation of cultural and natural heritage sites in the
                         project villages with infrastructure upgrading and promotion of income generating opportunities
                         from high value agriculture and countryside tourism is contemplated. Interventions will be tailored to
                         local circumstances and will be determined in consultation with line bureau staff, village groups,
                         private sector representatives, and local government.

                         Project areas and activities are selected based on specified criteria that aim at reducing the existing
                         development and income gaps among different villages on one hand, and at maximizing the potential
                         benefits from the existing cultural and natural heritage assets on the other hand. The buy-in from
                         local villagers is critical to ensure ownership of project activities and the sustainability of their
                         impacts. The total cost is estimated at about $145.19 million comprising an IBRD loan of $ US 100
                         million and counterpart funding of $ US 45.19 million. The project would have four components.

                         Component 1: Infrastructure Improvement
                         This component aims at improving infrastructure services in project villages by financing sustainable
                         priority investments in rehabilitating and expanding infrastructure facilities while preserving and
                         enhancing the traditional and historic character of these villages. Investments would include: i)
                         village roads upgrading/construction, bridges, sidewalks, domestic and tourism pathways, street
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lightings, and associated sub-surface infrastructure services (such as power and telecommunication
                         cables); ii) safe and reliable piped water supply either from mountain springs or town water supply
                         plants with appropriate treatment technologies; iii) storm water and waste water management through
                         construction of drainage systems, sewer networks and low cost and environmentally appropriate
                         treatment and disposal facilities; iv) river enhancements for flood prevention, environmental and
                         recreational uses through clean up, and embankment upgrading, and v) rehabilitation of small dams,
                         ponds, and canals for irrigation and drainage.

                         Component 2: Cultural Heritage Conservation
                         This component aims at restoring, preserving, protecting and, where practicable, adaptively reusing
                         historic Huizhou style buildings for social, cultural, village environment, and tourism development
                         purposes. Investments would include interventions to: i) arrest physical deterioration; improve
                         structural integrity, physical safety and functionality; restore cultural and historic authenticity; ii)
                         improve presentation and signage for restored buildings; iii) promote and facilitate, where
                         practicable, the adaptive reuse of local cultural heritage assets for social, cultural, and tourism
                         development purposes; iv) support the preparation of cultural heritage conservation plans for
                         selected project villages; v) document and disseminate information on important intangible cultural
                         heritage assets (buildings, particular social histories and practices, traditional stories, music, dress
                         and dance).



                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         Component 3: Enhanced Economic Opportunities
                         This component aims at generating direct employment opportunities, increasing local household
                         incomes, and stimulating village economies by building on the above improvements of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructural services and cultural heritage assets, to promote the development of high-value
                         agriculture and rural tourism. Investments would include (i) support to intensified production and
                         improved quality of characteristic high-value agriculture products such as tea, mulberry, flowers,
                         herb and grapes, and in high-value aquaculture - including initiatives to obtain green and organic
                         certification – by cooperatives and producer associations, with direct benefit in income and indirect
                         benefits in introduction and demonstration of improved technology; (ii) improved marketing
                         facilities and exhibition centers for agriculture products and handicrafts; (iii) development of income-
                         generating tourism services including adaptation of existing buildings, promotion of tourism at the
                         village level and training of villagers in tourism industry skills; (iv) enhance the core surrounding
                         environment by retrofitting existing non-Hui houses/buildings into Huizhou architecture to promot e
                         the visibility and positive image of the villages; and (v) provision of ancillary facilities to support
                         tourism including tourism service centers, exhibition and performance spaces, parking lots, public
                         toilets and improvements to public spaces such as squares and exercise facilities.

                         Component 4: Institutional Support
                         Component 4 supports and develops the capacity of institutions to implement the project and to
                         sustainably manage, operate and maintain the outputs of Components 1, 2 and 3. Investments will
                         include (i) support to strategic research and planning including market based development for
                         village-based tourism; (ii) capacity development for mana gement, operation and maintenance of
                         project outputs; (iii) establishment of an information dissemination and communication platform; iv)
                         establishment of effective financial and project management information systems and project
                         monitoring and evaluation system; v) the purchase of necessary systems hardware and software for
                         the PMOs; vi) training of PMO staff to effectively utilize the systems; and vii) other related
                         consultancies and studies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Huangshan Municipality at the far southern end of Anhui province.
                         Huangshan Municipality has 101 towns and townships, and around 900 villages with a land area of
                         9,807km2 and a total population of about 1.5 million. Huangshan is endowed with a rich natural
                         environment, and is the home-town of Huizhou Culture with abundant physical cultural resources,
                         and is a leading tourism destination in China.

                         The project covers 68 villages of Huangshan Municipality spread across 7 counties/districts, as
                         follows: Tunxi District (3 villages): Waibianxicun, Xinjiangcun, liucun; Huangshan District (12
                         villages): Xingcun, Raocun, Sanhecun, Chaoyangcun, Longshancun, Longyuancun, Baiguocun,
                         Zhongduncun, Yongfengcun, Guocun, Shuxicun, Xinfengcun; Huizhou District (8 villages):
                         Xixiancun, Lingshancun, Yangcun, Shuyuancun, Kunshacun, Qiankoucun, Fuxicun, Qiashecun; She
                         County (20 villages): Xucun, Tangyuecun, Zhengcun, Xiongcun, Maihuayucun, Shitancun,
                         Zhanqicun, Changxicun, Shenducun, Yuliangcun, Futacun, Baojiacun, Wengzhengshancun,
                         Hongqingcun, Hongfeicun, Zhangtancun, Miantancun, Jiekoucun, Sucun, Beiancun; Xiuning County
                         (7 villages): Yanpucun, Yanjiaocun, Tianlicun, Wanxincun, Lanshicun, Huaqiaocun, Huangcun; Yi
                         County (6 villages): Pingshancun, Guhuangcun, Shenchongcun, Bishancun, Tuanjiecun, Miaolincun;
                         Qimen County (12 villages): Taoyuangcun, Zhukoucun, Lixicun, Lunkengcun, Penglongcun,
                         Huanglongcun, Liuducun, Xiangtancun, Huanshacun, Luxicun, Mashancun, Kengkoucun.



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ximing Zhang (EASCS)
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               See Section II A (1)
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes               See Section II A (1)

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               Project will not have or may have impacts on the
                                                                               health and quality of forests; nor affect the rights
                                                                               and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                               dependence upon or interaction with forests, or
                                                                               aim to bring about changes in the management,
                                                                               protection, or utilization of natural forest or
                                                                               plantations.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes              See Section II A (1)

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes               See Section II A (1)
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes               See Section II A (1)
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes               See Section II A (1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Assessment (OP4.01). Environmental Assessments (EAs) for the project were
                              conducted by an accredited EA consulting institute (Shanghai Ship and Shipping Research
                              Institute-SSSRI which is accredited First class in EA). The impacts of the project on the
                              environment are expected to be overall positive. The project brings many environmental and social
                              benefits to local communities, such as the improved village infrastructure, public amenities and
                              environment, conservation of the existing Hui-style cultural heritage resources, and the increased
                              revenue by the promotion of value-added agriculture and countryside tourism. The EA shows that
                              the project will not have any significant adverse environmental impacts due to its small scale
                              investments mainly for the renovation or improvement of the existing facilities which are

                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         distributed across seven districts and counties in Huangshan Municipality.

                         The principal potential adverse impacts are construction related impacts including dust, noise,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         wastewater, spoil disposal and short disturbance to local communities. These impacts will be site-
                         specific and reversible in nature, for which mitigation measures can be designed readily. During
                         operation, the project may cause some induced impacts from the increased tourists in the rural
                         villages. Mitigation measures including provision of sanitation facilities have been taken into
                         account in the project design and the EMP.

                         Natural Habitats (OP4.04). The project triggers OP4.04 Policy because some activities are
                         designed for four villages (i.e. Fuxi, Shuxi, Xiong, Yanjiao) which are located in natural habitats:
                         a provincial nature reserve (i.e. Tianhu), a national wetland park (Taipinghu), and two tourism
                         scenic areas (i.e. Qiyunshan, Huashan). These activities are mainly limited to the renovation or
                         improvement of existing infrastructure, e.g. road pavement, construction of a bridge to improve
                         villagers’ accessibility during flood season, provision of road safety facilities, small scale water
                         supply pipelines and sewers, and provision of recreation amenities (e.g. playground, basketball
                         courts) at villages. These activities will not cause any significant adverse impacts to the protected
                         areas. The EA confirms that these activities are in line with Chinese EA regulations and the
                         relevant master plans for natural habitats; in compliance with the Bank policies on OP4.01 and
                         OP4.04; and have been approved by relevant governmental agencies.

                         Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11). The project will finance conservation of 137 old buildings,
                         some old trees and two old bridges in two villages. The PCRs survey has been conducted by a
                         nationally recognized institution including experienced PCR consultants. The PCR inventories
                         have been developed and mapped through information obtained from literature sources, site
                         survey, consultation with PCRs authorities, and communities etc.. A PCRs Management Plan has
                         been prepared.
                         Pest Management (OP4.09). The project finances the diversification of crop system (e.g. tea, roses,
                         and Chinese medicinal herbs) which potentially involves pest management. A Pest Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Plan has been prepared for agricultural components under this project, to minimize the
                         environmental and health hazards related to pest management.

                         Dam Safety (OP 4.37). The project triggers the Safeguards Policy on Safety of Dams (OP4.37)
                         since the project financed water supply facilities will draw water from reservoirs formed by two
                         existing dams, Qiyunshan Dam in Xiuning County and Qiaokengwu Dam in Shexian County. The
                         project will also finance the rehabilitation of 54 existing weirs for retaining water (weir height
                         from 1-5m and capacities are up to 20,000 cubic meters). Dam safety plans and emergency
                         preparedness plans have been prepared for the two existing dams. A Dam Safety Action Plan has
                         been prepared as part of the POM.

                         During the implementation, the Borrower will prepare and update an Annual Dam Safety Action
                         Plan and provide relevant dam safety information to the Bank and arrange field trips to review the
                         safety status the relevant dams, and take dam safety measures recommended by the Bank to
                         improve the safety status when necessary to ensure the safety of dams. The PMO would assign
                         special staff to work with the Bank team to ensure the project is implemented in line with the
                         OP4.37. The dam safety expert in the task team would (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of
                         existing dams, their appurtenance, and performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner’s
                         operation and maintenance procedures; and (c) provide written reports of findings and
                         recommendations for any remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the

                                                                    Page 5 of 12
                         existing dams to an acceptable standard of safety.

                         Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Based on a careful review of the legal documentation, the users of the subprojects, the common
                         practice, and the beneficiary analysis, the owners of the subprojects to be built in project villages
                         are the village communities. The negative impacts to the rural individuals would be caused by the
                         termination of their land contracts and some contracted land will be used temporarily during the
                         civil works of the subprojects.

                         In order to ensure successful project implementation and to reduce the financial burden for the
                         village communities involved, Huangshan municipality has agreed to pay the cost for the
                         termination of the land contracts and the temporary land use to the affected individuals through the
                         village communities.

                         The Bank Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. A Resettlement Action Plan
                         (RAP) has been prepared providing details on resettlement policy procedures and requirements
                         that will have to be followed during project implementation, including compensation rates,
                         mitigation measures to restore livelihoods, and institutional and monitoring arrangements.

                         The termination of land contracts will affect an area of 2.7 hectares of villager contracted land in
                         10 village communities. The temporary land use for the project civil works will impact 2.5
                         hectares of villager contracted land in 12 village communities. As a result, the termination of the
                         villager contracted land will affect 110 rural families and the temporary land use will affect 155
                         rural families.

                         The social safeguards consulting team identified the negative impacts for affected individuals on a
                         per village basis, adopted the resettlement policies properly, prepared the mitigation measures in
                         advance, and undertook a gender impact analysis and development through public consultations
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and participatory process.

                         The selection and design of village based subprojects considered the avoidance or minimization of
                         involuntary resettlement caused by any permanent land acquisition and temporary land occupation
                         and structure demolition due to the sensitive environment and environmental requirement in the
                         national park in Huangshan city area. For example, in the selection of road works, only roads with
                         a pavement width of no more than 4.5 m were included. Furthermore, road works will be
                         conducted in conjunction with line burial and drainage works, and priority is given to existing
                         water resources facilities. As the result, the land acquisitions were minimized and the housing
                         structural demolitions were avoided.

                         Following the institutional arrangements under the project, levels of resettlement offices from
                         municipality, district/county, to township/village will be established under the PMO and the PMUs
                         to coordinate and implement the resettlement activity together with the PIUs at the village level.
                         The project city Land and Resources Bureaus will be responsible for the land acquisition approval.
                         An experienced national consulting team will be contracted to serve as an independent monitoring
                         entity of the resettlement program. The project will be monitored and the living standards of the
                         project-affected people will be evaluated over the course of project implementation. The
                         monitoring results will be regularly reported twice a year and, if needed, remedial actions will be
                         devised.

                                                                    Page 6 of 12
                          The task team conducted due diligence review and concluded there were no subprojects in the
                          villages that are linked to the Bank supported project components. No new proposals of civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                          works linked to the Bank loan supported activities are anticipated.

                          The task team held meetings and interviews with the engaged village communities and did not find
                          any Chinese ethnic minority amongst them. All the villagers in the project area belong to the Han
                          population which is not considered an ethnic minority in China based on the Bank indigenous
                          people policy and previous practice. Therefore Bank Op 4.10 is not triggered.

                           A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared in case that there was a possibility that
                           sub-projects may be dropped or replaced after project appraisal. The RPF was disclosed at the
                           municipal website on June 25, 2013.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The improved village infrastructure and environment will attract more tourists. Local communities
                           will benefit from increased tourism activity. The increased number of tourists in the villages may
                           also have some adverse impacts (e.g. sanitation), for which mitigation measures (e.g. provision of
                           sanitation facilities) have been proposed in the EMP and built in the project design.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Technical alternatives were considered for the investment components during the feasibility study
                           and the EA to minimize environmental impacts. The EA and the feasibility study analyzed
                           alternatives for wastewater treatment technology, options of road pavements and river
                           embankments etc. The EA also evaluated the “without project” situation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environment

                          An EA has been conducted by an accredited EA consulting institute, and an EMP has been
                          developed for the project as a stand-alone document. The EMP includes specific mitigation
                          measures, ECOPs, a Pest Management Plan, a PCRs Management Plan, monitoring and
                          supervision arrangements, institutional arrangements for the implementation of the EMP, capacity
                          building, and estimated budget of the EMP implementation. Given that all sub-projects were
                          identified and prepared prior to project implementation, it was not necessary to prepare an
                          Environmental management framework at this stage.

                          Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOPs) have been prepared to address general construction
                          related impacts. Specific site mitigation measures have been developed to minimize potential
                          impacts caused by each type of construction activities. Mitigation measures and ECOPs for the
                          construction phase will be entered into bidding documents and supervised by relevant institutions.
                          During operation, the project may cause some induced impacts from the increased tourists in the
                          rural villages. Adequate mitigation measures including provision of sanitation facilities have been
                          taken into account in the project design and the EMP.

                          Natural Habitats (OP4.04). As mentioned above, all activities relative to Natural Habitats are in
                          line with Chinese EA regulations and the relevant master plans for natural habitats, and in


                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                         compliance with the Bank policies on OP4.01 and OP 4.04, and have been approved by relevant
                         government agencies.
                         Mitigation measures include continuous consultation with natural habitat management authorities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         good construction management, specific measures for natural habitats protection and provision of
                         sanitation facilities for tourists in the project design.

                         Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11). The PCR inventories have been developed and mapped
                         through information obtained from literature sources, site survey, consultation with PCRs
                         authorities, and communities etc. A PCRs Management Plan, as part of the EMP, specifies
                         conservation measures for the PCRs, monitoring plan; capacity building activities (e.g. trainings,
                         studies); institutional arrangements; and the budget for the implementation of the PCRs
                         Management Plan.

                         Pest Management (OP4.09). A Pest Management Plan has been prepared for agricultural
                         components under this project, to minimize the environmental and health hazards related to pest
                         management. The PMP includes promotion of IPM, training, supervision, and a budget for PMP
                         implementation

                         Dam Safety (OP4.37). Dam safety plans and emergency preparedness plans have been prepared
                         for the two existing dams. In addition, the Huangshan PMO has assigned special staff for dam
                         safety management to work with the Bank team to ensure the project is implemented in line with
                         the OP4.37. A Dam Safety Action Plan has been prepared as part of the POM to guide project staff
                         during implementation. Based on the action plan, the Borrower would provide relevant dam safety
                         information to the Bank and arrange filed trips to review the safety status the relevant dams, and
                         take dam safety measures recommended by the Bank to ensure the safety of dams.

                         Social

                         The PMO contracted Zongshan University to guide the social safeguards documentation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Zongshan University, based in Guangzhou, has worked for the Bank for over 15 years. Staff in the
                         engaged districts and counties were familiarized with the Bank safeguards policies during project
                         preparation. Close guidance to local officials on safeguards issues led to the minimization of any
                         resettlement activity, a reduction in the land contracts termination, and sub-projects selection
                         through public consultations. For example, in the selection of road works, only roads with a
                         pavement width of no more than 4.5 m were included. Furthermore, road works will be conducted
                         in conjunction with line burial and drainage works, and priority is given to existing water
                         resources facilities. An experienced national consulting team will be contracted to independently
                         monitor the resettlement program. Furthermore, the project will be monitored and the living
                         standards of the targeted affected people will be evaluated over the course of project
                         implementation. The monitoring results will be reported twice a year and, if needed, remedial
                         actions will be devised. The staff from the PMO and project agencies have been familiarized with
                         Bank safeguards requirement.

                         A project leading group has been established under the leadership of the Executive vice-Mayor of
                         Huangshan Municipality and with officials from the Municipal DRC, the Finance Bureau, the
                         EPB, the State Land Resource Bureau, the Agriculture Bureau, Tourism Commission, and the
                         Rural Planning Bureau. Huangshan Municipality has established a Project Management Office
                         (PMO) to coordinate the preparation of the Project and supervise and monitor its implementation.
                         The PMO is housed at the Municipal DRC which is the lead agency for overall project

                                                                   Page 8 of 12
                          management and implementation. Each Project County and District has established a Project
                          Management Unit (PMU) within its respective DRC to coordinate the preparation of the Project
                          and supervise and monitor its implementation at the county or district level. At the township and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          village levels, local Project Implementation Units (PIUs) will be responsible for project
                          implementation.

                           During the construction, the PMO and PMUs will appoint staff to take responsibility for
                           coordinating EMP implementation. Environmental supervisors will be responsible for daily
                           environmental management. During operation, the villages will be in charge of environmental
                           management under the guidance and supervision of EPBs. The Bank team and the EA consultants
                           have provided the clients with necessary safeguards trainings to improve their capacity during
                           project preparation. The training will continue during project implementation. Personnel of the
                           PMO, PMUs, PIUs, environmental supervisors and civil work contractors etc. will receive
                           safeguards training specified in the EMP. The PCRs Management Plan includes the PCRs
                           conservation training activities for local villagers and PCRs institutions. The Pest Management
                           Plan includes training activities for farmers and IPM awareness promotion activities. The proposed
                           institutional arrangement and the client’s capacity are deemed satisfactory.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           In accordance with Bank Safeguard policies and Chinese regulations, public consultations were
                           conducted from September to December, 2012, including public consultation meetings and
                           questionnaire survey with project affected persons and other stakeholders (village associations,
                           PCR authority, EBP, forestry bureau, water resources bureau). Local villagers generally supported
                           this project, and gave specific recommendations for the project such as (i) improved access roads,
                           drainage systems and reliable piped water supply (ii) development of income-generating tourism
                           services, and (iii) mitigation measures for construction activities.

                          Their opinions and concerns have been taken into account in the EA process and project design.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The EA and the EMP were locally disclosed on December 21, 2012, and re-disclosed on February
                          6, 2013, May 22, 2013, and June 25, 2013 through announcements on the local website
                          (Huangshan Government Website) and the local newspapers (Huangshan Daily). The EMP and the
                          EA safeguard documents were disclosed by the Bank InfoShop on June 27 and July 11, 2013
                          respectively.

                          The project has significant social benefits. It supports the improvement to village infrastructure,
                          the enhancement of the farmers’ livelihoods, the development of village-based tourism, the
                          promotion of harmonious villages’ development, and the protection of ‘Hui’ cultural heritages
                          following the broad development framework of “city-support-village” and “industry-support-
                          agriculture” promoted by the central government. The villages involved will be the project owners
                          and its main beneficiaries.

                          During project design and preparation, public consultations were conducted and will be continued
                          by the resettlement offices established in the counties and districts. Feedback was provided on
                          project timeline, mitigation mechanisms, and income generating activities in agriculture and
                          tourism. Independent monitoring for any resettlement activity and project impacts on affected
                          individual has also been built-in. The project information was disseminated to the displaced
                          families, and subprojects selection, design and locations were refined accordingly.



                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           The draft RAP was first disclosed at Huangshan municipal website on December 12, 2012. The
                           updated RAP was further disclosed on February 5, 2013, May 22, 2013, and June 25, 2013. The
                           RPF was locally disclosed on June 25, 2013. Both the RAP and the RPF were disclosed by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bank infoshop on July 11, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            21-Dec-2012
                           Comments: re-disclosed February 6, 2013, May 22, 2013, and June 25, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            12-Dec-2012
                           Comments: redisclosed on Feb 5, 2013, May 22, 2013, and June 25, 2013
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-May-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            06-Feb-2013
                           Comments: re-disclosed May 22, 2013
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats



                                                                  Page 10 of 12
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Rabih H. Karaky
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Gailius J. Draugelis (SM)                 Date: 27-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
