                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6393
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Azerbaijan                        Project ID:    P122200
                            Project Name:      REGIONAL ROADS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (P122200)
                            Task Team          Elizabeth C. Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Sep-2014                       Estimated   25-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (65%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (35%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Trade facilitation
                                              and market access (25%), Administrative and civil s ervice reform (25%), Rural
                                              services and infrastructure (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     368.33           Total Bank Financing:                 250.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  118.33
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     250.00
                              Total                                                                                     368.33
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives are (i) to improve access to markets and services via project
                           roads and (ii) to progress towards maintenance sustainability of the road network." The project
                           region is defined as the Sabirabad, Salyan and Neftchala rayons, and Shirvan town of the Aran

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         region. The road network consists of magistral (M) roads (1,654 km), republic (R) roads (1,795 km)
                         and local (Y) roads (9,867 km).
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed Project will finance the reconstruction of R45 (the Shirvan-Noxudlu-Salyan Road) and
                         R46 (the Salyan-Neftchala Road), a total length is 85km . The proposed Project lies in the Aran
                         region of Azerbaijan and links the Rayons of Sabirabad, Shirvan, Salyan and Neftchala. The R45 is
                         an important road connection between the towns of Shirvan and Salyan and the M6 and M3 highway
                         corridors. The R46 connects the regional administrative capitals of Salyan and Neftchala. The
                         Project will also finance the rehabilitation of 100 km of related local roads (Y roads) to enhance
                         regional development by improving accessibility for area residents.

                         The Project will support ARS in a phased maintenance modernization process. In view of the
                         substantial amounts invested in the road sector and the continued priority of roads to the country’s
                         development strategy, the sustainability of road investments has to be assured. The current
                         maintenance organizational structure is not suitable for the upgraded road network . The Project will
                         provide technical assistance to a phased introduction of modern maintenance practices. This Project
                         builds on the technical review initiated in the Third Highway Project for motorway maintenance and
                         will extend the review to maintenance options for the local roads. The reform envisages the
                         separation of the maintenance of M and R roads (total length of about 3500 km) from the rest of the
                         network and application of similar maintenance standards to these road categories. In the first phase,
                         about 1000 to 1200 km of upgraded M&R roads be maintained by 6 new regional units and
                         supervised by 1 management unit. The Project will support the first phase of reform. In the second
                         phase, as more M and R roads are upgraded, these roads will be included in the regional units; or
                         more units established. The new maintenance structure is expected to eventually cover up to 3500
                         km of roads. In the meantime, the existing 63 local units will continue to maintain the rest of the
                         network (local roads and R roads that have not been upgraded) on a parallel structure while reform
                         options are reviewed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Regional Roads Reconstruction. (i) reconstruction of R45 Shirvan-Salyan (41 km)
                         road, (ii) reconstruction of R46 Salyan-Neftchala (44 km) road, (iii) rehabilitation of 100 km of local
                         roads in the region, and (iv) technical supervision consultancy for the works.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening for Maintenance and Management of the Road Network.

                         Component 3: Support for Roads Related Development.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation, Monitoring and Impact Evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area is located along the 41km R45 Shirvan-Noxudlu-Salyan Road, 43km R46 Salyan-
                         Neftchala Road, and local roads connected to them, as well as in the area of affiliated facilities, such
                         as asphalt plant, aggregate crushing plant, borrow pits, construction camps and access roads. The
                         area, being immediately adjacent to the Kura River and the Caspian Sea, is characterized by a
                         number of wetlands of various size and ecological value, which are located along the existing routes
                         of regional roads. Also, the regional roads cross several villages/settlements, small shops and social
                         objects such as schools and pass by the agricultural lands.



                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Daniel P. Owen (GURDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GENDR)
                         Aly Zulficar Rahim (GURDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           This policy has been triggered because civil
                         BP 4.01                                      works to be implemented under the project
                                                                      represent environmental risks which are mainly
                                                                      temporary and limited by the period of
                                                                      construction, and manageable and mitigatable.
                                                                      The potential impacts may include loss of tree
                                                                      plantations in various sections alongside the
                                                                      existing road, disturbance of drainage systems,
                                                                      damage to soil due to extraction of road
                                                                      construction materials, increased dust production
                                                                      and air and noise pollution, disturbance to
                                                                      wildlife in the project area, especially disturbance
                                                                      to wildlife ecosystems, including those in the
                                                                      wetland areas, etc.

                                                                      The client prepared specific Environmental
                                                                      Assessment and Management Plan Report for the
                                                                      following two types of the roads to be dealt with
                                                                      by the project:
                                                                      1) two regional roads which have been identified;
                                                                      2) up to 100 km local roads connected to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      regional roads, which have not been identified
                                                                      and are not likely to be identified prior to
                                                                      appraisal.

                                                                      Therefore the chosen safeguard instruments bear
                                                                      dual purpose: (i) for the regional roads, provide
                                                                      for EA and regional road specific EMPs; (ii) for
                                                                      local roads serve as a framework, providing for
                                                                      the EA review of the area from which the local
                                                                      roads will be selected later on, and identifying the
                                                                      procedure to be followed when the local roads are
                                                                      identified, which is the preparation of the road-
                                                                      specific EMP Checklists.

                                                                      The TA on formulation of development strategies
                                                                      for the towns within the catchment area of the
                                                                      project should also consider environmental and
                                                                      social aspects, and the results of this TA should
                                                                      be made publicly available.



                                                              Page 3 of 8
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            This policy is not triggered. The impacts on
                                                                         natural habitats are duly considered and addressed
                                                                         by the project EAMP. For local roads those will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         be considered by site-specific EMP Checklists.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           This policy is triggered and a Resettlement Policy
                         4.12                                            Framework has been prepared. While there is no
                                                                         envisaged land acquisition foreseen in the
                                                                         rehabilitation of R45 and R46 roads, as yet
                                                                         unidentified 100km of local roads included in the
                                                                         Project may involve acquisition and/or
                                                                         displacement of affected persons. For the R road
                                                                         sections, the land immediately bordering the
                                                                         existing road falls within the RoW under the
                                                                         remit of the State or respective municipalities,
                                                                         and acquisition of private land will not be
                                                                         necessary. Design modifications involving slight
                                                                         deviations from standard can be introduced in
                                                                         sections of road upgrading where encroachment
                                                                         risks are an issue. This might include pavement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         reduction to avoid cutting into orchards and
                                                                         modifications in areas where the slope reach from
                                                                         road will need to be extended to accommodate
                                                                         raising the embankment. A number of roadside
                                                                         vendors and restaurants may be affected during
                                                                         construction works. For the local roads, the
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                                                                         prepared by the Borrower and disclosed. The RPF
                                                                         covers: (i) the description of areas covered by the
                                                                         Project; (ii) the legal basis and screening process
                                                                         for land acquisition, resettlement and land use in
                                                                         connection with works and construction activities
                                                                         to be carried out under the Project; (iii) the
                                                                         resettlement principles and entitlements of Project
                                                                         affected people based on different categories of
                                                                         impact; (iv) the procedures for valuation,
                                                                         compensation and other assistance provided to the
                                                                         affected people, including the grievance process;
                                                                         and (v) the responsibilities, procedures and



                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                                                                 requirements for the development and
                                                                                 implementation of site specific Resettlement
                                                                                 Action Plans.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project envisages rehabilitation of the roads within the existing ROWs, without changing the
                              road alignment. This involves impacts which are temporary, reversible and mitigatable if duly
                              managed. Therefore, the project has been assigned an environmental category “B” for the purposes
                              of the environmental assessment. The potential environmental issues have been analyzed by
                              environmental studies carried out by the client and mainly include:
                              -        impacts associated with the extraction and transportation of road construction materials.
                              The potential borrow areas have been proposed by the ASR and analyzed by the respective
                              environmental studies;
                              -        disturbance to drainage systems along the project area;
                              -        increased dust and emissions. This impact is likely to occur during the implementation of
                              civil works both at the construction sites and at the borrow pits;
                              -        impacts related to noise and vibration at selected sections of the roads passing through
Public Disclosure Copy




                              villages. This impact will occur during both the construction and operation phase. As the detailed
                              design is not yet available for the environmental analyses, the environmental studies have
                              identified potentially affected areas and specified studies to be undertaken in parallel with the
                              design which will allow for defining the exact locations and technical design for the application of
                              noise mitigation measures;
                              -        disturbance to wildlife, especially protected species identified in the project area. Those
                              species have been identified and specific mitigation measures proposed by respective
                              environmental studies;
                              -        impacts related to the vegetation clearing. Specific areas and numbers of trees to be cut,
                              along with the required compensatory planting, have been determined and should be taken into
                              account by designers and contractors;
                              -        impacts related to the generation and disposal of liquid and solid wastes at the
                              construction phase, including those generated at the construction sites, camps and borrow areas;
                              -        surface water pollution, including impacts on wetlands located along the road alignment;
                              -        impacts on soil which might be caused by spills and leaks of hazardous liquids, as well as
                              soil compaction and erosion which might be caused by poorly managed construction activities.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The potential long term impact related to the future activities in the project area include continued
                              noise impact which should be mitigated through the implementation of specific measures to be


                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           identified based on the additional studies to be carried by the detailed design. The potential
                           positive impacts will be of social nature and related to the increased connectivity among the
                           settlements in the project area and road safety due to the improved road conditions, including the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local roads connecting the two regional roads.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The client (ASR) has prepared an Environmental Assessment and Management Plan (EAMP)
                           which analyzed the entire project area (geographical coverage included the areas of both regional
                           and local roads), identified specific impacts associated with the rehabilitation of the two regional
                           roads, proposed adequate mitigation measures and determined implementation arrangements and
                           institutional responsibilities. For the local roads, the EAMP serves as a framework document
                           setting forth procedures for the environmental screening of the proposed roads, and preparation of
                           site-specific EMP checklists. The Project Implementation Unit established within the Agency for
                           State Roads under MoT has been involved in the implementation of road projects of Category A
                           and B for several years, and has a full time Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist who is
                           responsible for the supervision of the implementation of project EMPs. The PIU staff is
                           knowledgeable about World Bank safeguard requirements and environmental management
                           practices to be applied for the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project stakeholders include the Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Ecology and Natural
                           Resources, local governments and municipalities, local communities and villages which will
                           benefit from the project implementation. The draft EAMP has been discussed at the public
                           consultation meetings held by ASR in Neftechala, Salyan, Sabirabad and Shirvan on May 29-30,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           2014 and documented by the respective Minutes enclosed to the EAMP. The EAMP has been
                           posted on the official web-site of the MoT and Bank's Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  06-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               11-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Azerbaijan                                                   29-May-2014
                           Comments: Meetings held in the towns on Neftechala and Salyan on May 29, and in the towns of
                                         Shirvan and Sabirabad on May 30, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  05-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               06-Aug-2014




                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Azerbaijan                                                       09-Aug-2014
                              Comments: Disclosed in a local newspaper "Khalg"
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Elizabeth C. Wang



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Approved By
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)     Date: 09-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 8 of 8
