                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3802
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Egypt, Arab Republic of             Project ID:    P145699
                            Project Name:     Strengthening Social Safety Net Project (P145699)
                            Task Team         Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         20-Feb-2015                         Estimated   28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSPDR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (70%), Public administration- Other social services (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (70%), Social
                                              Inclusion (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    4507.00           Total Bank Financing:                 400.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                4107.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    400.00
                              Total                                                                                   4507.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to support establishment of an efficient and effective
                           Takaful and Karama Cash Transfer Program. “Efficient” is defined and measured by good targeting
                           of the poor; “Effective” is defined and measured by coverage of the poor, and having basic
                           administrative building blocks of the Program.


                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         3. Project Description
                         The project with a proposed cost of US$400.0 million equivalent will be implemented using an
                         Investment Project Financing (IPF) instrument. It aims at supporting the Government of Egypt's
Public Disclosure Copy




                         national Takaful and Karama Program. Takaful is a family income support with co-responsibility
                         (conditional) cash transfer program aiming at reducing poverty and producing human development
                         improvements (in health and education) while is an unconditional income support and social
                         inclusion sub-program that aims at the protection and inclusion of the poor elderly (above age 65)
                         and persons with severe disability. Takaful and Karama Program is being developed as a national
                         targeted SSN program aiming at protecting the poor through income support. The Program will be
                         rolled-out in a phased approach in a few consecutive waves (phases) to register and enroll poor
                         households. Targeting and operational processes in each wave will benefit from targeting and process
                         evaluations of the previous wave to ensure improved design and processes, following a “learning-by-
                         doing” approach before expansion. Moreover, to offset the targeting inefficiency of the existing SSN
                         programs, Takaful and Karama will use a combined targeting method including geographical
                         (poorest districts) and the Proxy Means Testing (PMT) mechanism to identify the eligible poor
                         households within the selected districts. Application to the Program will be open in the targeted
                         areas and enrollment will close when the program reached its full coverage target. Payment to
                         beneficiary households will be managed by the Post Office through individual virtual accounts.
                         Finally, the program will implement a wide communication and outreach program to ensure reaching
                         to the eligible poor and with the support of NGOs, Community Development Associations (CDAs),
                         community leaders and the media.

                         The project will consist of three components: (i) provision of conditional and unconditional cash
                         transfers under the Takaful and Karama Program; (ii) support for SSN targeting and operational
                         systems; and (iii) project management, monitoring and evaluation.

                         Component 1: Provision of Conditional and Unconditional Cash Transfers (Total component
                         estimate US$4,482 million; and estimated IBRD funds US$375 million). This Component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance payments to eligible beneficiaries under the Takaful and Karama cash transfer Program.
                         This component will use a results-based approach with eligible expenditures comprising cash
                         transfers under the Takaful and Karama program. The component will co-finance with the GoE the
                         benefits of the 1.0 million households enrolled in waves one and two. Government funds will
                         gradually increase until they reach 100 percent of the cost by Q3 of FY2017. The overall cash
                         benefits cost through the four years of project implementation is around US$4.482 billion, of which
                         IBRD contribution is about 8.5 percent. MoSS and MoF have agreed on the Program’s funding
                         projections for the Fiscal Years starting 2015 onward. Disbursements under Component 1 will be
                         triggered by achievement of specific, jointly-agreed results (Disbursement Linked Indicators or
                         DLIs) that are set out in the following table and detailed further in Annex 2. The jointly-agreed
                         results reflect progress towards efficiency of the Takaful and Karama program by measuring: i)
                         progress on the design and implementation of tools, assessments and evaluations to enhance the
                         accuracy of the program; ii) key milestones in the roll-out of the Takaful and Karama program; as
                         well as iii) progress in establishing some key administrative building blocks in the program to
                         enhance the effectiveness of the program. Together, achievement of these results will measure the
                         success of the program and progress towards the key elements of the PDO: efficiency and
                         effectiveness. Each DLI has a value that is disbursed when the Task Team Leader certifies that the
                         result has been technically achieved according to the verification protocol (detailed in Annex 2),
                         provided that sufficient cash transfers (eligible expenditures) have also been made under the Takaful
                         and Karama Program, as shown in Unaudited Interim Financial Reports (IFRs). Advances will be


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         provided, as needed and based on cash forecasts, to smooth the cash flow and enable the client to
                         make sufficient eligible expenditures. Disbursements may comprise conversion of advances into
                         disbursements and/or reimbursement of the Government’s own spending on the Takaful and Karama
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program.

                         Component 2: Supporting SSN Targeting and Operational Systems (estimated IBRD funds US$22.0
                         million). This Component will use a traditional investment financing approach with disbursements
                         against eligible expenditures for specific activities set out in the procurement plan. It will support
                         technical assistance and investments that will support achievement of the results under Component 1.
                         Specifically, it will support the development and implementation of Takaful and Karama targeting
                         and operational systems: registration; database cross checking; enrollment; conditionality
                         verification; case management and beneficiary data update; payment delivery; grievance redress; and
                         performance monitoring. The program MIS system will be developed and regularly updated to
                         support the CT business processes. The component will support the development of these systems;
                         improve the administrative infrastructure (equipment) of social units (the lowest administrative level
                         of MOSS), and provide training for officials and staff. The project will support regular updates of the
                         Program’s operations manual for adjustments based on experience and evidence. It will also support
                         the development of a specialized monitoring capacity in MoSS which will lead the institution’s
                         efforts of continuous Program improvement. The component will provide the needed technical
                         assistance and implementation support; as well as operating costs (travel, lodging and per diems, but
                         not salaries) to Ministry staff for the incremental costs of rolling out the Takaful and Karama
                         program. In rare cases, where a poor family does not have identification cards, the project funds
                         could be used to help them obtain formal identification. Total financing expected under this sub-
                         component is US$15 million. The subcomponent will finance goods, consultancy, training, non-
                         consultancy services and operating costs for staff to undertake monitoring visits and, in occasional
                         cases, fees to pay for formal identification of poor beneficiaries. Additionally, approximately $7m
                         will be allocated from this component to support the ongoing efforts of MoPAR, which is the
                         primarily government entity tasked with developing an integrated database of beneficiary
                         information; including the modernization of its technological platform as well as improving other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agencies technological capacities for data exchange, in developing a Unified National Registry
                         (UNR) using MoPAR’s Family Smart Card system. The UNR will provide verifiable administrative
                         information on household characteristics using currently available databases at various government
                         agencies. This administrative information will help inform eligibility determination for applicants of
                         different public programs, such as Takaful and Karama, beyond relying on reported information
                         during the program application phase. The UNR would also be utilized for identification of
                         beneficiary duplicates across programs, as well as cases of error and fraud. The Project will support
                         MoPAR to develop and implement a detailed road-map for integration of various databases into the
                         UNR and make them available to relevant public agencies. This subcomponent will finance the
                         technological infrastructure of the UNR as well as finance the expenses associated with connectivity
                         to other databases and its "card management system" (CMS) compatible with the UNR. These
                         expenses will include acquisition of servers, storage, software licenses and services that will host the
                         UNR as well as support to the G2G with additional Bandwidth, acquisition of servers to host other
                         databases imported/ connected (for databases such as: natural gas, government payroll, vehicle
                         registration, education, among others). This sub-component will finance goods, consultancy,
                         training, non-consultancy services and operating costs.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated IBRD funds US$3.0
                         million). This Component will use a traditional investment financing approach. It will support project
                         management and ensure that the Project is successfully and efficiently implemented in conformity

                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                         with the Financing Agreement, the Project Appraisal Document and the Operation Manual (OM).
                         The component will finance: (i) project implementation unit staff (non-civil servants) salaries; (ii)
                         equipment, operating costs for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and directly linked to the daily
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management of the project (office space, utilities and supplies, bank charges, communications,
                         translation, transportation, maintenance and insurance, building and equipment maintenance costs,
                         travel and supervision costs, etc.); (iii) regular internal audits and annual external audits (as per Bank
                         legal requirements audits of financial and procurement aspects); and (iv) undertaking evaluations.
                         The PIU will comprise: a Director, MIS specialist, Financial Management Specialist, Field
                         Operations Manager, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, Procurement Specialist,
                         Communications Specialist, Quality Assurance and Program Coordinator, and Researcher and Donor
                         Relations Specialist. The project will maintain a “live” monitoring system which entails continuing
                         to collect data, during project implementation, stories and other evidences about what is happening
                         and using such live monitoring to fine-tune the Program’s design and processes. The MIS represents
                         the backbone of the monitoring system, but it will also include: verification of beneficiary self-
                         reporting, verification of those deemed as severely disabled, and verification of payments to
                         beneficiaries. All will be undertaken on basis of random sample. The component will also finance
                         three evaluations: process evaluation after wave one; targeting performance evaluations (after wave
                         one and at project end); and an impact evaluation at the end to assess the project impact on household
                         welfare (consumption and asset protection) and on selective education and health indicators. Further
                         description of the proposed evaluations is provided in Annex 2. The component will finance
                         consultants, goods, travel cost, per-diem non-consultancy services and training.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented, at first, in the 19 poorest districts of Egypt located in the
                         Governorates of Souhag, Asut, Luxor, Qena, Aswan, and Giza. Geographical roll-out in waves two
                         and three and districts identification beyond the first 19 districts will be decided during the later
                         months of wave one implementation, with technical assistance from World Bank using poverty maps
                         and learning from the experience of wave one roll-out. World Bank safeguard policies are not
Public Disclosure Copy




                         triggered as a result of proposed activities under the components. The project will not include the
                         construction of physical infrastructure or civil works.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Surhid P. Gautam (OPSOR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment         No              The project's impact on the environment is expected
                          OP/BP 4.01                                       to be inexistent. Therefore, the project is classified as
                                                                           an environmental Category C (not requiring
                                                                           assessment).
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No              The project will not damage natural habitats (land
                                                                           and water areas where most of the native plant and
                                                                           animal species are still present), and will not result in
                                                                           loss or degradation of any Critical Natural Habitats
                                                                           as defined by the Policy.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36               No              The project will not have an impact on the health and
                                                                           quality of forests; will not affect the rights and
                                                                           welfare of people and their level of dependence upon


                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                                                                            or interaction with forests; and will not bring about
                                                                            changes in the management, protection, or utilization
                                                                            of natural forests or plantations, whether they are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            publicly, privately, or communally owned.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09          No             The project will not require the purchase, application
                                                                            or storage of pesticides and will not lead to an
                                                                            increased use of pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources      No             The project will not involve excavations, demolition,
                            OP/BP 4.11                                      movement of earth, flooding, or other environmental
                                                                            changes; and will not be located in, or in the vicinity
                                                                            of, a physical cultural resources site recognized by
                                                                            the borrower.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP         No             Indigenous Peoples are not present in, or have
                            4.10                                            collective attachment to, the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/     No             The project will not finance any civil works therefore
                            BP 4.12                                         the project will not involve in any land acquisition.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No             The project does not involve the construction of new
                                                                            dams and and/or existing dams in the borrower's
                                                                            territory.
                            Projects on International        No             The project does not involve any hydroelectric,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            irrigation, flood control, navigation, drainage, water
                                                                            and sewerage, industrial, and similar activities which
                                                                            involve the use or potential pollution of international
                                                                            waterways as described in para. 1 of the Policy; and
                                                                            does not include a detailed design and engineering
                                                                            studies of activities under para. 2(a) of the Policy,
                                                                            including those to be carried out by the Bank as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            executing agency or in any other capacity.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No               The project does not take place in disputed areas.
                            BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Not applicable. World Bank safeguard policies are not triggered as a result of proposed activities
                              under the components. The project will not include the construction of physical infrastructure or
                              civil works.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Not applicable. No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are foreseen as a result of proposed
                              activities under the components. The project will not include the construction of physical
                              infrastructure or civil works.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                        Page 5 of 6
                              Not applicable
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Not applicable. World Bank safeguard policies are not triggered as a result of proposed activities
                              under the components. The project will not include the construction of physical infrastructure or
                              civil works.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Not applicable. World Bank safeguard policies are not triggered as a result of proposed activities
                              under the components.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-                     Date: 23-Feb-2015
                            Manager:                   Gammal (PMGR)




                                                                        Page 6 of 6
