INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1093
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jan-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Congo, Democratic Republic  Project ID:  P153085
of
Project Name: DRC - Goma Airport Safety Improvement Project (P153085)
Task Team       Mohammed Dalil Essakali
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Jan-2015                Estimated    10-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Aviation (80%), General transportation sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), Conflict prevention
and post-conflict reconstruction (30%), Regional i ntegration (20%), Trade
facilitation and market access (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
IDA Grant                                                                  50.00
Total                                                                      50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve the safety, security, and operations of Goma
International Airport.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed Project will have two components: (a) Airport Infrastructure Investments; and (b)
Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support.
0
Component A: Airport Infrastructure Investments: This component will include investments
necessary to urgently enable the airport to meet international safety and security standards, and to
bring its capacity to the level prior to the volcanic eruption. The component will include the
a        following activities:
(a)    Rehabilitation of the existing runway, which will include: (i) the removal of lava rock in the
northern end of the runway; (ii) the reconstruction of the 335 meters needed to bring the runway's
total length to the original 3,000 meters; (iii) the construction of a runway turn pad at the northern
end of the runway; (iv) extension of the runway strip and construction of a Runway End Safety Area
(RESA) at both runway thresholds; (v) construction of the necessary side drainage system along the
western side of the runway; and (vi) installation of runway and taxiway edge lights.
(b)    Rehabilitation and extension of the existing apron, which include the strengthening of the
apron's pavement and its extension to a total area of 200 mx 130 m.
(c)    Rehabilitation of the airport's electrical systems, which will include the rehabilitation of the
existing power plant and power sub-station, and the provision and installation of electrical
equipment.
(d)    Supply and installation of a new mobile control tower.
(e)    The erection of the airport's security fence, by completing the construction of the fence
already started with the support of MONUSCO.
(f)    Support to airport rescue and firefighting service, which were established with MONUSCO's
support, by providing the necessary tools, parts, supplies, vehicles, as well as training for fire and
rescue personnel.
(g)    Rehabilitation of the existing passenger terminal.
(h)    Rehabilitation of the existing cargo area.
(i)    Implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plans linked to the civil
works.
Component B: Capacity Building and Project Implementation Support: This component will include
activities necessary to expand lessons learned under the proposed project for the benefits of other
airports in DRC, mitigate the risks associated with the volcanic activities in the area, promote
interventions to provide social dividends to surrounding communities in this conflict-affected area,
and ensure proper project implementation. The component will include the following activities:
(a)    Preparation of a priority airport rehabilitation program. This will include provision of
technical assistance to R6gie des Voies Afriennes (RVA) to prepare a rehabilitation program
benefiting a priority list of national airports. The technical assistance will be based on the results of
Page 2 of 8


﻿the national airport master plan being prepared under the ongoing Multimodal Transport Project and
will use the lessons and experience of the proposed project.
(b)    Monitoring of volcano risks and strengthening the preparedness of the airport and
O
U        surrounding communities. This will include the provision of technical assistance, equipment,
training, and operating costs. Currently, the monitoring of the volcano is undertaken by the
Observatoire Volcanologique de Goma (OVG), and the proposed project will partly support the
OVG's program over the period 2015 - 2018.
(c)    Provision of technical assistance to strengthen the economic and social fabric of the
communities around the airport. The removal of the lava rock from the airport will make available a
large quantity of lava rock (basalt) that has an economic value if processed. In the context of high
unemployment in the Goma area, the proposed project plans to help provide social dividends to the
local communities. The proposed project will support the study of the feasibility of labor-intensive
activities including the identification of the demand for by-products of basalt rock-such as
cobblestones for street paving-and the logistics of such activities. Based on the results of this
feasibility study, the project would develop operational procedures for such activities, and would
seek partnerships and collaboration with similar ongoing activities in the Goma area.
(d)    Project implementation support. This will include provision of goods, consultant services,
training and operating costs to support project coordination, implementation, management, auditing,
and monitoring and evaluation. Budget allocation to project management, estimated at about 4
percent of the total project cost is low by DRC standards, but it takes into account the economies of
scale of embedding project management within the existing Multimodal Transport Project
Implementing Entity (CEPTM). In general, project management costs are high in DRC given the
high cost of doing business in the country due to a combination of factors including the poorly
developed transport network, difficult terrain and large land mass, which often require travel by air,
as well as to the high salaries necessary to attract and retain highly qualified individuals.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Goma is the capital of Nord-Kivu province, which is situated on the western part of the East African
Rift bordering Rwanda and Uganda. The town of Goma and its airport are situated on the shores of
Lake Kivu. Lake Kivu is part of the East African rift network. The town and the airport are about 20
km from Mount Nyiragongo, and are on the path of the volcano lava. Mount Nyiragongo peaks at
about 3,470 meters (11,380 feet) elevation and reaches almost exactly 2,000 meters (6,560 feet)
above Lake Kivu. The airport is located about 3 km from Goma's city center, at an elevation of 1,551
meters. On January 17, 2002, Mount Nyiragongo erupted, and subsequently sent streams of lava into
the city of Goma, including the airport. About 30 percent of the airport landing strip was covered by
lava. Project activities will be implemented inside the airport operational area, which is still partly
covered by lava, which will be removed as part of project activities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
Hocine Chalal (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes         The construction or rehabilitation of the airport
Page 3 of 8


﻿OP/BP 4.01                             infrastructure (Component A) may have some adverse
impacts. Volcanic lava excavation and removal, the
construction and the operation of the airport drainage
system, could induce negative environmental and social
impacts on adjacent neighborhoods. An ESIA and
ESMPs will be prepared during project implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP    No           The project does not involve natural habitats.
o         4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36        No           The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09   No           The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources Yes        To concur with OP 4.01, as excavating lava may provide
OP/BP 4.11                             chance finds of physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes          Component A, particularly the construction of the
OP/BP 4.12                             security fence, may induce involuntary resettlement. A
RAP will be prepared during project implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No          N/A
Projects on International  No         N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas  No        N/A
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No large scale impacts are expected. The project is classified as Environmental Assessment
Category B with regard to the activities under Component A. The construction or rehabilitation of
the airport infrastructure (Component A) may have some adverse impacts. Volcanic lava
excavation and removal, the construction and the operation of the airport drainage system, could
induce negative environmental and social impacts on adjacent neighborhoods.
Construction stage. Construction activities will cause temporary impacts on the surrounding
environment. Construction impacts on neighborhoods and the natural environment will be
minimized or avoided through better environmental planning and integration with civil works
design. The lava rock excavated from the airport provides good construction materials, and it will
be used for all the aggregate materials needed for runway rehabilitation and for other materials for
the airport fence. This significantly reduces the construction environmental impacts.
Environmental specifications to mitigate construction related impacts will be prepared and
incorporated in civil works contracts and will be enforced by construction supervision.
Page 4 of 8


﻿Volcanic risks. The proposed project area is in the middle of an active volcanic zone. The
proposed project includes targeted activities to strengthen the monitoring of the volcanic activities
and other geo-hazards in Goma and its surroundings. The proposed project will also support the
activities related to preparedness and contingency plans.
o
Surface water. The existing airport occupies approximately 1.2 square kilometers of land and
creates an impervious surface. Impacts of rapid runoff from this impervious area is minor because
the land area of the airport is limited compared to the watershed area estimated at more than 140
square kilometers. Because of the lava from the volcanic eruption of 2002 might have modified
the hydrology of the watershed around the airport and the eastern part of the city of Goma, specific
attention will be paid to ensuring adequate drainage design is implemented as part of the airport
rehabilitation. This will ensure that storm water is captured before crossing the runway in order to
ensure safe operations for takeoffs and landings, that drainage of the airport surface area is done
without generating physical or chemical pollution, and that the airport's drainage is integrated in
the Goma city drainage system.
Other environmental issues. As part of project implementation, project subcomponents will
include solutions for waste and wastewater management at the airport, which is currently weak.
The project will also help strengthen emergency response to various incidents, particularly fire and
rescue. Risk management to be strengthened will also include risks associated with fuel storage
and transport, including both prevention and emergency preparedness and response plan for
potential accidents.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The building of the drainage system may induce adverse environmental impacts on adjacent
neighborhoods at exit, unless well designed.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
At national level, the DRC has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good
environmental management. In addition, the DRC has signed a number of international treaties
and conventions. However, implementation capacity is weak. Environmental policies and their
compliance are governed by the Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Tourism (Ministre
de l'Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du Tourisme or MECNT). Environmental
monitoring and management at MECNT are handled by three departments: (i) Le Groupe d'Etudes
Environnementales du Congo (GEEC); (ii) le Centre National d'Information sur l'Environnement
(CNIE); and (iii) La Cellule R6glementation et Contentieux Environnementaux (CRCE). The
GEEC is responsible for safeguards compliance of all projects in the country, but with emphasis
on environmental category "A" projects. GEEC is understaffed and has limited capacity. Despite
several donor-funded capacity building initiatives, GEEC still largely relies on donor funds to
carry out its field supervision duties.
The proposed project is classified as an "Environmental Category B" operation under World
Bank's OP/BP 4.01, and it triggers two World Bank environmental safeguards policies: OP/BP
4.01 - Environmental Assessments, and OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The proposed
Page 5 of 8


﻿project also triggers OP 4.12/BP Involuntary Resettlement, to mitigate potentially adverse impacts
that might result from the construction of the airport's fence. Therefore, the project requires an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). No
additional safeguards instruments are required for OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, but
O
Q)         instructions on how potential chance finds of physical cultural resources will be managed will be
covered in the ESIA.
As the proposed project is processed under the exceptional deferral paragraph 12 (a) of OP 10.00,
the safeguards action plan, as referred to in paragraph 53 of World Bank's BP 10.0, consists of the
preparation of the ESIA and the RAP not later than three months after the Effective Date. The
ESIA will include the environmental and social management plan. The preparation of these
instruments is the responsibility of the Recipient. CEPTM and RVA have already appointed an
independent consultant in December 2014 to carry out the ESIA and prepare the safeguard
instruments including the RAP, under terms of reference that were reviewed and approved by the
World Bank. A draft environmental and social screening report has already been submitted by the
consultant on December 28, 2014. CEPTM and RVA are therefore on track to comply with the
requirements of the applicable World Bank safeguards policies ahead of the deadline. Funding for
the preparation, implementation, and monitoring of the safeguards instruments has been included
in the budget of the proposed project. The project also strengthens the environmental capacity of
CEPTM by putting in place an environmental specialist who will be the focal point to ensure the
monitoring of safeguards compliance. RVA already has its own environmental specialists, and a
focal point will be designated for the proposed project. Civil works will not start prior to the
completion and disclosure of relevant safeguards instruments
Addressing the proposed project's safeguards issues and the preparation of the applicable
safeguards instruments is benefiting from the existing safeguards instruments of the ongoing
World Bank-supported Multimodal Transport Project (MTP, P092537). For the purpose of the
MTP, a "Plan Cadre de Gestion Environnementale et Sociale" (Environmental and Social
Management Framework) for the air transport component and "Plans et Directives de Gestion
Environnementale et Sociale du Secteur de Transport" (Environmental and Social Plans and
Directives for the Transport Sector) were prepared and disclosed in-country on December 31, 2009
and on World bank's Infoshop on January 21, 2010. Those documents include five safeguards
instruments: (i) Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for each transport
subsector, including one for air transport; (ii) an Indigenous Peoples Framework; (iii) a Physical
Culture Resources Framework; (c) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and (e) a Framework
for HIV/AIDS Prevention. These instruments, with which CEPTM and RVA are familiar, provide
a good basis for the preparation of the safeguards instruments of the proposed project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are the airport authorities, the UN agencies (particularly MONUSCO), using the
airport, the private sector and neighboring communities. The preparation of safeguards instruments
will include consultations of the key stakeholders.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              31 -Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           3 1-Mar-2015
Page 6 of 8


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of                              31-Mar-2015
Comments: These are the planned dates. The proposed project is processed under the exceptional
deferral paragraph 12 (a) of OP 10.00.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                31-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             3 1-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of                              31-Mar-2015
Comments: These are the planned dates. The proposed project is processed under the exceptional
deferral paragraph 12 (a) of OP 10.00.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Page 7 of 8


﻿All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
o          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mohammed Dalil Essakali
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (PMGR)          Date: 21-Jan-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


