                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA8969
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2014, 30-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of             Project ID:    P146007
                            Project Name:      EG: Household Natural Gas Connection Project (P146007)
                            Task Team          Husam Mohamed Beides
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          21-May-2014                         Estimated   24-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Oil and gas (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (40%), Urban services and
                                              housing for the poor (30%), Other economic management (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    1473.90           Total Bank Financing:                  500.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 473.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    500.00
                              European Neighborhood Instrument                                                          78.90
                              FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                      96.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                      326.00
                              Total                                                                                   1473.90
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to assist the Arab Republic of Egypt to increase household


                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                         access to reliable, lower cost, grid connected natural gas supply.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will connect 1.5 million households to the gas distribution networks, of which
                         1.1 households will be connected in 11 Governorates during the project’s first three year
                         implementation period, in areas under the concessions of four LDCs: (i) Town Gas in the Giza,
                         Ismailia, and Alexandria governorates (ii) Egypt Gas in Qalubia, Menufia, Daqahlia, Qena, Gharbia,
                         and Aswan governorates (iii) ReGas in Sohag and Marsa and Matrouh governorates; and (iv)
                         Sianco in the Alexandria governorate.

                         The proposed project’s design draws from the successful implementation experience of the Egypt
                         Natural Gas Connections project that supported the expansion of access to natural gas connections to
                         residents in Greater Cairo area and will have the following similar type of project components:

                         •       Component 1: Gas Network Expansion and Household Connections (Estimated Cost US$ -
                         1100 million ): This component will finance investments necessary to expanding the gas networks in
                         the project areas and connecting 1.5 million households to the distribution networks.

                         •        Component 2: Financial support for household connection charges in disadvantaged areas
                         (Estimated Cost: Euro 15 million). The scale-up of the natural gas connections as envisaged under
                         this project will expand the grid to 11 Governorates that will include relatively poorer areas of Egypt.
                         To ensure access will be provided to vulnerable households and project implementation will not be
                         delayed due to consumer affordability, this component will provide financial support for connection
                         fees for households in disadvantaged and poor areas. The component will be financed by an EU
                         Grant, managed by AFD, which is under preparation. The methodology for identifying the
                         disadvantaged areas that will benefit from this component and the financing mechanism for the
                         provision of the financial support will be based on socio-economic characteristics and poverty
                         mapping of the targeted areas developed by an ongoing AFD consultancy assignment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Component 3: Institutional Strengthening (Estimated Cost: Euro 5 million). This component
                         will be financed by the EU Grant, managed by AFD, and will contribute to improvement of the
                         governance structure and fiscal transparency and accountability at EGAS and support development
                         and implementation of gas sector regulatory and reform programs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be financing gas connection to about 1.1 million households in 11 governorates;
                         Giza, Alexandria, Marsa Matrouh, Ismaillia, Qalubia, Menofia, Gharbia, Daqahlia, Qena, Sohaj and
                         Aswan. The project will extend gas networks and services to areas in these governorates which are
                         currently covered and new areas as well.

                         The project is also a follow-up to an ongoing gas connection project supported by Bank covering the
                         greater Cairo area.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (GURDR)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GENDR)




                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           Planned interventions trigger this policy due to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         due to the potential multi-dimensional
                                                                         environmental and social concerns that could be
                                                                         sensitive, diverse or unprecedented. Given that
                                                                         routing of the high pressure pipelines and exact
                                                                         locations of the PRS’es was not known with
                                                                         certainty at appraisal time, an Environmental and
                                                                         Social Impacts Assessment Framework (ESIAF)
                                                                         was the appropriate environmental assessment
                                                                         instrument to be prepared Site specific ESIAs will
                                                                         be prepared, cleared and disclosed prior to the
                                                                         start of any construction works, following the
                                                                         principles and procedures as set forth in the
                                                                         ESIAF, as location of PRS and pipeline will be
                                                                         determined in the implementation stage. The
                                                                         ESIAF has been prepared, reviewed, approved
                                                                         and disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s
                                                                         Infoshop on March 23 and 24 respectively.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            This policy is not triggered.

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            This policy is not triggered.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The use of pesticides is not envisaged in this
                                                                         project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered because of the project’s
                         BP 4.11                                         potential to affect archaeological or cultural or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         religious sites. A chance find procedures has been
                                                                         prepared, and attached as annex to the ESIAF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                                         project areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           This policy is triggered as the land acquisition
                         4.12                                            will not be avoidable for the construction of
                                                                         pressure reducing stations (PRS) and high
                                                                         pressure gas pipelines. The client will make
                                                                         efforts to minimize or avoid the impacts of
                                                                         involuntary resettlement, for instance using the
                                                                         vacant government land for the construction of
                                                                         PRSs and obtaining the land through a willing
                                                                         buyer and willing seller process. However,
                                                                         involuntary taking of land will not be avoidable,
                                                                         particularly for the high pressure gas pipelines.
                                                                         Given that routing of the high pressure pipelines
                                                                         and exact locations of the PRS’es was not known
                                                                         with certainty at appraisal time, The appropriate



                                                                 Page 3 of 9
                                                                                 social safeguards instrument prepared was the
                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). Site
                                                                                 specific RAPs or ARAPs will be prepared,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 cleared and disclosed prior to the start of any
                                                                                 construction works, following the principles and
                                                                                 procedures as set forth in the RPF, as location of
                                                                                 PRS and pipeline will be determined in the
                                                                                 implementation. The RPF has been prepared,
                                                                                 reviewed, approved and disclosed in-country and
                                                                                 at the bank’s Infoshop on March 23 and 24
                                                                                 respectively.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               This policy is not triggered as project activities do
                                                                                 not involve new or existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                  This policy is not triggered.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  This policy is not triggered.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project falls under the World bank environmental category A classification due to
                              the potential adverse environmental and social impacts. Three Bank safeguards policies were
                              triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), and
                              Physical Cultural Property (OPN 11.03). Given that the final selection of the exact paths of the gas
Public Disclosure Copy




                              pipelines, pressure reduction stations, and the distribution networks will be made during the course
                              of implementation of the project, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment Framework
                              (ESIAF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were the safeguards instruments prepared.
                              To address the triggered physical cultural property policy, a chance find procedure was inserted an
                              as annex to the ESIAF. It is expected that during project implementation site-specific
                              Environmental and Social management Plans (ESMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                              will be prepared in particular when the locations/paths are known with certainty following
                              guidance contained in the ESIAF and RPF.

                             The Scope of the ESIAF is to assess the environmental and social impacts of extensions of new
                             high-pressure steel pipes to the project areas (or installations of new pipelines), pressure reduction
                             stations, and distribution networks serving the various project areas. Impacts of NG exploration,
                             extraction, refining, and transmission are outside the scope of the ESIAF. The ESIAF has
                             identified the following potential negative impacts during the construction phase:
                             •        Traffic congestion and loss of access due to excavation and installation works
                             •        Air emissions from heavy machinery and generators; and dust from excavation activities
                             •        Elevated noise levels from heavy machinery and asphalt breaking; as well as other
                             construction/demolition for extending natural gas piping into households
                             •        Risk of damage/breakage of underground utility lines and piping during excavations
                             •        Possible disruption or displacement of ecological systems


                                                                         Page 4 of 9
                         •        Potential risk to weak structures may arise in areas where building standards are not
                         followed or in areas where high groundwater levels affect integrity of foundations
                         •        Structural and aesthetic effects on culturally-valuable sites and antiquities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Management of solid, liquid and hazardous waste from handling and temporary storage to
                         transportation and final disposal
                         •        Potential impacts of PRS Construction (related to handling of construction wastes, noise
                         and air pollution from construction machinery)

                         Potential negative impacts during operations which include user health and safety, improper
                         handling of the odorant, noise of the PRS, safety aspects of PRS operation, and integrity of the
                         pipelines.

                         The mitigation measures to address these potential negative impacts are well presented and
                         detailed in the Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Framework (ESMMF)
                         contained in the ESIAF. The objective of the ESMMF is to outline a mechanism for minimizing or
                         eliminating potential negative impacts and for monitoring the application and performance of the
                         mitigation measures. The ESMMF identifies roles and responsibilities for different stakeholders
                         for implementation and monitoring of mitigations, and whenever applicable, the ESMMF is
                         designed to accommodate alternative context-specific mitigation and monitoring measures. The
                         implementation of the ESMMF is estimated to cost US$790,000 excluding the gross cost of
                         recruiting full-time HSE personnel and the cost of work in antiquities and culturally sensitive
                         areas.

                         The potential adverse social impacts are mainly related to the permanent land acquisition and
                         temporary land use for construction of 25 PRSs and 187 km of high pressure gas pipeline. It is
                         estimated that the project will need about 4 hectare of permanent land acquisition and 180 hectare
                         temporary land use. Since the exact locations of PRSs and alignment of gas pipeline cannot be
                         finally determined at this stage, a resettlement policy framework (RPF) has been prepared to
                         mitigate the potential resettlement impacts. The RPF establishes the principles for resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impact mitigation and the organizational arrangements for preparation and implementation of
                         resettlement action plans which may be needed during project implementation. The RPF summary
                         is included in Annex 3

                         To address demand side aspects of the service delivery, EGAS already has a continuous Citizen
                         Engagement plan in place to build and maintain a productive relationship over time with the
                         project hosting communities. This process extends throughout the life of the project and
                         encompasses a range of activities and approaches, from information sharing and consultation, to
                         participation, negotiation, and partnerships.

                         The proposed project will build on this Citizen Engagement focus. It will support the development
                         of a framework for household gas service delivery performance improvement and monitoring and
                         develop a monitoring system to develop a Key Product Indicator. As a relevant tool for citizen
                         engagement, EGAS and the participating LDCs will be strengthening the role of the customers’
                         service centers (CSC’s) to a more engaging role with citizens. Initially prior to the implementation
                         of the proposed project, the Bank will also support a safety awareness campaign geared toward the
                         more rural areas, where concerns on the safety of usage of natural gas connections and appliance
                         were raised during the social consultations. Once the project is moved to implementation this will
                         be sustained by the Social Development Officers hired by the project.



                                                                    Page 5 of 9
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The ESIAF considered several alternatives, including not undertaking the project. The No-Project
                           alternative is not favored as it simply deprives the Egyptian Public and Government of the social,
                           economic and environmental advantages associated with the proposed project such as reduced
                           expenditure on LPG importation and subsidies, significantly lower leakage and fire risk compared
                           to LPG and constantly available fuel for home use. Energy alternatives such as expand LPG usage,
                           or convert to electricity or, use renewable energy sources were also considered. Piping material
                           alternatives in the use of copper or steel was evaluated. Several considerations support the use of
                           steel piping such strength, cost, and some aspects of public attitudes (copper is known in Egypt as
                           an attractive target for theft due to its high value. Aside from the aspect of minimizing corrosion
                           (and therefore risk of leakage), selection of one of the piping materials over the other does not
                           seem to offer contrasts in the environmental and social impacts (except a marginally lower
                           pressure loss with copper piping). Therefore, as long as precautions and safety margins are
                           respected steel seems to be the more practical and safe choice.

                          Alternatives to the sequencing of constructions were also considered. Progressing with
                          constructing the transmission (HP) and distribution networks in the various project areas could be
                          achieved through two alternatives:

                          Alternative 1: complete the construction of the networks in more than one area simultaneously

                          Alternative 2: complete networks in sequence area by area

                          The advantages of Alternative 1 over Alternative 2 are: (i) shorter implementation schedule; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (ii) utilization of economies of scale in lower cost for the additional equipment and components
                          procured to cover multiple areas simultaneously.

                          The advantages of Alternative 2 over Alternative 1 are: (i) less resources and capital investments
                          required; and (ii) less management and coordination resources required.
                          Overall, the key contrast between the two alternatives is related to available assets and human
                          resources, while paying attention to coordination of sequential work outputs of the parallel teams.
                          The main advantage of working in parallel would be to minimize project implementation time.

                           Routing alternatives apply to transmission mains, distribution mains and connection mains.
                           Deciding on routing alternatives for the distribution and connection network is premature at this
                           stage. However, selecting optimum routes for these networks is crucial to avoid as much
                           environmental and social impacts as possible. It is very important to avoid as many sensitive sites
                           as possible to minimize environmental and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           EGAS/Egypt Gas/Town Gas contracted with ESIAF and RPF to be carried out by one of the
                           leading environmental consulting firm, EcoConServ. This firm has well experienced staff and
                           consultants with ample knowledge of Bank safeguards policies, and also prepared the safeguards


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           instruments for the Natural Gas Connection (Greater Cairo) I project of which the environmental
                           departments in both EGAS and Town Gas gained experience through the implementation of the
                           various site-specific ESMPs and RAPs. These entities (EGAS, Egypt Gas, and Town Gas) have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           good track record in paying attention to safety measures in the development of the Gas Sector and
                           use international recognized standards and procedures used by British Gas. Rigorous attention is
                           paid to environmental and social aspects supported by environmental departments and HSE units
                           that were created long ago and are used to international standards.

                           Three entities namely EGAS, Town Gas and Egypt Gas will be responsible for the implementation
                           of the ESMMF and by extension the site –specific ESMPs. These entities have well qualified
                           environmental and social staff, with well-defined Health, Safety and Environment (HSE)
                           departments. EGAS Environment staff and Town Gas HSE personnel have received training on
                           environmental auditing, EIAs for industrial establishments and environmental legislation. Further,
                           the environmental departments in both EGAS and Town Gas gained experience through the
                           implementation of the ongoing Natural Gas Connections Project in Greater Cairo; as they were
                           involved in planning, tendering and construction procedures. The ESMMF also recommended
                           training programs for EGAS/Town/Egypt Gas staff to build their capacity for environmental and
                           social management. The entities will also benefit from guidance from the Bank Safeguards team
                           members.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultations were carried out with key stakeholders. The ESIAF and RPF held two consultation
                           sessions as required for category A projects. These were very well advertised and attended in the
                           11 governorates. Tools used included focus group discussions, individual interviews, group
                           meetings and public consultation. Consultation activities (scoping, interviews, focus group
                           discussions, public hearing/consultations/scoping sessions) were held with various stakeholders
                           and community members in host communities in the 11 Governorates. These consultations were in
                           compliance with World Bank policies related to disclosure and public consultation (BP 17.50 and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           OP 4.01) and Egyptian regulations related to public consultation (Law 4/1994 modified by Law
                           9/2009). Throughout the various consultation and engagement activities, the work teams
                           experienced and recorded overwhelming public acceptance, by the communities and the
                           governmental stakeholders towards the proposed project. Aside from limited concerns regarding
                           arrangements for the Natural Gas installation payments and street restoration, all participants
                           expressed their eagerness for commencement of project implementation without much delay and
                           many others requested the extension of the project to additional areas.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  23-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               24-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                      23-Mar-2014
                           Comments: The link to the website is http://www.egas.com.eg/Corporate_Overview/
                                         NaturalGasConnectionsProject.aspx
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          23-Mar-2014
                           Comments: The link to the website is http://www.egas.com.eg/Corporate_Overview/
                                         NaturalGasConnectionsProject.aspx
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Husam Mohamed Beides
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                              Date: 18-Jul-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                  Date: 30-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
