                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA5887
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                  P145747
                                                                          Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     DRC: Strengthening PFM and Accountability (P145747)
                            Task Team       Saidou Diop
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       07-Oct-2013                          Estimated   30-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTMW                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (60%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (60%), Other
                                              accountability/anti-corruption (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                  5.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  5.00
                              Total                                                                                        5.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to enhance the credibility, transparency, and
                           accountability in the management and use of central government and selected sub-national
                           governments’ finances. Considering the complementarity with other donor and Bank-funded

                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         programs, the proposed MDTF operation will focus on downstream PFM reforms of the central
                         government and public financial management in selected provinces ( Equator, Kasai Oriental and
                         North Kivu).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         I. Project Development Objective(s)

                         The proposed project development objective is to enhance the credibility, transparency, and
                         accountability in the management and use of central government and selected sub-national
                         governments’ finances.

                         II. Project Description

                         Component 1- Improving budget execution processes

                         This component aims to empower line ministries in the budget execution process and improve cash
                         management and internal audits. It includes three sub-components: (a) supporting decentralization of
                         commitment authority to line ministries; (b) enhancing cash management and (c) strengthening ex-
                         ante controls and internal audits. This component will be used to link the program with other Bank
                         projects in health, education, agriculture, infrastructure and rural development sectors. This will be
                         done through regular meetings and sharing of information. This component will be implemented with
                         due consideration of ongoing partners’ capacity building and public administration strengthening
                         efforts (creation of national administration institute, development of curricula and training
                         modules…).

                         Component 2 - Strengthening budget oversight

                         This component aims to enhance the external oversight in the management of public finances. It
                         includes three sub-components: (a) strengthening external audit processes; (b) strengthening the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         legislative oversight; and (c) increasing public access to key fiscal information and strengthening
                         demand side of governance.

                         Component 3 - Building public sector and financial management systems at provincial level

                         This component aims at improving PFM systems and improving public services in Equateur, Kasai-
                         Oriental, and North Kivu (when the security situation will permit) provinces. The entry point of all
                         capacity-building activities funded under this component will be the Plateforme minimale agreed
                         with all donors. The component includes 3 sub-components: achieving the same objective which is to
                         build public sector and financial management systems in each province abovementioned. Any
                         support to North Kivu province will be done in close coordination with conflict prevention and
                         stabilization initiatives, in order to contribute to peace and stabilization in the province through
                         enhanced governance, state-citizen trust and local level accountability. The below activities
                         described into the sub components will learned from PRCG experience. Joint mission will be
                         envisaged with PRCG yet the provinces covered are not the same.

                         Component 4- Project management

                         This component will provide support to the COREF for the coordination, administration,
                         communication, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, audit, and


                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                           dissemination of the project’s activities at both central and local levels. At the provincial level,
                           COREF will set up local teams comprising a provincial coordinator, procurement and financial
                           management officers, and an administrative staff to oversee the provincial-level implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the program. The component will also support the activities related to the memorandum of
                           understanding to monitor the implementation of the PFM reform program and harmonize
                           international development partners’ PFM interventions. The component will include change
                           management activities to create broad consensus and identify key incentives around reform activities.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be carried out with DRC counterpart institutions in the Capital Kinshasa and three
                           selected provinces Equateur, Quasai Oriental and North Kivu. The only physical activities that are
                           foreseen are the procurement of electronic hardware (computer terminals, serves).
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              None
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                           None
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           No reasonable alternatives are identifiable from an environmental management perspective.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           This project does not warrant a separate dialogue on safeguards, as the anticipated impacts really
                           are negligible. However, to sensitize the counterpart towards good practice, and create an example
                           for subsequent projects with potentially more significant impacts, a short, checklist type EMP will
                           be supplied during the implementation phase with tender and contract documents to provide
                           guidance, and establish contractual leverage on good housekeeping, waste management, and
                           workplace and community health and safety.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           NA
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Saidou Diop
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 19-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Renaud Seligmann (SM)                        Date: 19-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
