                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1034
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Belarus                           Project ID:    P149697
                            Project Name:      Transit Corridor Improvement Project (P149697)
                            Task Team          Simon David Ellis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Sep-2014                       Estimated   19-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), Other public sector
                                              governance (40%), Regional integration (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     270.01           Total Bank Financing:                250.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  20.01
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    250.00
                              Total                                                                                    270.01
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve transport connectivity, border crossing procedures
                           and safety for domestic and international road users on selected sections of the M6 corridor.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1: Improvement of Sections of M6 ‘Minsk – Grodno’ Transit Corridor. This Component

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         will finance the reconstruction and upgrading of selected sections of the M6 road, from a two-lane to
                         a four-lane road. The road improvement would meet two strategic objectives for the government by:
                         (i) linking Minsk to Grodno as part of their national strategy of connecting all six Oblast centers to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         high standard roads; and (ii) developing international transit corridors to promote cross border trade.
                         The crucial M6 transit route provides links between Minsk, Grodno and the Polish border. This
                         component would finance the extension of the current four-lane road from Minsk for a further 73.4
                         kilometers (km 57.0 to km 130.4), and extend the current four lane road from Grodno for a further
                         13.3 kilometers (km 197.7 to km 211.0). There are insufficient finances for the whole road but these
                         sections have been prioritized based on their overall economic returns. The road would be designed
                         for the European standard axle load of 11.5 tons and also include two level interchanges and road
                         safety features according to European standards. The route carries a substantial proportion of transit
                         traffic with volumes averaging 5975 vehicles per day, of which 32 percent are trucks. This
                         component will also finance financial and technical audits. Through counterpart financing, the
                         government would finance the feasibility studies, engineering design, technical and environmental
                         supervision, land acquisition, and infrastructure loss. Following improvement, the road would be
                         tolled and have Weigh-In-Motion sensors installed (not financed through this loan).

                         Component 2: Modernization of Sector Institutions. This Component includes the following two sub-
                         components: Sub-component 2.1: Traffic and Road Safety Coordination Center. The proposed
                         Traffic and Road Safety Coordination Center (TRSCC) will be established within Beldor Center to
                         promote safer roads through improved traffic management, emergency response and traveler
                         information dissemination in the road sector. Sub-component 2.2: Road-side services. The provision
                         of road side services is important for the safety and convenience of road users but is also a potential
                         source of employment for local communities and particularly women.

                         Component 3: Border Management Enhancement. This Component will finance activities designed
                         to improve the overall performance of border management in Belarus, facilitating the movement of
                         cross-border trade at the Bruzgi BCP by reducing average clearance times and the number of
                         transactions subjected to secondary inspections. This component will support the implementation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increase the effectiveness of the ‘two agencies at the border’ policy being adopted by the SCC. It
                         will also support national ambitions to transition to a one-stop-shop approach as part of a single
                         electronic window environment.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The section to be upgraded is located between Minsk and Grodno and is a 86.7 km part of the
                         highway from Minisk to Grodno and on to the Polish border. The project area is generally flat with
                         some rolling sections. The road mainly crosses farmland but there are sections of forest available for
                         wood supply (plantations of common industrial tree species managed by state forestry enterprises)
                         and several rivers and creeks to cross. Good construction practices and reasonable housekeeping
                         during the upgrade of the road will ensure that negative impacts on flora, fauna and landscapes are
                         minimized. While the alignment goes through the protected area - Landscape Sanctuary
                         "Naliboksky" at km 91.07 - km 101.0, no impacts on natural habitats or important ecosystems are
                         expected. There are a number of settlements along the way and there will be need for limited land
                         acquisition, physical resettlement and some provision of sound barriers for houses that are close to
                         the road.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)
                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The overall project is proposed as environmental
                         BP 4.01                                         category "B" in accordance with the Bank's
                                                                         operational policies. The Ministry of Transport
                                                                         through Belgipodor have already prepared a first
                                                                         draft of the EIA/EMP which is of good quality.
                                                                         The EIA/EMP includes: baseline data on the
                                                                         environmental characteristics of the project area,
                                                                         national and WB EA legal requirements and
                                                                         institutional responsibilities; potential
                                                                         environmental impacts; project alternatives
                                                                         analyzed; and a detailed Environmental
                                                                         Management Plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The alignment goes through the protected area
                                                                         "Zakaznik Naliboksky" at km 91.07 - km 101.0.
                                                                         There are only low-value trees at some sections
                                                                         nearby the alignment and no impacts on critical
                                                                         natural habitats or important biodiversity are
                                                                         expected. Some sections of the road go through
                                                                         forest available for wood supply (plantations of
                                                                         common industrial tree species, managed by state
                                                                         forestry enterprises).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The upgrading of the road from two lanes to four
                         4.12                                            lanes will require some land acquisition along the
                                                                         length of the road. Physical resettlement is,
                                                                         however, to be expected only on a very limited
                                                                         scale and will concern a few households. In some
                                                                         cases the land plots of the households will need to
                                                                         be acquired for projects purposes. It is also
                                                                         projected that as the result of widening of the road
                                                                         some houses will be located so close to the road
                                                                         that it would not be possible to ensure noise
                                                                         protection to the acceptable standards by
                                                                         installing sound barriers, and these houses would
                                                                         have to be resettled. Individual preliminary



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                                  consultations were held by the client with the
                                                                                  households that are likely to be affected. The
                                                                                  specific number and exact location of such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  households will be identified only after the
                                                                                  finalization of the technical design. A
                                                                                  resettlement policy framework (RPF) was
                                                                                  prepared for the project, agreed by the Bank and
                                                                                  disclosed in Belarus in Russian and in English on
                                                                                  Bank’s Infoshop in May 2014. A RAP was
                                                                                  prepared for the section of the road in Grodno
                                                                                  oblast. The was disclosed in Russian on the site of
                                                                                  GRODNOAVTODOR on September 24, 2014
                                                                                  and on Infoshop on September 24, 2014. A RAP
                                                                                  for Minsk Oblast is currently under preparation.
                                                                                  RAP(s) for the other sections of the road will be
                                                                                  prepared after appraisal upon completion of the
                                                                                  technical design as needed.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International            No               Activities under the project will not involve
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  abstraction of water or pollution of international
                                                                                  rivers or its tributaries. The alignment runs at a
                                                                                  distance from Neman and the planned works will
                                                                                  not result in pollution of Neman. OP 7.50 is not
                                                                                  triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The upgrading of the road from two lanes to four lanes will require some land acquisition along
                              the length of the road. However, physical resettlement of individuals is only expected on a very
                              limited scale and will concern a few households. In some cases the land plots of the households
                              will need to be acquired for projects purposes. It is also projected that as the result of widening the
                              road some houses will be located so close to the road that it would not be possible to ensure noise
                              protection to the acceptable standards by installing sound barriers, and these houses would have to
                              be resettled. No potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are expected.
                              Potential environmental impacts are standard for road upgrade/rehabilitation and include local air
                              pollution from trucks and other construction machinery, noise, operation of borrow pits,
                              generation of waste during construction process and operation of construction camps. These
                              impacts will be mitigated through implrmrntation of the mitigation measures contained in the
                              EMP.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                          Page 4 of 7
                           Project activities will require land acquisition and a limited physical resettlement of individual
                           households. No potential indirect and/or long-term environmental impacts are expected due to
                           anticipated future activities in the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No alternatives were considered because the project will upgrade the existing road and no areas
                           were identified that merit by-passing. While some land acquisition will be necessary in order to
                           widen the road as part of the project, the project will aim to minimize cases of physical
                           resettlement. Households that will have to be resettled will receive full compensation according to
                           the principles outlined in the RPF and site-specific RAP.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A resettlement policy framework (RPF) was prepared for the project, agreed by the Bank and
                           disclosed in Belarus in Russian and in English on Bank’s Infoshop in May 2014. A RAP was
                           prepared for the section of the road in Grodno oblast. The RAP was disclosed in Russian on the
                           site of GRODNOAVTODOR on September 24, 2014 and on Infoshop on September 24, 2014. A
                           RAP for Minsk Oblast is currently under preparation. RAP(s) for the other sections of the road
                           will be prepared after appraisal upon completion of the technical design.
                           The EIA and EMP was prepared by the Client and disclosed in country in Grodno Oblast in
                           December 2013 and in Minsk Oblast in June 2014. These documents were disclosed in infoshop
                           on September 5, 2014.

                           The borrower has prior experience of successful implementation of World Bank funded projects in
                           the road sector. The PIU will identify the specialist responsible for monitoring the implementation
                           of the RAP(s) and reporting to the Bank on resettlement implementation. The State Enterprise
                           Beldor NII and Belgiprodor will be involved in monitoring the adherence to environmental
                           safeguards requirements. The Bank’s specialists will monitor resettlement and environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                           issues in the course of their regular supervision missions.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The RPF was disclosed on Infoshop on March 1, 2014 (in English), and in country on May 1, 2014
                           (in Russian). Individual preliminary consultations were held by RUE GrodnoAvtoDor with the
                           households that are likely to be affected based on the draft RAP for Grodno Region. Once these
                           consultations were completed the RAP for Grodno region was finalized and disclosed in Russian
                           on the website of RUE “GrodnoAvtoDor”, and in English in Infoshop. Additional public
                           consultations will also be held now that the final RAP has been disclosed. The RAP for Minsk
                           Oblast will be prepared and provided to the Bank for approval and disclosure once the technical
                           designs have been completed.

                          Detailed grievance redress mechanisms are described in the RPF and RAP. The hot line of the
                          MoTC will be used as additional grievance mechanism for project implementation and
                          resettlement monitoring. The grievances and queries related to the project will be redirected to the
                          project support team for addressing them.

                          The EIA and EMP was prepared by the Client and consulted upon in December 2013-January
                          2014 in Grodno oblast and June -July 2014 in Minsk oblast. The document was disclosed in the
                          Infoshop on September 5, 2014 following approval by the Bank.


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    01-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belarus                                                           01-May-2014
                           Comments: Resettlement Action Plans for the Grodno Oblast have been prepared and disclosed
                                         in country and submitted to the info shop on September 24, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Simon David Ellis
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 02-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                            Date: 02-Oct-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
