                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC8303

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P149340
                            Project Name:      Nagaland Health Project (P149340)
                            Task Team          Patrick M. Mullen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Nov-2014                      Estimated        16-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHNDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (60%), Water supply (10%), Sanitation (10%), Other Renewable Energy
                                               (10%), General information and communications sector (10% )
                            Theme(s):          Health system performance (90%), Decentralization (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     60.00                     Total Bank Financing:         48.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           12.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  48.00
                              Total                                                                        60.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve health services and increase their utilization
                           by communities in targeted locations in Nagaland.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1. Community-level capacity development and investments. This component will
                           encompass support to community engagement and management of health services, as well
                         community-level interventions in several sectors with an impact on HNP services and outcomes. The
                         component will support capacity-building of Village Health Committees as well as provide results-
                         based financial resources for the community to make investments to improve HNP services and in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         areas with the potential to affect HNP outcomes.

                         Component 2. Improvements in health facility power supply, water supply and sanitation. This
                         component will finance investments in off-grid electricity supply, water supply and sanitation in
                         targeted health facilities.

                         Component 3. Health system development. This component will support development of key
                         components of the health system that will improve the management and effectiveness of government
                         health services in Nagaland. This will include development of the health supply chain management
                         system and of information and communication technology systems to improve health service
                         management and quality. The project will also work to address health human resource constraints,
                         making investments in training as well as supporting implementation of a health human resource
                         strategy that is currently being developed. Improvements in medical waste management will be
                         supported.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities at the community and health facility levels will be targeted in a coordinated manner
                         to specific locations across Nagaland. This is one of the smallest Indian states with an area of just
                         16,579 square kilometers and a population of about two million. The state is predominantly
                         mountainous with a rich floristic diversity. The project will support improvements in water supply
                         and sanitation in targeted health facilities, as well as improvements in medical waste management.
                         The limited civil works proposed under this project, mostly upgrading of existing facilities, will be
                         carried out within the premises of the existing rural health facilities or on government land adjacent
                         to such facilities, which are free from encumbrances in rural areas. Therefore, these civil works will
                         not involve land acquisition and are not likely to generate any resettlement risks. The potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts of these activities would be limited and local. The terrain and rocky substrata may pose some
                         challenges in laying pipelines and building deep burial pits. About 20% of the state has wooded
                         forests and the proposed project activities are unlikely to pose any significant harm to these,
                         especially when renewable sources of energy would be used. The majority of the population of the
                         state is from tribal communities (16 major tribes) and consultation, as well as project support to
                         community-level interventions, will ensure community engagement. An Environment and Social
                         Assessment (ESA) has been initiated to assess the actual social and environmental footprint of the
                         project activities and to prepare an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to plan
                         and implement the required mitigation measures.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing institution, the state Department of Health and Family Welfare, is not familiar
                         with the Bank's safeguards requirements and this operation would require building capacity to
                         identify and manage safeguards risks. However, adequate oversight arrangements will be put in place
                         to address social and environment safeguards risks that will primarily relate to medical waste
                         management and ensuring that the tribal population benefits from project interventions through
                         participatory planning and implementation.

                         The governance and management architecture of the project will have three levels: (i) Project
                         Steering Committee; (ii) Project Executive Committee; and (iii) Project Management Unit. The
                         Project Steering Committee, chaired by the Chief Secretary, will provide overall approval of the
                         project strategy and activities, oversight of implementation, and policy-level coordination between
                         sectors. Further, a Project Executive Committee, chaired by the Commissioner and Secretary, Health
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Family Welfare, will provide regular oversight and approvals necessary for the implementation
                         of project activities, notably fiduciary-related clearances. A Project Management Unit, with a senior
                         officer of the Department of Health and Family Welfare as Project Director, will be to manage
                         implementation of the project. The Project Management Unit would be strengthened with technical
                         support staff in addressing medical waste management and other environmental and social
                         safeguards issues. In addition, an environmental and social assessment is being undertaken which
                         includes, among others, an ESMF with guidelines for ensuring that potential adverse impacts are
                         avoided, minimized, and mitigated where unavoidable. The mitigation plans will provide specific
                         roles and responsibilities for implementation, follow up and monitoring. Since community
                         engagement is central to the project, part of safeguards management would be through community
                         institutions for which the project will invest in building capacity.

                         As the majority of population in Nagaland are from tribal communities, the project will be
                         implemented in areas that are mainly inhabited by tribal communities. OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples)
                         is therefore triggered, requiring the project to take pro-active steps to ensure that its benefits accrue
                         to members of tribal groups. The government has in place constitutional provisions, laws and
                         institutions for protection of tribal people’s rights and for ensuring their welfare and development.
                         The project will include participatory planning and implementation of project activities with free,
                         prior, informed consultation with communities. Nagaland has an advanced system of participatory
                         local services oversight and management through "communitisation" instituted by state legislation
                         (2002) that transferred responsibility for local health, education, water, sanitation, forests, roads and
                         power services to Village Councils and sector-specific Committees. This included transfer of assets
                         as well as financial resources, notably funds for salaries. In the health sector, Village Health
                         Committees are responsible for management of local health services. This system will ensure
                         effective application of OP 4.10 without establishment of any additional institutional mec hanisms
                         and with capacity building. Training and ongoing support to Village Health Committees will improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         their capacity to oversee and to manage health services as well as to manage implementation of
                         project-financed investments. The project will support increased representation by women and foster
                         the involvement of women's self-help groups.

                         The project involves carrying out physical activities including: (a) rehabilitating/renovating health
                         facilities limited to the existing premises; (b) installing solar panels on either rooftops or on
                         government land adjoining the health facilities, (c) installing rainwater harvesting and sanitation
                         equipment/facilities within or around health facilities, (d) possible small scale projects such as water
                         source rehabilitation to be done by Village Health Councils under Component 1 of the project. The
                         Project will involve limited civil works, mostly in the form of upgrading of existing facilities, which
                         will be carried out within the premises of the existing rural health facilities or on government land
                         adjacent to such facilities, which are free from encumbrances in rural areas. These civil works will
                         not involve any land acquisition and are not likely to generate any resettlement risks. However,
                         whether to trigger OP 4.12 shall be decided based on the final outcome of the ESA being undertaken.
                         Based on a reconfirmation of ESA findings through field visits, by the time of Appraisal an ESMF
                         shall be prepared, complying with the applicable Bank safeguards policies. The ESMF will include
                         an Indigenous People’s Framework (IPF), and Gender and Social Inclusion strategy. If the ESA so
                         requires, ESMF will also include a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The project will be
                         implemented through grassroots level community mobilization ensuring equal participation of
                         women and men from all community groups. The summary of the ESMF will be translated and
                           disclosed in the local language in Nagaland.

                           The client will establish required capacity within the project implementation arrangements to carry
Public Disclosure Copy




                           out the ESMF. The ESMF will be finalized with free, prior, informed consultations locally, and will
                           be disclosed on the state government’s website and through the World Bank Infoshop before
                           Negotiations. Project support in improving the health system may entail risks related to medical
                           waste management, while there may be risks related to disposal of wastes produced by any civil
                           works. The project is classified as Environmental Assessment category 'B'.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
                           Anupam Joshi (GENDR)
                           Mehul Jain (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project may have limited and localized
                           BP 4.01                                             adverse impacts due to construction activities
                                                                               and involvement of community groups. This
                                                                               policy is triggered to ensure that an
                                                                               environmental and social assessment identifies
                                                                               any potential adverse impacts and propose
                                                                               appropriate mitigation measures.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The project does not pose any harm to critical
                                                                               and other natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              Proposed investments will not result in any
                                                                               adverse forest management practices.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project will not support procurement of
                                                                               pesticides and related equipment.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              Civil works would be largely restricted to
                           BP 4.11                                             existing facilities. Only limited works may be
                                                                               taken up on common lands. No deep excavation
                                                                               is envisaged.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes             As the majority of population in Nagaland are
                                                                               from tribal communities, the project will be
                                                                               implemented in areas that are mainly inhabited
                                                                               by tribal communities. OP 4.10 is therefore
                                                                               triggered, requiring the project to take pro-
                                                                               active steps to ensure that its benefits accrue to
                                                                               members of tribal groups.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      TBD             The Project will involve limited civil works,
                           4.12                                                mostly in the form of upgrading of existing
                                                                               facilities, which will be carried out within the
                                                                               premises of the existing rural health facilities or
                                                                               on government land adjacent to such facilities,
                                                                               which are free from encumbrances in rural
                                                                                                                                 areas. These civil works will not involve any
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition and are not likely to generate
                                                                                                                                 any resettlement risks. However, whether to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 trigger OP 4.12 shall be decided based on the
                                                                                                                                 final outcome of the Social Assessment being
                                                                                                                                 undertaken.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            No dams are involved.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not involve works on any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      TThe project proposes to undertake an environmental and social assessment (ESA). No additional
                                      (separate) assessments are proposed. A framework approach for managing environmental and
                                      social impacts would be followed. It will include a mitigation plan related to medical waste
                                      management. In addition, the relevant EHS Guidelines would be applicable to the project.
                                      Although resettlement associated with civil works to be financed by the project is not likely,
                                      assessment and reporting procedures may need to be put in place.

                                      The SA and EA will be conducted and finalized by September 30, 2014, and the revised and
                                      updated Bio-Medical Waste Management plan will be finalized and disclosed by Government of
                                      Nagaland after review by World Bank team by September 30, 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Patrick M. Mullen

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 22-Sep-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Albertus Voetberg (PMGR)                                                                                             Date: 22-Sep-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
