                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6273

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Serbia                           Project ID:       P146248
                            Project Name:      Deposit Insurance Strengthening Project (P146248)
                            Task Team          Rinku Chandra
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Jan-2014                      Estimated         27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSPF                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Banking (50%), Public administration- Financial Sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):         International financial standards and systems (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        200.00                 Total Bank Financing:     200.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        200.00
                              Total                                                                        200.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the financial capacity of the DIA so as to meet
                           its legal deposit insurance and bank resolution obligations.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project is a Results Based IPF to the Republic of Serbia for an amount of US$200m to
                           support the strengthening of the Deposit Insurance Agency (DIA). The recent failure of two small
                           banks resulted in the depletion of a key part of the financial safety net, the Deposit Insurance Fund
                         (DIF). The Deposit Insurance Fund of Serbia is managed by the Serbian Deposit Insurance Agency
                         (DIA), which utilizes the financial resources available to protect depositors up to a specified level (in
                         this case EUR 50,000) and to facilitate the resolution of banks that fail in a cost effective manner.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Considering the importance of an effective Deposit Insurance Scheme to maintaining confidence in
                         the banking system, this operation aims to provide the Deposit Insurance Fund with the financial
                         resources required to perform its legally mandated deposit insurance and bank resolution functions.

                         The proposed project has two components:
                         1)     A results based component of US$199 million that capitalizes the Deposit Insurance Fund
                         based on satisfactorily achieving DLIs that improve the ability of the DIA to meet its legally
                         mandated deposit insurance and bank resolution obligations.
                         2)     A technical assistance component of US$1 million that aims to strengthen the ability of the
                         DIA to meet its legal deposit insurance and bank resolution obligations.

                         Component 1: Results Based Component
                         This component includes US$199m that will be utilized to capitalize the Deposit Insurance Fund
                         based on meeting Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). The DLIs will be developed during the
                         course of the project preparation, but examples of DLIs include the following:
                         •       Increasing premiums from banks
                         •       Putting in place a stand-by facility for the DIA
                         •       Improving information sharing between the NBS and DIA
                         •       Improving the independence of the Board of the DIA
                         •       Improving the recoveries process
                         •       Improving oversight of the State Owned Banking sector


                         DLI 1: Premiums
                         Considering that premiums are the primary source of income or the DIF, they will need to be
                         increased to achieve the target size. The DLIs in this category will aim to increase the amount of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         premiums from the banks operating in Serbia in line with international best practices for a Deposit
                         Insurance Scheme. These DLIs will increase the premiums (either through an extraordinary premium
                         increase or an increase in the regular premium) from the current level of 0.4% in 2014 and 2015 as
                         Deposit Insurance Schemes should primarily be paid for by the banks themselves.

                         DLI 2: Stand-by facility
                         In addition to funding, it is critical for the DIA to have a guarantee or stand-by facility that it can
                         readily access in case it runs out of funds. Best practice for Deposit Insurance Schemes includes
                         having a back-up facility that ensures that funds can be accessed without Government approval
                         during a time of banking instability. Thus the second DLI will ensure that the Government puts in
                         place a guarantee or stand-by.

                         DLI 3: Improved information sharing between financial safety net providers
                         In order to strengthen the coordination between the three financial safety net providers, DLIs will
                         target the sharing of key data between the NBS to the DIA. The sharing of information between the
                         financial safety net providers is critical to allowing the DIA to meet its legally mandated function.
                         International best practices require that a framework should be in place for the close coordination and
                         information sharing. This should be done on a routine basis, as well as in relation to particular banks,
                         among the deposit insurer and other financial system safety-net participants
                         DLI 4: Increasing the independence of Board of Directors of the Agency
                         Governance principles for deposit insurers highlight that it should be operationally independent,
                         transparent, accountable and insulated from undue political and industry influence. The DLIs in this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         category will aim to increase the independence of the Board of Directors of the Agency. The current
                         governing body of the Deposit Insurance Agency is its Managing Board. The Deposit Insurance Law
                         indicates that the Managing Board is to be comprised of six members: a Chairman appointed by the
                         Government; the Minister of Finance and Economy; the Vice-Governor of the NBS responsible for
                         bank supervision; the Deputy Director of banking supervision at the NBS; a member from the
                         Association of Banks; and a member proposed and appointed by the Government.

                         DLI 5: Strengthen the results from the recovery process.
                         The Deposit Insurance Agency’s mandate also includes collecting receivables from bank
                         bankruptcies and liquidations. Collections from these efforts totaled only EUR 40 million in 2011
                         and 2012, as there are issues related to both the institutional and legal structure for conducting these
                         transactions that minimize the likelihood of success. Thus, the DLIs in this category will focus on
                         implementing a strategy (exact targets to be defined during project preparation)

                         DLI 6: Improving oversight of State Owned Banks
                         There is a need to improve the information flow from the state owned banks to the owner – which in
                         this case is the Government – in order to minimize the possibility of future problems similar to
                         Agrobanka and RBV that resulted in the depletion of the DIF. The Government currently has an
                         ownership stake in a small number of state banks, two of which have equity investments by EBRD
                         and the IFC. DLIs will aim to improve the information that the Government has on the State Owned
                         Banks in order to better manage the assets in which it has an ownership stake.


                         Component 2: Technical Assistance to improve the ability of the DIA to meet its legally mandated
                         deposit insurance and bank resolution functions.
                         This component will finance technical assistance in critical areas that are needed to achieve the DLIs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The exact nature of the TA can only be determined after finalizing the DLIS, but possible areas of
                         TA include:
                         •       Information sharing between safety net providers: Consulting services could be provided to
                         ensure that the DIA has adequate capacity to utilize the information that it is provided from the NBS.
                         •       Governance: Consulting services could be provided on developing an operational manual for
                         the Board of the DIA and ensuring that it has the capacity to meet its legally mandated requirements.
                         •       Recoveries: Consulting services could be provided to develop a time-bound strategy and
                         implement it over the course of two years.
                         •       Oversight of State Owned Banks: Consulting services could be provided to increase the
                         capacity of the Ministry of Finance to oversee the enterprises that it manages and improve the
                         corporate governance framework.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Not applicable

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Not applicable

                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      None
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Rinku Chandra

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Dec-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Aurora Ferrari (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Dec-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
