                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6709

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Honduras                         Project ID:       P148737
                            Project Name:      Corredor Seco Food Security Project (P148737)
                            Task Team          Eli Weiss
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated         15-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSAR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Agro-industry,
                                               marketing, and trade (10%), Irrigation and drainage (10%), He alth (10%),
                                               Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%), Nutrition and food security
                                               (40%), Rural non-farm income generation (20%), Rural s ervices and
                                               infrastructure (20%), Managing for development results (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                      Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                 30.00
                              Total                                                                        30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The suggested Project Development Objective is to enhance food and nutritional security of
                           vulnerable households in selected locations of the Corredor Seco in Honduras. Food security will be
                           supported by improving and diversifying agricultural production, value addition, and accessibility to
                         markets for small rural producers, with a particular focus on environmental sustainability and
                         women. Nutritional status of rural households will be improved by more diversity in households’
                         food consumption due to the combined effect of the change in behavior, induced by nutrition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         education (i.e. demand side) and the diversification in the agricultural production toward more
                         micronutrients rich crops (supply side).
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project is based on the government flagship program proposal to support interventions
                         for the vulnerable population of a series of contiguous municipalities (Dry Corridor – Corredor Seco)
                         whose associated investment plan known as Allianza para el Corredor Seco (ACS) was submitted by
                         the Government of Honduras (GOH) to donors and agencies. The ACS intents to partly fill a
                         financing gap of the Country Investment Plan (PIPSA), increase the incomes and reduce malnutrition
                         of poor and food insecure families, and lay the foundation for continued rural growth. The initial
                         proposal comprises three co-investors: the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID, US$
                         25M), the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI, US$ 30M), and this project of
                         US$ 30M that is funded by the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP). In
                         addition, the European Union (EU) is currently negotiating with the GOH for a possible program in
                         the ACS for around US$30 million, while Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA)
                         already has food security interventions in the area for US$42 million, with an expectation to soon
                         join the ACS group of financiers.

                         The Corredor Seco is defined largely by the dry and variable climatic conditions and extends from
                         the border of Guatemala to Nicaragua. It includes many of the poorest municipalities in the country.
                         Nearly all (91.7 percent) of its population (650,000 people) has income below the national extreme
                         poverty line (US$1.81 per person per day). Half (55 percent) is estimated to suffer from stunting.
                         Producers in the Corredor Seco face low productivity and are vulnerable to climate change. Maize
                         yields are 14.8 quintales per manzana (qq/mz), compared to the national average of 26.6, and high-
                         technology yields are 70 qq/mz. Bean yields are 6.7 qq/mz compared to the national average of 10.9,
                         while high-technology yields are 23.75. Because of low crop diversification, exposure to price
Public Disclosure Copy




                         changes, and limited access to markets, Honduran producers in the Corredor Seco are particularly
                         vulnerable to effects of climate change, price volatility, and extreme weather. The mix of extreme
                         poverty, undernutrition, and vulnerability to climate change converge in creating an economic and
                         social dynamic that calls for integrated food security investment.

                         The government's ACS proposal is broken down into geographical and thematic areas to allow each
                         contributing entity to finance specific areas of intervention while contributing to the overall
                         "alliance" in a coordinated way. The USAID will focus its support on the departments of La Paz,
                         Intibuca, and Lempira, where it has been traditionally investing in other initiatives. The CIDA is
                         supporting three food security projects implemented by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
                         United Nations (FAO), CARE, and Oxfam in parts of Choluteca, Valle, Intibucá, Lempira, and La
                         Paz. The GAFSP facility is expected to fund similar activities in parts of Comayagua, Francisco
                         Morazán, and El Paraíso. Its direct beneficiaries are expected to be about 12,000 households with a
                         total of 70,000 beneficiaries, including around 10,750 men, 11,500 women, and 48,000 children
                         (these numbers will however be corroborated during preparation, as the project will provide
                         assistance to individuals, groups, and at times more individuals within the same households). In
                         addition, the GAFSP will provide institutional support to the overall program by financing activities
                         to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture (SAG) for PIPSA
                         and of the Millenium Challence Account – Honduras (MCA-H) for the ACS. CABEI will finance
                         rural infrastructure, in particular secondary and tertiary roads, across the whole of the Corredor Seco,
                         thereby complementing the above investments in food security and agriculture. The Project
                         Appraisal Document will have an annex with the details about the different provinces regarding their
                         extension, population, and a map.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To define the areas of intervention, the GOH has developed a municipal prioritization model for
                         investments in food and nutrition security. This model has been built by the Technical Food and
                         Nutrition Unit of the Presidency (UTSAN) based on correlations between chronic malnutrition (as
                         the dependent variable) and poverty, illiteracy, human development index, municipal development
                         index, unsatisfied basic needs, rural populations, and number of persons per household (as
                         independent variables). The results have been weighted, normalized and classified into 5 levels of
                         food and nutrition insecurity: “critical, high, medium-high, medium and low”. The ACS investments
                         will be prioritized in the municipalities that suffer critical and high levels of food and nutrition
                         insecurity.

                         The Project will contribute to achieving the overall goals of the Alianza para el Corredor Seco (ACS)
                         by enhancing food and nutritional security of vulnerable households in selected geographical
                         locations and by providing institutional capacity. The overall Project design rests on four
                         components: (i) Agriculture production and access to markets; (ii) Non-farm livelihoods; (iii)
                         Nutrition and hygiene; and (iv) Institutional capacity building and project management.

                         Component 1: Agriculture production and access to markets (US$ 12M)

                         The component aims at improving agriculture practices in terms of output, quality, and
                         diversification. It will do so under two principles:

                         i)        Promoting environmentally sustainable and climate smart practices will finance training and
                         technical assistance (TA), and provide matching investment grants to promote agriculture
                         diversification to high value, micronutrients rich crops, improved management practices, post-
                         harvest management, and improved risk management and climate adaptation through agronomic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         practices. It will also promote training in financial and risk management and provide seed funding for
                         investments in high value crops and value addition. Investment grants will be provided based on
                         eligibility criteria and building on the successful experience of previous or ongoing interventions in
                         the country. The eligibility criteria and the funding mechanism will be consistent across the ACS
                         financing from other donors, in particular USAID. To become eligible, a sub-project will have to
                         meet criteria of financial feasibility, sustainability, and replicability. Once established, it will
                         continue to be supported through a menu of services, including planning, accounting, finance,
                         marketing and sales, transportation, environmental management, and operations, etc.

                         (ii) Linking production with national or international markets, will finance: a) technical assistance
                         through well-established Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), private sector agencies,
                         education institutions, and gremios and cooperatives to promote farmer organizations to access
                         markets, develop long-term private sector alliances, secure better market information on quality
                         standards; and b) small investment grants to facilitate transportation of products, initiate collective
                         purchases such as storage facilities, solar dryers, etc. By the same token, on the demand side, the
                         component will assist brokers, processors and input providers to embed services (transportation,
                         financial, tool provision, fertilizers, etc.) to small producers in their costs. The result will be better
                         linkages between producers, processors, and exporters, and more established business relationships
                         between groups and buyers, including supermarkets and their intermediaries.
                         Component 2: Non-farm livelihoods (US$ 8.0M)

                         This component aims at promoting alternative livelihoods to agriculture, to diversify rural incomes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         For most of the poor households in the project area, agriculture is the main source of food and
                         income, but it is often complemented by other livelihood generating activities, like bakery, eateries
                         and food services, repair workshops, handcrafts, transport, brokering, small trade, etc., as well as
                         remittances. There are also communities in the Corredor Seco where farming is not feasible due to
                         dry weather and eroded soil conditions. In these circumstances, greater incomes can be more
                         sustainably achieved through off-farm employment and engaging in alternative livelihood activities.

                         The component will finance community mobilization and group formation, training and technical
                         assistance, and seed funding to support common interest groups, women's groups, associations and
                         productive alliances to leverage investment funding for income generating activities outside
                         agriculture. TA through well-established local NGOs will be provided for the elaboration of
                         individual or group business plans and small sub-projects that are beneficial for the community by
                         creating employment, providing a useful service, and in general creating a collective good. Like in
                         component 1, to become eligible, a sub-project will have to meet criteria of financial feasibility,
                         sustainability, replicability and of being beneficial for the group or the community. Once established,
                         livelihood sub-projects will continue to be supported through a menu of services, including planning,
                         accounting, finance, marketing and sales, transportation, environmental management, operations, etc.
                         It is expected that the project will leverage other sources of funding such as remittances and small
                         loans by building on successful activities in the area piloted through different earlier and ongoing
                         projects. Assistance will also be provided to leverage affordable financial services and training in
                         record keeping and loan application will be provided. For larger collective businesses, the project
                         will help prepare financing plans and applications to lenders. Experience from the ongoing Bank
                         financed COMRURAL and other several successful projects will be taken into account during
                         preparation to define the specific mechanisms and evaluate the risks associated with this approach.

                         Component 3: Nutrition and hygiene (US$6 M)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component aims at improving nutrition education and behavioral change at the household and
                         community level. The component will build on existing interventions related to nutritional education
                         and behavioral change models that have shown to adequately increase food diversity of nutritious
                         food at the individual, household and local level. Three main activities are proposed:

                         i)       Training, technical assistance and communication activities will focus on improving
                         nutrition by encouraging the consumption of nutritious foods and improving knowledge of basic as
                         well as infant nutrition practices. Feeding practices will promote in particular the integration of
                         vitamin-rich foods, counseling and education to improve food consumption in terms of quality,
                         quantity, and variety of the diet; infant and young child feeding practices (improving weaning
                         practices for children aged 6-18 months using nutritious and locally available foods); use of fortified
                         staple foods; involvement of men and other caregivers in education regarding nutrition and maternal
                         and child health. The component will also train agricultural extension workers in all areas related to
                         nutrition.

                         ii)     Studies, data collection, and monitoring will focus on the analysis of community-level data
                         for decision-making, an d development and implementation of monitoring and supportive
                         supervision systems of nutritious food availability and price fluctuation in the different areas of
                         intervention. Some value chain nutritional assessment will be performed to inform policy makers in
                         the constraints encountered by food systems in delivering adequate nutritious diets to rural
                         households.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iii)     Small grants to improve households’ consumption, conditions and community infrastructure
                         to accompany the promotion of local food diversity availability, accessibility and utilization in the
                         areas of intervention. The grants will incentivize the adoption of local micronutrients rich crops to
                         diversify local households’ diets.

                         Component 4: Institutional capacity building and project management (US$ 4M)

                         The component aims at strengthening the national institutional capacity to monitor and evaluate the
                         implementation of the country food and nutrition security strategy and to support the Project
                         Management Unit (PMU). Two main activities will be supported:

                         i)       Capacity building for monitoring and evaluation at two levels: for the overall investment
                         plan – the PIPSA – and for the Alianza para el Corredor Seco, therefore including the proposed
                         project. The component will finance improvement of the monitoring and evaluation system for the
                         PIPSA and the monitoring capacity in the Ministry of Agriculture (SAG) by providing training,
                         software and equipment. The system will build on and further strengthen USAID investment in an
                         M&E system based on recommendations from RUTA (Regional Unit for Technical Assistance that
                         promotes sustainable development and poverty reduction in rural areas of Central America), and
                         capitalize on the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) experience on impact
                         evaluation in the area by establishing a system to monitor, measure, and share results. The
                         strengthening of the food security and nutrition M&E capacity will mitigate implementation risks
                         stemming from the need to articulate an array of GOH ministries and agencies, as well as
                         development and private sector partners, NGOs, etc. The M&E system will be the Government's data
                         point for both GOH and donor funded food security programs and a centerpiece for the new updated
                         PIPSA. Performance data for the ACS will feed into the PIPSA through an M&E system run by the
                         project implementing agency, the MCA-H. Impact evaluation efforts will measure achievement of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expected outcome level results, particularly reductions in poverty and malnutrition, including gender-
                         differentiated impacts.

                         ii)      Project management will finance the incremental cost, equipment, and operational costs to
                         establish and operate a Project Management Unit (PMU) at the Millennium Challenge Account -
                         Honduras (MCA-H). The PMU will manage the proposed project implementation by ensuring that (i)
                         interventions are properly planned, coordinated and aligned with project design and development
                         objectives; (ii) implementation and institutional arrangements and activities are in line with the
                         relevant Bank's fiduciary and safeguard policies, procedures and standards; and (iii) there is due
                         monitoring, oversight and reporting of project implementation and the resulting outputs and
                         outcomes as per a result framework to be agreed during the preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project geographical target area will be within the Corredor Seco, where much of Honduras’
                         extreme poverty and chronic undernutrition is concentrated. The Corredor Seco is a large area
                         defined by dry and variable climatic conditions, and it extends from the border of Guatemala to
                         Nicaragua. It includes many of the poorest municipalities in the country, with 91.7 percent of its
                         population (650,000 people) with an income below the national extreme poverty line (US$1.81 per
                         person per day) and 55 percent suffering from stunting. Producers in the Corredor Seco face far
                         lower productivity than the national average, and are particularly vulnerable to increasing climate
                         variability and change due to low crop diversification, exposure to price changes, and limited access
                         to markets. The agriculture sector is hampered by poor roads, limited investment for irrigation, seeds,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tools, and other basic inputs, antiquated practices, and adherence to low-value crops.

                         The population of the Corredor Seco region is primarily Ladino, although some Indigenous Lenca
                         Peoples live in the western regions. A number of factors contribute to their overall vulnerability:
                         severe poverty, limited access to clean water, a nutrient-deficient diet (largely corn and beans), poor
                         sanitation, and insufficient breastfeeding. The project is expected to fund above described activities
                         in yet undefined municipalities in the departments of Comayagua, Francisco Morazán, and El Paraíso
                         (a final list of the municipalities to be covered is still being discussed and will be finalized as part of
                         the project preparation).

                         Overall, Honduras is ranked as one of the most vulnerable countries to climate change on the planet.
                         Over the last 30 years, 50 natural disasters have cost $4.7 billion and killed 15,500 people,
                         disproportionately affecting harvests and food prices. Leaf rust—an airborne fungus—is ravaging the
                         coffee industry affecting more than 100,000 small producers. Honduras’ endowment of water,
                         forests, and soil is one central foundation for much of the country's economic activity, but is
                         vulnerable to natural shocks, mismanagement, and depletion. Poverty and natural resource depletion
                         are strongly linked. About half of the population of Honduras is rural, 80 percent of which live in
                         environmentally unstable hillside areas practicing subsistence agriculture, and affecting the
                         sustainability of the natural resources. Deteriorating natural resources fail to provide a minimal
                         livelihood to the poor. Rural poverty accounts for 70 percent of all poverty and 58 percent of extreme
                         poverty which is concentrated mostly in the western and southern areas of Honduras. Past experience
                         show that successful poverty reduction in rural areas is linked to the ability of the poor to diversify
                         their livelihoods while conserving the environment. There are communities where farming is not
                         feasible due to dry weather and/or eroded soil condition. Successful poverty reduction in rural areas
                         is linked to the ability of the poor people to diversify and complement their traditional sources of on-
                         farm income through off-farm micro and small enterprises. This offers higher levels of income while
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the diversification of income reduces vulnerability to shocks due to weather and market conditions.
                         Non-farm employment opportunities are often more accessible for rural women. Hence, several
                         public goods are to be produced by the project which justifies the use of public resources.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Millennium Challenge Account Honduras (MCA-H) will host the Project Management Unit (PMU)
                         and be in charge of the project implementation. This includes securing that implementation and
                         institutional arrangements and activities are in line with the relevant World Bank's safeguard policies,
                         procedures and standards, and that there is due monitoring, oversight and reporting of project
                         implementation and results. The MCA-H was created in 2005 with a five‐member Board of Directors
                         with voting right composed of the Vice‐President, the Finance Minister, the Minister of Industry and
                         Commerce, and two representatives of the civil society. The Minister of Agriculture and the Minister
                         of Transport and Public Works seat in the Board as observers with no voting right.

                         The MCA-H has implemented a US$ 205 million Millennium Challenge Corporation compact,
                         demonstrating its implementation capacity across numerous sectors and proved expertise on socio-
                         environmental management. For example, it recently implemented a major road project in Honduras
                         that involved significant involuntary resettlement. However, as an institution it has no previous direct
                         experience in implementing World Bank projects and safeguard policies. Hence, component 4 of the
                         project will support MCA-H to strengthen its capacity in fiduciary, safeguard and M&E aspects.
                           The MCA-H counts with an individual consultant who has substantial experience in the Bank
                           safeguards, and the task team is working with the MCA-H to prepare the project's Environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Social Management Framework (ESMF). The GOH will complement the existing MCA-H technical
                           team in charge of the ESMF preparation by hiring two consultants, one social and other with
                           combined skills and experience in environment and agriculture/rural development. The Bank has
                           provided the GOH selected example Terms of Reference and ESMFs of similar Bank projects in
                           Honduras and other LAC countries. The ESMF will be initially prepared for the GAFSP-financed
                           activities only, but the other ACS development partners are welcome to use it as a good practice
                           guide for the non-Bank related activities. The GOH has an interest in further developing the ESMF
                           during project implementation under component 4 with a medium term objective to develop a single
                           approach to environmental and social impact assessment and management; one set of consistent rules
                           and procedures, regardless of the financing source.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)
                           Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project is proposed as Category B as per
                           BP 4.01                                            OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. No
                                                                              large scale, significant and/or irreversible
                                                                              impacts are foreseen. The project activities are
                                                                              expected to be mostly small-scale and enhance
                                                                              baseline conditions and procedures regarding
                                                                              socio-environmental management and
                                                                              sustainability. The project requires preparation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              of an ESMF that will guide the socio-
                                                                              environmental management of its demand-
                                                                              driven sub-projects (components 1 and 2),
                                                                              which are expected to be between USD 2,000–
                                                                              5,000 per beneficiary, and other activities that
                                                                              could have environmental impacts. Beyond
                                                                              financing agricultural inputs, sub-projects can
                                                                              entail minor investments in productive facilities
                                                                              and equipment that will require socio-
                                                                              environmental management. The ESMF will be
                                                                              prepared to prioritize and guide environmentally
                                                                              sustainable and climate smart agricultural
                                                                              practices under the ACS. Further, the ESMF
                                                                              will include a negative list to secure exclusion
                                                                              of any large scale, significant and/or irreversible
                                                                              negative environmental or social impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes             The Corredor Seco includes at least three
                                                                              national parks and two biological reserves.
                                                                              Further, taken its focus on rural areas and
                                                                 demand-driven nature, OP/BP 4.04 will be
                                                                 triggered to allow funding for sub-projects that
                                                                 would have positive impact on natural habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and/or engage in sustainable use of their
                                                                 resources. Additionally, the ESMF’s negative
                                                                 list will exclude any activity that could lead to
                                                                 conversion or degradation of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Taken the project's focus on rural areas and its
                                                                 demand-driven nature, OP/BP 4.36 will be
                                                                 triggered for its potential relevance mainly
                                                                 under component 2 on alternative livelihoods.
                                                                 Forestry-related project activities are not
                                                                 particularly foreseen, but the project design will
                                                                 neither exclude them. Overall, project activities
                                                                 aim at reducing pressure to deforest for
                                                                 agriculture and/or livestock purposes and
                                                                 promoting agro-forestry.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The project will finance agricultural activities
                                                                 where baseline conditions involve different
                                                                 levels of use of agrochemicals. The project will
                                                                 promote Integrated Pest/Crop Management
                                                                 through project-provided extension services.
                                                                 The ESMF will include a list of prohibited
                                                                 agrochemicals. It will be determined during the
                                                                 ESMF preparation weather green and blue label
                                                                 pesticides will be eligible for project financing.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Honduras has rich archaeological and cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                 resources. The project design does not
                                                                 particularly aim at financing activities related
                                                                 with physical cultural resources. However,
                                                                 taken its demand-driven nature and since the
                                                                 actual sub-project locations will not be known
                                                                 during project preparation, OP/BP 4.11 will be
                                                                 triggered to make sure that component 2 on
                                                                 non-farm rural livelihoods will be able to
                                                                 address potential PCR/tourism-related sub-
                                                                 projects. The project will only allow positive
                                                                 impacts on PCRs; the ESMF’s negative list will
                                                                 exclude any activity that could lead to their
                                                                 degradation or destruction. The ESMF will also
                                                                 guide for applicable archaeological chance find
                                                                 procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The ESMF preparation will determine if any
                                                                 indigenous peoples are likely to benefit from the
                                                                 proposed project activities. Small numbers of
                                                                 indigenous Lenca and Tolupan peoples live in
                                                                                                                                 the Comayagua and Francisco Morazán
                                                                                                                                 departments where project activities will take
                                                                                                                                 place. However, the specific municipalities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 participating in the program have not been
                                                                                                                                 defined yet. Once the eligible municipalities
                                                                                                                                 have been identified, an environmental and
                                                                                                                                 social screening will be carried out. During this
                                                                                                                                 process, the presence of Indigenous Peoples that
                                                                                                                                 meet the four criteria of OP 4.10 will be
                                                                                                                                 assessed. It the event that such groups are
                                                                                                                                 determined to be present within the project area
                                                                                                                                 of influence, the GOH will prepare an
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared, consulted and disclosed prior
                                                                                                                                 to appraisal.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           The project is not expected to require any
                                 4.12                                                                                            involuntary resettlement and it is extremely
                                                                                                                                 unlikely that project activities will result in any
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition. None the less, the
                                                                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) preparation process will
                                                                                                                                 evaluate the likelihood that some small amounts
                                                                                                                                 of land may be required for the construction of
                                                                                                                                 storage facilities, etc. The ESMF will also
                                                                                                                                 include robust screening criteria for voluntary
                                                                                                                                 land donations. In the unlikely event that this
                                                                                                                                 assessment confirms some potential need for
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition, the GOH will prepare a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to
                                                                                                                                 provide simple standards for assessing value,
                                                                                                                                 confirming eligibility and providing
                                                                                                                                 compensation in accordance with OP 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The project will not finance any mayor dam.
                                                                                                                                 However, taken it expects to finance small dams
                                                                                                                                 and irrigation systems, OP/BP 4.37 could be
                                                                                                                                 triggered as a precautionary measure to make
                                                                                                                                 sure the project will be habilitated to adequately
                                                                                                                                 address sub-projects that would depend on an
                                                                                                                                 existing dam.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           The task team is working with the GOH and the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            country lawyer to determine the need to trigger
                                                                                                                                 this policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas within the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Mar-2014
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Consultations in the selected eligible municipalities will be completed before appraisal begins and
                             the ESMF and any other potential safeguard instrument duly disclosed in country and at the
                             InfoShop before the appraisal mission that is planned to take place the first week of June 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Eli Weiss

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                              Date: 16-Feb-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                              Date: 17-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
