INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8252
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Zambia                    Project ID:  P149091
Project Name:   Lusaka Sanitation Project (P149091)
Task Team       Michael John Webster
Leader(s):
Estimated       17-Mar-2015               Estimated    22-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Sanitation (100%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (30%), Municipal governance and
institution building (20%), City-wide Infrastructure and Ser vice Delivery
(25%), Pollution management and environmental health (25%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    315.00           Total Bank Financing:   65.00
-      Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                            Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                   65.00
African Development Bank                                      67.00
EC European Investment Bank                                  136.00
GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU                       47.00
(KFW)
Total                                                        315.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives


﻿The project development objective is to increase access to sustainable sanitation services for the poor
in Lusaka.
C. Project Description
O
The project will have the following three components:
*      Component 1: Sewerage improvements (US$ 30 million). The objective of this component
is to upgrade and expand sewerage systems in the Ngwerere and Manchinchi sewersheds. Priority
upgrading and expansion will be based on priority 1 investments as identified in the Lusaka
Sanitation Master Plan and complying with the agreed eligibility criteria. Year 1 investments will be
in Emmersdale, Chaisa, Ngwerere and Kafue Road. Year 2 to 5 investments will be based on the sub-
project appraisal documents prepared by LWSC and approved by the Bank. The investments will
likely include expansion of sewer networks, upgrading of interceptors and basic repair works on
existing sewage ponds.
*      Component 2: On-site sanitation (US$ 10 million). The objective of this component is to
develop a comprehensive response to the on-site sanitation challenge facing Lusaka and support on-
site sanitation provision in priority areas. This component will focus on priority peri-urban areas that
will not be sewered in the medium- to long-term due to technical and financial considerations.
Investments will include partial subsidy for on-site sanitation facilities, support to the development of
fecal sludge management systems and service providers, and strengthen information and data
management, and promote sanitation and hygiene education. LWSC will support the Water Trusts to
implement this component.
*      Component 3: Institutional strengthening (US$ 7 million). This component will provide
technical assistance (TA) to implement the project, including: Project Management support to
Lusaka Water and Sewerage Company (LWSC) to implement the project including staff, consultants,
seconded staff from relevant institutions and incremental operating costs; and TA to strengthen the
capacity of LWSC to provide sanitation services including TA to improve sanitation operations,
improve overall performance of the utility, equipment for sanitation operations and preparation funds
for future priority investments. The component will also provide financing for the PMU to finance
selected activities for relevant agencies such as MLGH, MoH and LCC to achieve an integrated
approach to service improvements.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project activities will be implemented in the Manchinchi and Ngwerere sewersheds which are
located in the western part of Lusaka city. Year 1 investments have been agreed with LWSC and
include Emmasdale, Chaisa, Ngwerere main collector and Kafue Road main collector. Year 2 to
year 5 investments are yet to be finalized, but will be selected from priority 1 investments (as
identified by the Lusaka Sanitation Investment Master Plan) within Ngwerere and Manchinchi
sewersheds. While the sites are broadly known and there is an indicative list of sub-projects, the
specific sites and works are not yet finalized. The project areas have urban and peri-urban
settlements. It is highly likely that the planning may be poor with little or no provision for service
lanes. Furthermore, uncontrolled property development may restrict access of construction workers
to project site. The project is therefore likely to have negative socio economic impacts on the
settlements and on livelihood patterns which may include interruption of traditional paths, safety of
children in view of trenches, sewer lines disturbing gardens and tuck-shops and physical relocation
of some houses considering the haphazard settlements.


﻿The project is also likely to result in (very limited) involuntary resettlement and disruption of sources
of livelihood. Experiences from other projects in related areas are that there will be pit latrines and
wells which may complicate excavation for sewers. Pit latrine contents tend to affect the area around
O
U       the toilet making excavations around a health risk as often in such areas hand excavation becomes
the most appropriate approach due to limited space. Occupational safety and health of the employees
working on the sewer system and the community are also important aspects. Negative environment
and social impacts may include: (i) water pollution (contamination of both ground and surface
waters); (ii) issues relating to informal settlements; (iii) temporary disruption of livelihood activities;
(iv) occupational safety and health; and (v) public safety and health (including HIV and AIDS).
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will be implemented by the Lusaka Water and Sanitation Corporation (LWSC). Zambia
has an Environmental Management Act that stipulates effluent discharge standards which is
administered by Zambia Environmental Management Agency (ZEMA). Though the borrower has
some staff already working in sewer treatment and pollution monitoring, capacity for implementing
and monitoring safeguards issues is still weak. The project, through component 3, will support the
recruitment of an environmental and social safeguards specialist into the Project Management Unit in
LWSC whose role will be to implement and monitor the mitigation measures described in the ESMP.
In addition, the project will support additional specific institutional capacity building measures to
ensure effective implementation of the safeguards.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will largely generate positive impacts
OP/13P 4.01                             contributing to better health through increased access
to sanitation facilities, reduced incidences of water
borne diseases and awareness on good hygiene
practices.
The Project is classified as environment Category B,
requiring a partial environmental assessment. The
potential negative impacts associated with the project
activities will largely be associated with civil works
emanating from digging of trenches to install the
sewer pipes during the construction phase of the
project. The anticipated negative impacts will be
localized, site-specific and small-scale and might
likely include soil erosion, generation of construction
related solid waste, limited reduced vegetation cover
due to clearing of land to pave way for construction
activities, increased localized noise and dust
emissions due to earth moving equipment and
machinery, and oil spillage from construction
equipment and machinery.


﻿Given that the nature, scope and location of activities
related to on-site sanitation will be determined
during implementation of the project, including the
alignments for laying the sewer pipes, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) will be prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop before
appraisal. In addition, an Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) with appropriate
mitigation measures will be prepared for all year 1
investments.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          Trenching activities associated with expansion of the
sewer main will likely have minimal impacts on
natural habitats such as wetlands and rivers during
the construction phase. The project ESMF will
include assessment for potentially affected natural
habitats and include provisions for any required
mitigation measures to minimize any possible
impacts.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           There are no forests that will be affected by the
project and there are no activities proposed which
promote forest management.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project activities will not promote the use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          The project activities will have no impacts on
OP/BP 4.11                               Physical Cultural Resources. The project areas show
that they are already impacted with the construction
of existing sewers, road network and residential areas
such that the chance of coming across physical
cultural resources are very remote. However, the
project ESMF will incorporate chance find
procedures for construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project areas are densely populated, possibly
BP 4.12                                  including informal settlements. The project is
expected to disturb settlements, requiring land
acquisition leading to temporary or permanent
resettlement, and is likely to disrupt livelihood
activities. However, no major resettlement is
expected in the project. Before appraisal, a
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared,
consulted upon and publicly disclosed in Zambia and
in the Bank InfoShop following a set of public
consultations. Resettlement Action Plans will be


﻿prepared for year 1 investment - and disclosed in
Zambia and the Bank's Infoshop - and for year 2-5
investments, will be prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed before beginning civil works in the project.
afety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No            The project will not support the construction of new
dams or entail rehabilitation of existing dams.
Projects on International     Yes          The proposed project and the resultant sub-projects
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       falls within the sewerage type of projects and are
within the immediate catchment of the Zambezi
River, an international water body traversing, thereby
raising grounds for triggering the policy. The scope
of the project and resultant subproject will not cover
works and activities that would exceed the original
scheme or change the nature of the resultant effluent
to the effect that it can be considered a new scheme.
The project is aimed at improving the quality of the
effluent to reduce the overall pollution load to the
Zambezi River catchment thereby creating grounds
for qualification for notification exemption. LWSC
will therefore seek exemption for the requirement for
notification of riparian states.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project location is not within a disputed area.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 26-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
LWSC has procured consultants to prepare the ESMF, ESMP (for year 1 investments) and the
Environmental Project Brief (for ZEMA) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to be
disclosed by March 1, 2015. LWSC is preparing the RPF and RAP for year 1 investments in-
house, with the assistance of individual consultants.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael John Webster
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)               Date: 12-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)             Date: 19-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


