                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7007
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                               Project ID:    P133018
                            Project Name:      Zhejiang Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P133018)
                            Task Team          Gang Qin
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-May-2014                         Estimated   25-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Wastewater Collection and Transportation (50%), Water supply (20%),
                                               Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       400.00           Total Bank Financing:  200.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    200.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       200.00
                              Total                                                                                       400.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to sustainable water
                           supply and sanitation services in selected villages and towns in rural areas of Zhejiang Province.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Bank supported project will have the following three components.

                                                                        Page 1 of 11
                         Component 1: Improving Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 356 million). This component will
                         invest a total of US$ 356 million, of which US$ 193.5 million is from the IBRD loan, for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction and rehabilitation of water supply and wastewater collection and treatment facilities in
                         the Project Counties. A total of 138 administrative villages (259 natural villages) and 9 rural towns
                         have been identified during preparation, but more villages and towns could be added during project
                         implementation. During preparation, the team has appraised US$ 169 million in subprojects or about
                         47 percent of the total allocation for this component. Each county has already received a nominal
                         allocation from the total amount of the loan, and the remaining 53 percent of investments under this
                         component will be identified and appraised during project implementation, batch by batch, in
                         accordance with the framework approach. Changes may happen to these allocations depending on the
                         performance of different subprojects and Project Counties during implementation.

                         Component 2: Training and Capacity Building (US$ 2.5 million). This component will be fully
                         financed by the IBRD loan. It will provide specific training and assistance to local water companies
                         to improve their technical, financial, and overall managerial performance, including their technical
                         capacity for operation and maintenance of all WSS systems. The identified and agreed areas of
                         technical assistance support include: (a) training for staff of Project Management Offices (PMO),
                         Project Implementing Unit (PIU) and institutions involved in project implementation; (b) training for
                         staff and operators of water companies participating in the Project to enhance their O&M
                         competency; (c) institutional strengthening and capacity building for water companies participating
                         in the Project; and (d) implementation of a program to monitor and evaluate the performance of
                         wastewater treatment stations in the participating villages.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Supervision (US$ 3.5 million). This component is closely
                         linked to the infrastructure investment under Component 1 and will be fully financed by the IBRD
                         loan. It will provide project management assistance to all relevant agencies at both provincial and
                         county level. The identified and agreed areas of technical assistance to be financed by this
                         component include: (a) technical support for the implementation of a framework approach, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reviewing technical reports for subprojects which are eligible for project financing; and (b) support
                         for project management and supervision.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Zhejiang Province, with total population of 54.6 million (2012), is located in the east coast of China
                         with an area of 105,391 km2, of which 70.4% is mountainous areas; 23.2% is plains; and the
                         remainder 6.4% is covered by rivers and lakes. Zhejiang has a sub-tropical monsoon climate, with
                         the clear division of four seasons and abundant sunshine. The average annual temperature is 15°C -
                         18°C and the average annual precipitation is 1,200-1,800 mm. The proposed project counties are
                         mainly in the mountainous and hilly regions of the Province.

                         Four counties in the Province have been selected to participate in the project. They are: Anji County,
                         which is located in the northwest of the Province; Fuyang City, which is located in Qiantang River
                         Basin, upstream of Hangzhou; Tiantai County, which is located in mountainous area of central
                         Province. The river system in the County is Jiaojiang River system; and Longquan City, which is in
                         south of the Province. The main river is Oujiang River.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chongwu Sun (GENDR)


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         Zhefu Liu (GURDR)
                         Ximing Zhang (GWADR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           Based on the project proposal and preliminary
                         BP 4.01                                      screening and scoping during project
                                                                      identification, this policy is triggered, mainly
                                                                      because of the activities under the component 1.

                                                                      The project will have significant benefits in terms
                                                                      of providing improved water and wastewater
                                                                      services for villages and the townships in the
                                                                      selected counties of Zhejiang Province.
                                                                      Investments under Component 1 include civil
                                                                      works for water supply, drainage, wastewater
                                                                      collection, and treatment facilities, etc.

                                                                      Potential negative environmental and social
                                                                      impacts would mainly occur in the construction
                                                                      phase, and they would include soil erosion, noise,
                                                                      dust, and shipping and disposal of construction
                                                                      waste, etc.

                                                                      Category B is proposed mainly because that the
                                                                      impacts are site-specific and few is irreversible,
                                                                      mitigation measures can be designed during
                                                                      project preparation and applied during
                                                                      implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      The following environmental safeguards
                                                                      instruments are proposed: An environmental
                                                                      impact assessment (EIA) and a standalone
                                                                      environmental management plan (EMP) will be
                                                                      prepared to cover the entire project. Social impact
                                                                      should be designed as part of the EIA.
                                                                      Furthermore, an environmental and social
                                                                      management framework (ESMF) is proposed, as
                                                                      an annex to the EIA, for sub-projects that are not
                                                                      known by appraisal.

                                                                      During the preparation of the proposed
                                                                      instruments, WBG’s Environmental, Health and
                                                                      Safety Guideline will be an important reference.
                                                                      A due diligence review will be conducted for
                                                                      existing facilities and projects related to the
                                                                      proposed project.




                                                              Page 3 of 11
                                                                         Public consultation and information disclosure
                                                                         has been conducted following OP4.01
                                                                         requirements during EIA preparation. At least two
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         rounds of public consultation had been carried out
                                                                         with potentially affected persons and other
                                                                         relevant stakeholders through various methods, e.
                                                                         g., questionnaire surveys, interviews and public
                                                                         meetings as needed. The full final EIA has been
                                                                         disclosed locally.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            There were no natural habitats was found through
                                                                         screening and site survey.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Based on current information, the proposed
                                                                         project components are not located in forest areas.
                                                                         Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The proposed project will not procure pesticides
                                                                         nor will it result in the increased use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           There were no physical cultural relics to be found
                         BP 4.11                                         through screening and site survey. Since the
                                                                         chance-find procedure is prepared in the EMP,
                                                                         the policy is triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The project will support selected counties in
                                                                         Zhejiang Province. The task team visited the
                                                                         corresponding villages in these areas and had
                                                                         meetings with the municipal departments in
                                                                         charge of the minority affairs. The task team
                                                                         concluded there is no community of the Chinese
                                                                         minorities identified by the Chinese government
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         in the project area. All of the populations in the
                                                                         project areas are Han people who are not
                                                                         identified by China government as minority and
                                                                         also Han does not fall in the definition of ethnic
                                                                         minority identified by Bank OP 4.10. Thus, OP
                                                                         4.10 is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Some collective land will be required at the
                         4.12                                            township level for waste treatment plants and
                                                                         temporarily during waste water collection
                                                                         pipeline installation. Hence, Bank Involuntary
                                                                         Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 will be triggered. A
                                                                         Resettlement Action Plan is required to mitigate
                                                                         any negative impacts caused by collective land
                                                                         acquisition and temporary land use in the first two
                                                                         years of the project programs. Based on the
                                                                         project features, avoidance to land acquisition,
                                                                         specific to those valuable cultivated, is prioritized
                                                                         at first. Training courses on how to select the sites
                                                                         of waste water treatment plants and the



                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                                             alignments of the waste water collection pipelines
                                                                             were provided for the PMO staff and the
                                                                             consulting team. The task team will review the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             analysis of those site selections. The task team
                                                                             also requested the PMO to mobilize a village
                                                                             committee based project volunteer supporting
                                                                             team consisting of the head of the village
                                                                             committee, the head of the Women associated,
                                                                             highly respected elder because of his/her merit
                                                                             and also representative of the villagers. This team
                                                                             will participate into the project preparation
                                                                             process and later on the monitoring work during
                                                                             civil works. Their roles will be documented in the
                                                                             RAP as a way to enhance local institutional
                                                                             capacity. A resettlement policy framework will be
                                                                             prepared to guide the selection of sub-projects.
                                                                             The RAP and RPF will be prepared and disclosed
                                                                             prior to appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes             Although the project does not finance
                                                                             construction of new dams or rehabilitation of
                                                                             existing dams, some of the project financed
                                                                             infrastructures would rely on the proper operation
                                                                             of nine existing upstream dams—Tianzigang,
                                                                             Fenghuang, Laoshikan, and Fushi Dams in Anji
                                                                             City, and Yanzhangxi 1, Yanzhangxi 2, Ruixiang
                                                                             1, Ruixiang 2, and Zhuyang Dams in Longquan
                                                                             City. Failure of those dams could cause extensive
                                                                             damage to or failure of the new Bank-funded
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             structures. It is assessed that Safety of Dams is
                                                                             triggered.
                            Projects on International        No              Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              Not applicable
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguards

                             Environmental Assessment: The Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered and
                             the project has been classified as Category B. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and a
                             freestanding environmental management plan (EMP) were carried out to determine the key
                             environmental impacts, the mitigation measures and environmental monitoring program and
                             necessary institutional arrangement as well as capacity building development. The documents


                                                                     Page 5 of 11
                         have been prepared on the basis of Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental
                         protection, master plans and environmental plans as well as applicable Bank safeguard policies
                         and Bank group’s Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was no any potential large scale,
                         significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts to be found. From proposed components,
                         following benefits are expected: improve key infrastructure, including water supply and increase/
                         improve wastewater collection and treatment in the selected project towns and villages. It is
                         estimated that about 1.73 million populations would be served by the project, with newly
                         increased water supply capacity 29.24 million tons per year and newly added wastewater
                         collection capacity 53.45 million tons per year. Furthermore, it is expected that 12171 tons of
                         COD and 5667 tons of BOD would be reduced annually when collected wastewater to be treated.

                         The major negative environmental impacts are expected short term mainly during project
                         construction phase, including dust, noise, traffic interruption, etc. For operation phase,
                         management capacity at local level would be a key issue.

                         There were no physical cultural relics to be found through screening and site survey. Since the
                         chance-find procedure is prepared in the EMP, the policy is triggered.

                         Safety of Dams (OP 4.37). The project triggers the Safeguards Policy on Safety of Dams
                         (OP4.37). Although the project does not finance construction of new dams or rehabilitation of
                         existing dams, some of the project financed infrastructures would rely on the proper operation of
                         nine existing upstream dams—Tianzigang, Fenghuang, Laoshikan, and Fushi Dams in Anji City,
                         and Yanzhangxi 1, Yanzhangxi 2, Ruixiang 1, Ruixiang 2, and Zhuyang Dams in Longquan City.
                         Failure of those dams could cause extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-funded
                         structures. Those dams are from 8m to 89m by height, 2.1 million cubic meters to 218 million
                         cubic meters by reservoir capacities, they were built from 1976 to 2011. The PMO has hired one
                         independent dam safety expert (DSE) to (a) inspect and evaluate the safety status of existing dams,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         their appurtenance, and performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner’s operation and
                         maintenance procedures; and (c) provide written reports of findings and recommendations for any
                         remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable
                         standard of safety. The DSE has prepared a Dam Safety Review Report and sent to the Bank. The
                         PMO would also assign special staff to assist the Bank team to ensure the project is implemented
                         in line with the OP4.37. Dam safety plans and emergency preparedness plans have been prepared
                         for the existing dams. During the implementation, the Borrower will prepare Annual Dam Safety
                         Action Plans and provide relevant dam safety information to the DSE and the Bank and arrange
                         field trips when necessary to review safety status the relevant dams, and take dam safety measures
                         recommended by the DSE to improve the safety status when necessary to ensure the safety of
                         dams.

                         Social safeguards

                         The project has significant social benefits to rural populations. It supports the rural sanitations
                         service delivery in selected around 150 village communities in 4 cities/counties in Zhejiang
                         Province. At this stage, 78 village communities in the four cities/counties were selected. Four
                         resettlement action plans (RAP) were prepared to address the land acquisition and resettlement in
                         the engaged 4 cities/counties and a consolidated RAP was prepared to brief the main contents of
                         those 4 RAPs. A resettlement policy framework was prepared to guide the resettlement activities

                                                                   Page 6 of 11
                           for the second stage of the selected village communities. The RAPs provided details on
                           resettlement policy procedures and requirements that will have to be followed during project
                           implementation, including compensation rates, mitigation measures to restore livelihoods, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           institutional and monitoring arrangements. The RAP has been disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop
                           on April 14, 2014.

                           The project will require the permanent acquisition of 6.1hectares of land, including 3.3 hectares of
                           cultivated land and 2.8 hectares of State owned land. The dominant current land use is growing
                           rice. 78.8 hectares of land will be used temporarily during the pipeline installations. The project
                           will require 24,418 square meters of structures, including 6,976 square meters of rural structures
                           and 17,442 square meters of enterprise structures. As the result, the project will impact 518
                           populations by permanent land acquisition and resettlement, and 1,163 populations by temporary
                           land use. No tombs were affected.
                           The task team undertook screening to the minority communities in the project areas. The project
                           area is Han population centralized area without any Chinese minority community in the project
                           area and Han population is not identified as minority by the Bank. The task team concluded that
                           there are no Indigenous Peoples as identified by the Bank are present in, or have collective
                           attachment to the project area.

                           The task team conducted due diligence reviews and concluded that no local funded linkage
                           projects within two years prior to the project identification were identified.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           As designed, the proposed project will improve key infrastructure and public utility facilities in the
                           project areas, including water supply, and increased/improved wastewater collection and
                           treatment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental: Alternatives were mainly considered during the project feasibility study and EIA
                           preparation mainly onas “with and without” project analysis and option comparison for
                           wastewater treatment technologies, which supported the rural wastewater collection and treatment
                           program.

                           Social: Alternative study was considered at the resettlement action plan, e.g. select the sites of
                           waste water treatment plants on the unused land, or hilly land, or less outcome of cultivated land;
                           install the pipelines along roads or less outcome of cultivated land. Comprehensive comparisons
                           were analyzed with consideration of technical, economic, as well as environmental and social
                           factors.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental:

                           The EIA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly addressed the
                           potential environmental and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate
                           measures in the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts.
                           The preparation of EIA followed the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines, as well as
                           Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health and safety (EHS) guidelines.


                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                         The major negative environmental impacts are expected short term mainly during project
                         construction phase, including dust, noise, traffic interruption, disturbance to rivers/streams, short
Public Disclosure Copy




                         term water quality degradation, soil erosion, and shipping and disposal of construction waste etc.
                         A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP
                         summarized the key environmental impacts and detailed the environmental management and
                         supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan,
                         and budget estimates of EMP implementation. It includes sets of Environmental Codes of Practice
                         (ECOPs) for contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to
                         ensure effective implementation.

                         The project would support rural wastewater collection and treatment in about 300 villages. The
                         environmental impacts are as similar as mentioned above. The assessment was carried out for the
                         villages that were selected as the first batch (shortlisted), as detailed in the EIA report. For those
                         villages (long list) that will be determined during project implementation, an environmental
                         management framework has been prepared and included, as a chapter, in the EIA and EMP.

                         The EMP also includes environmental monitoring programs for both construction and operation
                         phases. The parameters to be monitored include noise, dust, and water quality. To ensure the strict
                         and efficient implementation of the mitigation measures proposed, including environmental
                         obligations during construction, a program of monitoring activities has been developed as part of
                         the EMP. Furthermore, chance-find procedure is included in the EMP to ensure the relics, which
                         are discovered during construction, to be protected properly according to relevant national and
                         Bank’s policies and regulations. The project progress reports furnished by the PMO will include a
                         section for EMP implementation and related environmental monitoring reports. In addition,
                         training would be provided to the operators to ensure long term and effective operation of the
                         facilities built under the project.

                         Social: The provincial PMO contracted experienced social safeguards institute to guide the social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safeguards documentation. The resettlement implementation offices were set up in the engaged
                         cities/counties active to participate into the resettlement impact survey, public consultations. The
                         staffs from the PMOs and agencies are getting familiar to the Bank requirement, specific to the
                         safeguards requirement.

                         The social safeguards consultants worked with the design institute in charge of project feasibility
                         study on the selections of the waste water treatment plants and roadmaps of the pipelines. The
                         analytical works were undertaken and the project negative impacts were minimized, and the
                         mitigation measures were developed according to the Bank requirement. The RAPs covering the
                         key resettlement information in project cities/counties were approached. A resettlement policy
                         framework was prepared to guide the second stage of the project and any project component
                         changes that might cause the resettlement and land acquisition and local funded projects that will
                         be linked to the Bank supported project prior to the Close of the Bank loan.

                         Public consultation was the key element to inform the public and receive their feedbacks. The
                         public consultations were undertaken by the consulting institute and the project entities in the
                         project cities/counties to address the importance of the safeguards policy based on the stages of the
                         project preparation. The project preparation was a well-done process to disseminate the Bank
                         requirement on social safeguards and incorporated people’s concerns into the RAPs and also an
                         important process to provide on-job training courses to the engaged agencies in project cities/

                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                          counties.

                           An experienced monitoring consulting firm, independent to the PMO and the project agencies, will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           be contracted to monitoring the resettlement activities and the monitoring report will be reviewed
                           by the Bank twice a year as requested.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Environmental:

                          Two rounds of public consultations were carried out during the EA process. The technique used
                          for the public consultations include surveys using public opinion questionnaires, focused group
                          discussions, public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some project affected
                          persons. The issues raised during these consultations have been incorporated in the EIA and EMP.
                          Furthermore, feedbacks to the concerns and issues collected in public consultation have been
                          provided to the concerned groups and documented in the EA. The EIA and EMP documents and
                          other project related documents have been disclosed locally through websites and local
                          newspapers on March 7, 2014, as required by national and Bank's policies. The English language
                          EIA and EMP have been disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop on April 10, 2014.

                          Institutional arrangement also was determined in the EIA and EMP. Zhejiang Provincial PMO will
                          take overall responsibility to coordinate and oversee the EMP implementation, including
                          management and supervision, training, and preparation of project progress report based on the
                          reports and monitoring information from each project county, etc. Each county PMO will take
                          respective responsibility for EMP implementation, including hiring qualified environmental
                          expertise for environmental monitoring, supervising contractor to implement the mitigation
                          measures, promoting good practice of environmental protection measures and technologies. With
                          related mitigation measures and clauses to be incorporated in the bidding documents and contracts,
                          contractors will have obligation and mandates to implement the EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Social:

                          The social assessment was undertaken. Local people’s concerns were incorporated into the project
                          design and mitigation measures were appropriately undertaken to reduce the negative impacts
                          caused by land acquisition and resettlement relocation. The affected people considered that the
                          project would improve their family living standards and village sanitations. The project
                          stakeholders are the local communities and the people in the engaged cities/counties. The affected
                          people considered the project will give them opportunities to have better living environment and
                          develop their businesses for future tourism at village community basis.

                          Gender analysis was done well. A disaggregated gender analysis in the affected village/community
                          was undertaken by Hehai University with support from local agencies, listening to women’s
                          expectations, and collecting ideas and recommendations that were incorporated in the designs of
                          the project. Gender disaggregated information were also collected and used in the RAP to ensure
                          that women’s interests could be safeguarded during any resettlement implementation. Women will
                          play increasable important roles in the project implementation. The task team and resettlement
                          monitoring institute will continue to monitor gender impacts during project implementation. The
                          project is consistent with the Bank’s approach to promote inclusion as a tool to help increase
                          productivity and reduce disparities. The population currently living in rural villages is mostly


                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                           comprised of women who have stayed back to take care of the family due to the migration of
                           young and middle-age men. In this connection, the project will explore the possibility of providing
                           training for women so that they can assist with the basic maintenance of assets created under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project which could also provide an additional source of income for women.
                           During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations
                           were conducted and will be continuous by the resettlement offices in the engaged cities/counties
                           and also the independent monitoring agency. The project information was disseminated to the
                           displaced families for refining the project design, selections of the project components and the
                           locations of the subprojects.

                           The RAP, resettlement policy framework in the engaged counties/districts were disclosed and sent
                           to Infoshop on April 14, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            18-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            14-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources




                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Gang Qin
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/       Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                          Date: 22-Aug-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
