INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8722
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        South Sudan                Project ID:   P130119
Project Name:   South Sudan Agriculture Development Project (P130119)
Task Team       Maurizio Guadagni
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Mar-2015                Estimated     28-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Agricultural extension and research (45%), Crops (45%), Animal production
(10%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Other rural development (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      70.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            5.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
IDA Grant                                                       50.00
International Fund for Agriculture Development                  15.00
Total                                                           65.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed objective of the project is to contribute to increasing agricultural production and
productivity of participating households in selected project areas. It is envisaged that the project
would help improve the livelihood and food security of vulnerable segments of the population. This
medium term objective complements the ongoing food crisis emergency programs that several


﻿donors are implementing, including the World Bank funded Emergency Food Crisis Response
Project, and would act as a bridge to move from emergency relief to more sustainable recovery.
C. Project Description
The proposed project activities would be organized according to the following three components: (i)
Agricultural extension and farm demonstrations; (ii) Seed production and distribution; and (iii)
Project implementation and management.
o       Component 1. Agricultural Extension and Farm Demonstrations
The objective of this component is to increase agricultural productivity by increasing adoption
ofimproved technologies facilitated through improved access to agricultural extension and farm
demonstration services. An additional long term objective is institutional support to rebuilding the
basic framework of an extension system. Decades of civil war have stifled traditional practices that
ensured farmers' livelihoods in the past. The majority of South Sudanese farmers are applying
inadequate cultivation practices, with extremely low productivity. Many farmers have not adopted
improved technologies due to lack of awareness about such technologies. Yet, local and regional
experience has shown that there are available improved production technologies which can
significantly raise yields of most of the important crops. Agricultural extension is practically non-
existent in the country, with the exception of some ad hoc services given by NGOs, essentially under
emergency programs. The Directorate of Agricultural Production and Extension of the Ministry of
Agriculture is poorly staffed and budgeted, and it has weak capacity for providing technical support
to farmers, States or other local institutions.
This component would have the following subcomponents: (a) strengthening basic extension
services, (b) support for farmers field schools, (c) support for demonstration of improved farming
practices, and (d) strengthening communal land ownership.
Sub-component L.a. Strengthening basic extension services. This subcomponent will start to develop
an extension service-delivery mechanism for disseminating improved agricultural practices to
smallholders. To this end, the project will strengthen the Directorate of Agricultural Production and
Extension to enable it to plan and execute a national extension system that is capable of reaching
small farmers in the country. In order to have a uniform approach to the dissemination method of the
extension messages, the project will support the Ministry in preparing guidelines that will be
followed by public and private actors engaged in delivering extension service. During the preparation
of this component, the team will consider if there is any mechanism which could allow public
financing of extension while creating competition among a variety of providers. Project inputs will
comprise staff training, transportation facilities, provision of incremental funds and technical
assistance.
Sub-component 1.b. Farmer Field Schools are designed to target a group of farmers. This extension
delivery system has been developed and tested in South Sudan by FAO, and is appreciated for its
pragmatism and cost effectiveness. Farmer field schools are managed by trained extension workers
with knowledge of non-formal education methods, and farms are used as basic example for
discovery-based learning. The process respects the experience that farmers bring with them and
facilitates group development. Farmers work in small groups to ensure that each participant's ideas
are shared, his/her uniqueness is accepted, and existing knowledge recognized. The activities are
designed to respond to the immediate needs of farmers and are geared towards encouraging
creativity, inter-dependence and group solidarity. The subcomponent will support adopting this
approach as an important knowledge-disseminating system.


﻿Sub-component i.e. Demonstrations of improved farming practices. In parallel to the dissemination
of improved technologies, the project will finance farm demonstrations to prove the feasibility and
effectiveness of the proposed technologies. This is based on the consideration that farmers tend to be
O
more open to innovation whose benefits they can see with their own eyes and whose feasibility is
demonstrated in real farm conditions. This subcomponent will be implemented through a Demand-
Driven Matching Grant Scheme that will co-finance proposals coming from potential beneficiaries.
The criteria for financing will be detailed in a grant manual whose dissemination will guarantee
transparency.
Sub-component 1.d. Strengthening communal land ownership. Most of the land used for agricultural
production is held under communal ownership. While this ownership, under the oversight of
traditional institutions, has historically been sufficient to secure farmers' land rights and was
favorable to agricultural production, recent developments including legal uncertainties surrounding
communal landownership as defined under the new South Sudanese law (where it is not clear what
rights communities enjoy vis-d-vis the state) and new pressures on community lands, such as those
associated with urban expansion, increasing land values, the commercial exploitation of natural
resources, and the large-scale acquisition of land rights for public or private purpose have threatened
communal land ownership. The sub-component will support a pilot to test the feasibility of
strengthening communal land rights through formalization (survey, mapping and registration of
rights). South Sudan's draft National Land Policy provides for organization of communities into
formal groups and registering their land rights and the project will support the translation of policy
into law an d will also provide support to organizing communities into legal entities and demarcating
and registering their land.
Extension topics. The component will work to increase adoption of simple existing technologies. The
list below provides some example of topicswhich are considered priority to achieve the project
objective:
Agronomical practices: experience shows that adoption of very simple technologies, such as
row planting, can lead to a more homogeneous seed distribution and thus increased yields. Other
simple crop practices, such as improved weeding, crop rotation, particularly when using leguminous
crops which fix nitrogen in the soil, the use of crop residues, mulching, reduced soil disturbance,
intercropping, agro-forestry, etc., can mitigate soil erosion and maintain soil fertility. In addition,
a       there is an interesting experience in Rwanda with compost manure technology which could be
replicated in South Sudan. All of these are Climate Smart Agriculture approaches which are
fundamental to substitute the extremely limited availability of fertilizers due to the high import and
transport costs;
*      Animal Power. Increasing animal power is key in addressing the current labor scarcity and
related high costs; increase weed control, as well as in expanding cultivating land. Although there are
initial cultural obstacles related to the use of cattle for draft animal power, experience in South Sudan
has shown that these can be overcome with an effective extension work and practical demonstration;
*      Improved post-harvest handling. The long and humid rainy season contributes to significant
post-harvest losses in South Sudan, even if a specific quantification is not really available. Various
locally built storage facilities have been tested and provided good results in reducing crop losses.
Likewise, basic processing, such as cassava drying and maize milling and solar drying technologies
can contribute significantly to reduce post-harvest losses. The project will expand these activities
through extension and the demand-driven matching grant scheme;
*      Water harvesting points. One of the problems in many regions of South Sudan is that
precipitations during the rainy season can even be too abundant and lead to flooding, while the rest of


﻿the year is too dry to allow cultivation. Simple water harvesting systems, such as small earth/stone
ridges or cisterns, which allow the catchment of flood water. Such systems can be used to add a
second crop in the rotation, and/or as livestock drinking point. There is some experience with this
approach in the country as animal water points (the so called "hafir") but the team is not aware of
O
any local experience with using this approach for crop production. This would therefore be
considered a pilot;
*      Urban and peri-urban agriculture. Difficult transport, particularly during the rainy season, is
a major challenge to agricultural development and food security. One approach to address this
challenge is to bring agricultural production close to demand, near urban areas. FAO has been
studying urban and peri-urban agriculture, and could provide technical backstopping to carry out this
pilot.
Component 2. Seed Production and Distribution
This component has the objective to increase the domestic production of quality seeds, hence
reducing the dependency on imports. This in turn would reduce the cost of improved seeds to farmers
and consequently increase their use, a key factor to increase productivity.
Availability of quality seeds in South Sudan is inadequate, and the current limited supply is imported
from the neighboring countries, mainly by aid agencies. The Government does not have the capacity
for seed testing and certification, while the private sector does not have the capacity to multiply and
distribute seeds. Farmers' inadequate use of improved seeds is one of the main constraints of the
agricultural sector.
Crop varieties that will be addressed under the component were selected on the basis of the following
two criteria: (i) crops that play a key role in local livelihood; and (ii) regional availability of
improved varieties whose testing process has been completed, including through through the East
Africa Agriculture Productivity Program. They will include, but not limited to:
Recent releases of high yielding maize varieties from the neighboring countries;
Drought, low-phosphorous tolerant, high-nitrogen fixing legumes such as cowpeas, common
beans, chickpeas, pigeonpeas;
*      Short duration, drought tolerant, and aflatoxin free groundnuts;
*      Striga resistant sorghum; and
Mosaic resistant cassava.
The component would support the Directorate of Agricultural Research of the Ministry of
Agriculture to carry out some minimal adaptive research and subsequent release of improved
varieties and to produce foundation seeds. It will comprise the following subcomponents: (a) support
to agricultural research and foundation seed production; (b) development of seed testing and
certification capabilities, and (c) support to seed production and distribution.
Subcomponent 2.a. Support to agricultural research and foundation seed production: This
subcomponent will support the Directorate of Agricultural Research to undertake adaptive research
to test the imported crop varieties for their suitability under South Sudan conditions and to produce
foundation seeds for multiplication by certified seed growers. Institutional aspects such as policy and
prioritization of research will have to be analyzed to decide whether policy changes will be required.
The subcomponent will support this Directorate to import breeder seeds from neighboring countries,
and to produce foundation seeds for multiplication by the private sector under the next sub-
component. The subcomponent will explore possible coordination with the Association for
Strengthening Agriculture Research in Eastern and Central Africa (ASARECA) of which South


﻿Sudan is now a member.
Subcomponent 2.b. The sub-component will assist the Directorate of Agriculture Production in seed
testing and certification. This Directorate is responsible for regulating the quality of seeds, but it has
O
not developed such a capacity so far. Yet, certifying the quality of seed is an important element of
guarantee to farmers. The subcomponent will define a suitable institutional framework for regulating
the quality of seeds and the parameters that constitute a certified seed. The actual testing and
certification of seeds may be carried out directly by the Directorate or through other authorized
entities, such as NGOs, if there will be possibility for cooperation between the public and private
sectors. The subcomponent will support the Government in finalizing its seed policy, as well as in
drafting a seed law to promote an orderly growth of the seed industry. Among other things, the law
should aim at establishing seed standards and rules and regulations that enhance the emergence of a
modern seed industry. Given the infant nature of the seed industry, the project should privilege the
development of simple and clear rules that can be easily followed by seed producers and users. In
addition, the seed law should define institutional responsibilities in regulating the industry. The
subcomponent will finance civil works, equipment, and technical support to build the capacity in
seed testing and certification.
Subcomponent 2.c. Support to seed production and distribution: The subcomponent aims to boost the
embryonic seed business (now consisting of a few seed companies) toward a private seed industry.
The foundation seed produced by Research will be procured by entrepreneurs who will in turn supply
it to their out growers for multiplication and production of certified seeds. There are two possible
seed multiplication models, with three or four generations: (i) breeder-foundation-certified seed or
(ii) breeder-foundation-registered-certified seed. During preparation it will be decided which model
is more suitable for the local conditions. The specific criteria for identifying foundation seed users
will be defined, and they will be tied up to the technical and organizational competence in producing
quality seed. Protocols for producing quality seeds will be developed by the project, mainly by
adapting similar documents prepared in the neighboring countries. The subcomponent will provide
training on seed production to prospective seed growers. To this end, the project will provide funds -
possibly in the form of vouchers - p and technical support to private seed companies to (i) organize
seed multiplication with farmers and their groups; and (ii) procure, bulk, and package the multiplied
seeds, after having them tested and certified.
o       The sub-component will pilot a voucher system to enable the accessing of seeds by vulnerable group.
This will ensure access to improved seeds by these groups and guarantee a certain level of demand
for seed at the initial stages of project implementation. Details on farmers' eligibility with careful
attention to relative vulnerability across the various ethnic groups and modus-operandi of the system
will be worked out during project preparation.
Component 3. Project Management and Implementation
The objective of this component is to allow timely implementation of project activities. The project
implementing agency is the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Tourism, Animal Resources, Fisheries,
Cooperatives and Rural Development. The capacity of this Ministry is weak, as described in Section
C below. The experience under the South Sudan Support to Agriculture and Forestry Development
Project, which was implemented during 2008-12, provided important lessons of experience. The
outcome was rated moderately unsatisfactory because of "poor results from the planned adaptive
research program, poor implementation of M&E and environmental safeguards, the lack of a solid
basis for any meaningful analysis of project efficiency, as well as the low prospects for sustainability
of outcomes". These shortcomings may have been consequence of two issues: (i) the challenge to


﻿implement a development project in a situation which was still under the emergency of recovering
from a long period of war, and (ii) the difficulty to develop a proper collaboration between low paid
and poorly motivated staff of the Ministry and well paid consultants of the technical assistance.
O
)       Both issues were later addressed under the Emergency Food Crisis Response Project, which is
working with a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) under the Directorate of Agriculture Production and
Extension. Through dedicated TA (in Procurement, M&E, Safeguards, and Financial Management)
the PCU has gained considerable experience in managing and implementing World Bank projects
and is now better placed to manage the implementation challenges. At each level (Federal, State, and
County), there will be committees to provide direction and guidance to project implementation. In
addition, in line with the overall ISN objective of building the capacity of government agencies in
South Sudan to execute their mandate, the proposal is for on the ground project implementation to be
carried out by the Country Agricultural Departments (CAD). Due to anticipated capacity constraints
the county level, the CADs will be supported in this role by contracted NGO/TA, which could
possibly include technical agencies. Details of these implementation arrangements will be finalized
during project preparation and will be guided and refined by lessons from previous and ongoing
projects.
The proposed operation would be financed by an IDA Credit. This would facilitate more
Government involvement in project design and implementation. This is mostly positive, even if there
is some risk that the Government may not accept dedicating Credit resources to expensive TA.
During preparation, the team will look at the option to obtain grant co-financing to finance TA.
This component will finance necessary TA and operational costs for the PCU and CADs. The
component will also invest to establish an adequate monitoring and evaluation system, including data
collection, a baseline study and final evaluation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project area has not yet been selected. While the World Bank team would give priority to safer
areas with higher levels of poverty combined with strong agricultural potential, the Government is
concerned about equity and therefore prefers a broader coverage. The selection of the project area
has important implications, therefore during project preparation the Bank team will work with
government on striking an appropriate balance in line with the available resources for the project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Overall capacity of the implementing agency is weak. The Implementation Completion Report of the
South Sudan Support to Agriculture and Forestry Development Project, which was implemented
during 2008-12, states that "Overall, the environmental and social safeguards were not executed as
envisaged under the project". However safeguard compliance has significantly improved under the
ongoing Southern Sudan Emergency Food Crisis Response Project, whose compliance with
safeguard is now rated as satisfactory thanks to hiring a safeguards technical assistance. Indeed an
audit revealed that environmental and social safeguards continued to be implemented adequately at
the NGO level.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
John Bryant Collier (GENDR)
Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)
Varalakshmi Vemuru (GSURR)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment   Yes          It is expected that the project will have an overall
OP/BP 4.01                                positive impact on the environment by improving the
efficiency of resource utilization, such as yield
increase. However some aspect of project activities
may present some risks, such as the increased area
under cultivation to increase production or water
harvesting. Given that less than 4 percent of the total
land area is currently cultivated, the expansion of
cultivated area does not constitute a concern, unless
it is carried out in sensitive or protected areas. Water
harvesting points will be small earth/stone ridges to
allow the catchment of flood water and are not
expected to cause an environmental concern. Crop
practices supported by the project are expected to
have a positive environmental impact. Examples are
improved weeding, crop rotation, particularly when
using leguminous crops which fix nitrogen in the
soil, the use of crop residues, mulching, reduced soil
disturbance, intercropping, agro-forestry, to mitigate
soil erosion and maintain soil fertility even without
the use of synthetic fertilizers. As the location of the
subprojects has not been decided at the time of
project preparation, the government will take a
framework approach to safeguards. The Environment
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) from
the Emergency Food Crisis Response Project will be
updated to fit the project activities and will be
publicly disclosed following consultations with
project stakeholders. The ESMF will include
screening mechanism for sensitive or protected areas
at the subproject level.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD           It is not expected that the project will affect natural
habitats, but this will be confirmed before appraisal.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No           The project is not expected to have any impacts on
the health and quality of forests; nor to affect the
rights and welfare of people and their level of
dependence upon or interaction with forests; and,
(the project does not aim to bring about changes in
the management, protection, or utilization of natural
forests or plantations, whether they are publicly,
privately, or communally owned).
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes          The project will not finance the purchase or support
the use of pesticides. It will rather support the control
of pests through seeds of resistant varieties, such as


﻿Striga resistant sorghum or Mosaic resistant cassava.
Where possible, an IPM will be encouraged and
employed. The IPM will be embedded in the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          It is not expected that the project will have any
OP/BP 4.11                                 archaeological, paleontological, historical,
architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other cultural
significance. This will be confirmed before appraisal.
If by appraisal the team will be certain there are no
physical cultural resources, we will not trigger the
policy. If PCR is present, the policy will be
triggered, and the ESMF needs to discuss the
possible impacts and mitigation measures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          Ethic identity is a strong feature in South Sudan,
4.10                                       including in rural and agricultural areas. The policy
is triggered as analysis by World Bank and other
experts confirms that the overwhelming majority of
people in the project area are expected to meet the
requirements of OP 4.10. Given that agricultural land
ownership and agricultural practices are all strongly
related to ethic identity and traditions, the project
will embed the basic principles of OP 4.10 of a free,
prior, and informed consultation leading to broad
community support, as part of the implementation
arrangements. Indeed elite capture by certain ethnic
groups and the relative vulnerability of the minor
groups could lead to capture of benefits and potential
exclusion from participation and benefits. Therefore
the Project will adopt a vulnerability approach to
mitigate this risk through carefully defined eligibility
criteria for targeting the poorest and mechanisms like
vouchers to reach the vulnerable groups. A
functioning grievance redress mechanism will also
be established. Per the requirements of OP 4.10, no
separate IPP is to be prepared.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No           The project is not expected to have any involuntary
BP 4.12                                    resettlement, including impact on access to land that
would affect livelihoods. On the contrary, the
"strengthening communal land ownership" sub-
component will test the feasibility of strengthening
communal land rights through the formalization of
rights. The PAD will have an annex on land tenure
arrangements.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            No dam or related issues will be addressed under the
project. Water harvesting points will be small earth/
stone ridges to allow the catchment of flood water
and are not expected to cause any dam safety issues.


﻿Projects on International   No            Since the project will not include irrigation, this
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     safeguard will not be triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        The project will not be located in or near disputed
BP 7.60                                  areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Nov-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
During project preparation, the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Tourism, Animal Resources,
Fisheries, Cooperatives and Rural will hold a set of public consultations, informed by the
implementation experience of similar Bank-funded projects and a number of reports and analytical
studies in South Sudan. The consultations will be held in a culturally appropriate manner and will
include evaluation of potential adverse and positive effects of the project. This will also inform the
development of targeting strategy to reach the vulnerable groups. A social assessment will be
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed. In addition, the ESMF from the Emergency Food Crisis
Response Project will be updated. The updated ESMF will undergo a set of public consultations
and will be disclosed in South Sudan and in the Bank InfoShop prior to project appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maurizio Guadagni
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)             Date: 31 -Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Sector Manager:        Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)                    Date: 02-Feb-2015
o
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


