                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA8622

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Mar-2014, 29-May-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Senegal                          Project ID:    P146859
                                                      Parent         P122476
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     SN: Public Res. Management Strengthening (P146859)
   Parent Project    Public Financial Management Strengthening Technical Assistance Project
   Name:             (P122476)
   Task Team         Maimouna Mbow Fam
   Leader:
   Estimated         02-Jun-2014                      Estimated   31-Jul-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTMW                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Central government administration (100%)
   Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:         30.00                Total Bank Financing:      30.00
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                           30.00
     Total                                                                                 30.00
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a         Yes
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                            Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The PDO is to enhance the credibility, transparency, and accountability in the management and
   use of central government finances. The project aims to support the modernization of the Public
   Financial Management system in Senegal. It includes four components: (1) Strengthening Fiscal
   Policies and Planning; (2) Improving Budget Execution Processes; (3) Strengthening the capacity
   of external audit and legislative oversight; and (4) Project Management.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   To enhance budget credibility, transparency and accountability mechanisms in the use and
   management of central government financial resources.

   The project aims to support the modernization of the Public Financial Management system and
   the implementation of a Public Sector performance based system in Senegal.
   It includes five components: (1) Strengthening Fiscal Policies and Planning; (2) Improving
   Budget Execution Processes; (3) Strengthening the capacity of external audit and legislative
   oversight; (4) Project Management; and (5) Supporting the implementation of a Public Sector
   Performance-Based Management and Results Monitoring system.
3. Project Description
The proposed changes introduced under additional financing will involve and impact the following:
(i) Component 2: Improving Budget Execution and Reporting Processes ; (ii) additional allocation to
component 4 “Project management” to cater for additional implementation management and
coordination costs over the extended life of the project; and (iii) inclusion of a new component
“Supporting the implementation of a Public Sector Performance based Management and Results
Monitoring.
The description of the changes introduced, in terms of new components and/or activities under
additional financing, are provided below.
Component 2- Improving Budget Execution and Reporting Processes

The additional activities under this component are aligned to those defined in the already existing
sub-components. They will therefore not contribute to triggering a change in the PDO. The AF will
not also change the objective of the component as a result of the need to scale up to create greater
development impact.

Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening budget execution processes: With the introduction of an
additional activity under this sub-component to support the improvement of public procurement
systems, the sub-component’s objectives will be amplified from that of: “Supporting the Treasury
Department in the implementation of the WAEMU Directives by developing and disseminating an
operation manual as well as conducting capacity-building activities for accountants, and supporting
the decentralization of commitment authority to line ministries” to “Supporting (a) the Treasury
Department in the implementation of the WAEMU Directives by developing and disseminating an
operation manual as well as conducting capacity-building activities for accountants, (b) the
decentralization of commitment authority to line ministries, and (c) strengthening public procurement
systems for improved budget execution”.

Sub-component 2.2: Enhancing budget management information systems: With the variation in


                                            Page 2 of 6
scope of this sub-component “Enhancing budget management information systems”, the objective of
the sub-component will thus change from “enhancing the respective processing capacities and
functionalities of the existing ICT-based PFM information systems platform as well as provide the
necessary capability to establish seamless interfaces between the five core systems themselves” to
‘establishing a platform for an integrated financial management information system for budgeting
and core treasury operations and interfacing with other core systems with a view to enhancing the
credibility, reliability and performance of the revenue and expenditure management systems of the
government of Senegal”.

The original project conceived the enhancement of existing PFM ICT-based tools as well as the
provision of the requisite capability to establish seamless interfaces between the two core but
separate budgeting and treasury financial management information systems (ASTER and SIGFIG)
with five other core systems (tax, customs, debt and payroll including pensions). The activities
envisaged for implementation under the original project will remain as they would not negatively
impact the outcomes envisaged under the newly introduced activities but would rather be leveraged
for enhanced development outcomes. At the request of the Government, and based on clear
justification to scale up the original project deliverables and increase the impact on improved
economic governance, the additional financing will provide the enabling basis for ensuring that the
government budgeting and treasury systems are fully integrated under a uniform platform and that
this platform forms the basis for interfacing with six other separate systems (tax, customs, debt,
payroll, pensions and banks). A fully integrated system that interfaces with the other core systems
will provide a viable technical and functional basis and system of recording and controlling of public
finances and thus better support the process of de-concentrating and decentralizing expenditure
commitment authority to service delivery agencies consistent with the WAEMU Directives. At
present, commitment authority is centralized at the budget department, who will continue to
determine the fiscal envelope and budget ceilings, the aggregation of the overall government
budgets, and the release of spending authorities to MDAs (based on cash availability).

An IFMIS project team will be constituted and will include technical, functional and training and
change management specialists as well as MDA-based focal persons. The team will be instrumental
in supporting the project implementation processes, aligning with the quality assurance consultants in
the conduct and validation of the operational and user acceptance tests, defining change processes
engineered by the WAEMU Directives, and coordinating the capacity building aspects across MDAs
in systems operations and upkeep. To further strengthen the IFMIS project team, external consultants
would be recruited to pair with civil servants and facilitate knowledge transfer as needed. The IFMIS
Project Manager, under the authority of the overall project coordinator will, with support from the
quality assurance consultants, be in charge of coordinating and negotiating on even terms with the
implementation partner on the delivery of the technical, business requirements, and change
management aspects of the IFMIS implementation. Annex 3 provides a detailed description of the
activities introduced under the additional financing for the sub-component.

Component 4- Project Management

Additional allocation to the Project Management component will cover implementation management
and coordination costs over the extended life of the project. In addition, one of the critical success
factors in implementing a core IFMIS component in a project is the establishment of a core team led
by an experienced IFMIS Specialist (serving as IFMIS project manager) who reports to the Executive
Secretary (the overall Project Coordinator.



                                             Page 3 of 6
The proposed changes will also involve the addition of A New Component - “5” – Supporting the
implementation of a Public Sector Performance-B based Management and Results Monitoring
system.

The objective of this new component is to support the Government of Senegal in (i) monitoring the
overall achievements of (i) the targets set by the National Economic and Social Development
Strategy (SNDES) and Plan Senegal Emergent (PSE) (ii) establishing the reforms initiated in order
to implement a Public Sector Performance-Based Management System, that will be applicable to
both the Central Government level (Ministry of Finance and Line Ministries) and the State Owned
Enterprises (SOEs) and autonomous agencies and, (ii) strengthening the system of monitoring and
evaluation of results. This component aims at implementing a comprehensive set of monitoring tools
which will enhance informed and timely decision-making abilities at key levels within the
Government. Strengthened monitoring and evaluation is not only critical for the overall management
of the targets set by the Plan Senegal Emergent, but is essential for the entire performance based
management system adopted by the Government. The component includes two sub-components: (i)
improving the Performance-Based Management System and the Central Government’ s Oversight of
SOEs and public agencies; and (ii) strengthening the implementation of a Result Monitoring
Framework with available M&E information and results/causal chains underlying the Government’ s
program (for the National Economic and Social Development Strategy (SNDES) and Plan Senegal
Emergent -(PSE).,
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be located in Dakar, Republic of Senegal

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Demba Balde (AFTCS)
Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       No
 BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

 Pest Management OP 4.09            No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
 4.12
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No




                                            Page 4 of 6
   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The project is focused on PFM reforms and would not trigger any safeguards policies.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     N/A
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     N/A
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
     on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     N/A
  B. Disclosure Requirements
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
   Not applicable
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?


                                             Page 5 of 6
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Maimouna Mbow Fam
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Renaud Seligmann (SM)                     Date: 29-May-2014




                                             Page 6 of 6
