                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7561
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Niger                              Project ID:    P145261
                            Project Name:      Public Sector Capacity and Performance for Service Delivery (P145261)
                            Task Team          Robert A. Yungu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Mar-2014                        Estimated   31-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTP4                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General public administration sector (60%), General education sector (20%),
                                               Health (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Other public sector governance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        40.00           Total Bank Financing:  40.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                40.00
                              Total                                                                                      40.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to strengthen public investment management capacity and civil
                           servant performance evaluation processes in targeted ministries in order to improve service delivery
                           outcomes
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         A.      Description

                         Lending instrument and components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.        The proposed Project will be financed by an Investment Project Financing (IPF) grant of
                         US$40.00 million. The modality for project implementation will consist of a combination of results-
                         based financing, which will be linked to the achievement of agreed-upon performance indicators
                         (Disbursement Linked Indicators - DLIs) and the reimbursement of a portion of eligible
                         expenditures, as well as technical assistance support, where disbursements will be based on outputs.

                         2.      The Project supports the implementation of critical capacity-building aspects of five national
                         programs developed under the overarching PDES: the State Modernization Program (PNME), the
                         3rd Public Financial Management Reform Program (PRGFP3), the 3N Initiative, the National Health
                         Sector Program (PDS) and the newly adopted Education Sector Program (PSEF). The Project will
                         particularly target twelve eligible expenditure programs (EEP) which are part of the five selected
                         sector programs.

                         3.       The approach adopted by the Project is to support government-identified solutions to core
                         public sector capacity and systems deficits and to apply these in selected sectors to produce tangible
                         development and service delivery results in the medium term. The Project’s support for national
                         programs facilitates a locally developed and owned and, therefore, feasible reform program. The
                         focus on results-based disbursements is intended to address the collective action problem and create
                         direct incentives to encourage the different sector actors to perform.

                         4.       In order to address the governance risks associated with security in the country, the project
                         will also provide limited support to the security sector in the form of (i) horizontal capacity building
                         in core planning and budget execution functions and (ii) technical assistance to strengthen sectoral
                         financial management information systems. The project follows carefully the recommendations of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the 2013 Public Expenditure Review on Security and takes into account the institutional mandate of
                         the World Bank Group with respect to the sector.

                         5.          The project components will be phased to ensure that capacity-building support, technical
                         assistance and coaching on change management and rapid results delivery will be available early
                         during project implementation. In a low-capacity environment this will help to ensure that
                         implementing ministries receive the necessary support to assist them in achieving the DLIs.


                         A.      Project Components

                         6.            There are two components. The first finance selected sub-programs (Eligible
                         Expenditures Programs – EEPSs) that support key government programs and the PDES. Funding of
                         this component will be results-based and dependent on achievement of agreed-upon DLIs. The
                         second will provide technical assistance to facilitate the achievement of the program results included
                         in the first component.

                         COMPONENT 1 Supporting Service Delivery Results

                         7.         The Project will target its support towards the achievement of results in twelve sub-


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         programs (EEPs) within five selected sectors: civil service, public financial management, agriculture,
                         health and education. With respect to the selection of sectors, the Project places the emphasis on
                         sectors of particular importance to the country’s economic and social development. It seeks to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         harness existing momentum in sectors in which reform efforts have advanced and in which existing
                         Bank or other development partner support is available. In so doing, the Project seeks to further
                         catalyze results and fill the gap often identified in vertical sectoral support by (i) addressing systemic
                         and cross-cutting public sector issues that affect sectoral performance; and (ii) introducing targeted
                         rapid results initiatives and change management processes, as well as creating incentives to reward
                         performance in achieving results. The selection of sectors has been guided by the Government and
                         takes into account the comparative advantage of the Bank and those of other donors engaged in
                         supporting the Global Capacity Building Program.

                         Sub-component 1.1 Core Public Sector Reforms

                         8.      This sub-component seeks to strengthen the Administration’s absorptive capacity to facilitate
                         more rapid and efficient public investment management and service delivery. It will target critical
                         aspects of human resource management and financial management by supporting the Government’s
                         PRGF3 and State Modernization programs. As described below, Component 2 will provide
                         complementary training and equipment to support the achievementof these reforms.

                         Sub-component 1.1.1 Human Resource Management

                         9.          The project will support the Ministry of Civil Service and Administrative Reform and
                         the High Commission for State Modernization (HCME) to effectively carry out critical elements of
                         the Government’s National Policy for State Modernization (PNME), which includes the Program for
                         Administrative Reform. The objective of this new program is to promote improved performance and
                         productivity of ministries and individual civil servants and strengthen the accountability of ministries
                         towards the Executive. The project will focus on sub-program two of the State Modernization
                         program and will assist the Government in improving and consolidating merit-based promotion and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         performance management processes.

                         10.     EEP 1: Development of Human Resources Performance Evaluation System. Given the
                         limited progress made to date in developing and applying a robust HR performance system, the
                         Ministry will first focus on laying the regulatory and organizational framework needed to apply the
                         Civil Service Organic Law 2007/27 . The Ministry will then focus on supporting the development,
                         adoption and annual review of results-based performance contracts for ministries (plans d’actions)
                         and civil servant managers (lettres de mission) in selected se ctors.


                         Sub-component 1.1.2 Public Financial and Investment Management

                         11.      This sub-component will support the Government’s ongoing PRGFP3 program, more
                         specifically in the areas related to budget execution and public investment. The objective of this
                         reform is to improve public investment management systems and strengthen budget formulation,
                         monitoring and reporting processes. The project will target multiple sub-programs of the PRGFP3 :
                         (i) sub-program 5, strengthen public policy budgeting at the center and sector levels (MTEF); (ii)
                         sub-program 8, improve capacity for planning and execution of public procurement; and (iii) sub-
                         program 9, rationalize and improve treasury management.



                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         12.      EEP 2: Establish coherent and realistic MTEFs (global and sector). Main activities will focus
                         on the strengthening of the capacity of the Directorate of Budget and the Directorate of Financial
                         Reforms of the Ministry of Finance, as well as the Directorates in charge of financial resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (DRFM) and planning (DEP) in line ministries. Special attention will also be given to improving the
                         relevant information systems to ensure swifter preparation and implementation of policy-based and
                         multi-year programs.

                         13.     EEP 3: Strengthen capacity for public procurement. This sub-program seeks to introduce
                         procedural guidelines to simplify administrative, financial and procurement processes. It will focus in
                         particular on: (i) mainstreaming the use of procurement plans in line ministries, and (ii)
                         strengthening the capacity of the General Directorate of Procurement (DGCMP). A key goal of this
                         program is to ensure that all line ministries are able, at the beginning of fiscal year, to present a
                         procurement plan of at least 10 million CFA for implementation during the year.

                         14.      EEP 4: Rationalize and improve cash flow management. This sub-program will help to
                         ensure that treasury plans are based on the amount and flow of expenditures. The treasury plan of the
                         DGTP will be established based on the commitment plan issued by the DGB. The sub-program will
                         also facilitate the closure of bank accounts owned by public entities and the consolidation of
                         remaining accounts.

                         15.      EEP 5: Strengthen capacity for planning, programming, monitoring and evaluation of
                         development programs. This sub-program will help: (i) build the planning and prioritization capacity
                         of the planning staff in line ministries; (ii) reorganize the structures in charge of public investment
                         planning and equip them with tools to facilitate mandatory preliminary studies (technical feasibility,
                         cost estimations and impact); and (iii) create a hierarchical system of risk-based controls for public
                         investments and reorganization of the structures charged with public investment execution to
                         formalize the modalities for cooperation between the General Directorate of Planning (DGP), the
                         General Directorate of Budget (DGB) and the General Directorate of Treasury and Public
                         Accounting (DGTCP).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.2 Agriculture Sector

                         16.      This sub-component will assist in accelerating the pace of implementation of the large-scale
                         3N program. The project will specifically support the first and second sub-programs of the 3N
                         initiative with the objectives of enhancing agricultural production and improving the coordination
                         and implementation of the 3N initiative.

                         17.      EEP 6: Improve agricultural productivity and revenue generation in irrigated areas. The
                         project will target improved agricultural production by supporting rapid results-driven processes to:
                         (i) strengthen advisory and technical support to agricultural producers; and (ii) increase the
                         availability of high grade seed and irrigation equipment.

                         18.     EEP 7: Improve productivity of rain-fed agriculture . The project will improve productivity
                         by providing advisory and technical support to agricultural producers.

                         19.      The agriculture sector sub-component will complement existing vertical World Bank support
                         to the sector. In particular, it will enhance sectoral capacity to execute public investments in
                         irrigation in complementarity to the support for irrigation provided by the Niger Basin Water

                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         Resources Development project, the GFRP2 and the PRODEX. It will also focus on upstream issues
                         of productivity to supplement the extensive support currently provided to downstream transformation
                         and market-related activities through the PRODEX.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.3 Public Health

                         20.      The objective of this sub-component is to improve the coordination, planning and human
                         resource allocation associated with the implementation of the National Health Program. The Pro
                         gram will target sub-programs three, four and six of the PSF. Sub-program three seeks to facilitate
                         the sufficient provision of competent and motivated human resources across health facilities. Sub-
                         program four targets the availability of quality pharmaceutical supplies and sub-program six aims to
                         enhance governance and leadership in the sector.

                         21.      EEP 8: Adequate human resources deployment. The sub-program seeks to facilitate the
                         sufficient provision of competent and motivated human resources across health facilities. The project
                         will support the application of a human resources planning and projection system, the introduction of
                         regional competency pools and the elaboration and application of modern sectoral performance
                         management and incentive systems.

                         22.     EEP 9: Good provision of medicines and key medical inputs. The sub-program will help
                         medical facilities to prevent stock-out of essential medical supplies. The reform of the
                         pharmaceutical agency, the Nigerien Society of Pharmaceutical Industries (Société Nigérienne des
                         Industries Pharmaceutiques – SONIPHAR), the streamlining of logistics processes and stronger
                         accountability measures will be critical. The Project will assist: (i) improved regulatory arrangements
                         in conformity with the WAEMU directives; (ii) the identification of reform options for the
                         privatization/ restructuring of SONIPHAR; (iii) the elaboration of a strategy to combat the illicit
                         market for pharmaceuticals; and (iv) tools to support the management of pharmaceuticals across the
                         supply chain.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         23.       EEP 10: Governance and Leadership. Under this sub-program, support will be given to
                         enhancing the planning, FM and monitoring and evaluation functions of the Ministry of Health in
                         order to strengthen governance and leadership in the implementation of the PDS. It will include
                         support for the development of Service Delivery Indicators (SDI) on the performance of health
                         facilities (see Annex 2 for details).

                         24.     The support proposed through this sub-component will complement the World Bank’s
                         support of the health SWAp for PDS implementation which is expected to be extended through a
                         new operation.


                         Sub-component 1.3. Education

                         25.      The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen management and institutional capacity
                         in the sector to support the implementation of the new Education Sector Plan. In close coordination
                         with the World Bank-managed basic education project under preparation (financed by the Global
                         Partnership for Education), the Program will support more efficient use of resources for improved
                         access and quality through the development and implementation of a human resource management
                         strategy and improvements to the monitoring and evaluation system. The Project will assist the
                         Ministry of Primary Education in the following two programs:

                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                         26.     EEP 11: Improve teacher deployment and management. A strategy will be developed, as
                         well as a performance-based management system based on best international practices.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         27.      EEP 12: Information system and M&E. Under this sub-program, support will be given to
                         developing a process for the collection, analysis and capitalization of quantitative information on the
                         performance school facilities across the country through the roll-out of facility based surveys and the
                         introduction of Service Delivery Indicators (see Annex 2 for details). This process will ensure the
                         availability of up-to-date, disaggregated quantitative data at the facility level which will enable the
                         Ministry of Primary Education to make assess input avai lability, and human resource skills and
                         effort at the facility level, measure the effects of key policies (evaluate progress) and take informed
                         corrective actions (for instance teachers’ ratios). The publication of SDIs will also help to strengthen
                         accountabil ity of service providers towards the final beneficiaries.


                         COMPONENT 2 Technical Assistance

                         28.     This component will complement the first component by financing selected inputs for which
                         resources are not readily available in the national budget or for which the Government has requested
                         more intensive supervision support. Funding of this component will not be linked to DLIs. It will
                         finance IT systems and equipment and technical assistance.


                         Sub-Component 2.1 Provision of Information Systems and Equipment

                         29.      The objective of this sub-component is to facilitate efficient and effective public expenditure
                         and service delivery through the installation or upgrading of modern information systems. The
                         activities envisaged under this sub-component reflect the priorities identified by the Government and
                         they complement the extensive assistance already provided by other partners including the French
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cooperation, BAD, UNDP and EU. The project will specifically finance:

                         (a)     Upgrading the planning and M&E systems in selected sector ministries. Current planning
                         systems lack dynamic decisional tools to allow for quick information updates about the project life
                         cycle. Planners need to have ready access to reliable and current information in order to develop
                         appropriate procurement plans and conduct effective monitoring and evaluation.

                         (b)      Interconnection of planning and financial management systems. Existing sectoral and
                         investment planning systems are not adequately connected to financial management systems and this
                         limits the ability of administrators to plan and manage procurement on the basis of reliable and up-to-
                         date information on the availability of financial resources. Current advances in technology mean that
                         dynamic dashboards can quickly be built, without significant financial investments, through the
                         extraction of data across various information systems.

                         (c)     Upgrading of the security sector’s financial management information systems. Following
                         the recommendations of the Public Expenditure Review of the Security Sector 2013, and in view of
                         the Bank’s limited institutional mandate for engagement in the sector, technical assistance will be
                         directed to strengthening the financial management information systems in the sector. This support
                         has specifically been requested by the Government and satisfies the World Bank legal criteria for
                         engagement (see Annex 9).

                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         (d)     Consolidation of the information systems managed by the National Statistical Institution.
                         The support will assist the National Institute for Statistics (Institut National des Statistiques - INS) to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upgrade its systems and ensure better interconnections with sectoral information systems to enhance
                         the centralization and capitalization of data on development outcomes.

                         (e)       Support for the development of tailored one-stop customs and anti-money laundering
                         information management systems. In order to address critical upstream bottlenecks that affect public
                         investment management, the project will provide support for th e development of information
                         management systems associated with (i) the creation of a one stop shop for customs transactions; and
                         (ii) the anti-money laundering and financing of terrorism initiative led by the National Unit for the
                         Treatment of Financial Information (Cellule Nationale de Traitement des Informations Financiers –
                         CENTIF).

                         Sub-component 2.2. Change Management

                         30.     The objective of this sub-component is to cultivate a culture of collaboration for results and
                         ownership of reform processes from within the Administration. Support will be given to the
                         application of change management tools and targeted training in leadership, coaching, results-based
                         management and rapid results initiatives. The process will be built around:

                         (a)    a series of seminars engaging high-level leadership to improve leadership skills, identify
                         major challenges, build consensus, mobilize various levels of stakeholders and establish a favorable
                         environment for implementation by the teams.

                         (b)      technical assistance to support the roll-out of successive cycles of rapid result initiatives
                         (RRI) to achieve results fast (100 days) in the implementation of small-scale, tangible results in the
                         agriculture, health and education sectors. These results will be aligned with high-level leadership
                         priorities, which will be initially defined during the high-level seminars. The technical assistance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will support the attainment of the sectoral DLIs under component one whilst simultaneously
                         reinforcing a performance-driven and results-oriented culture in the public administration.

                         (c)    a network of international coaches will support the progressive development of national
                         coaches to support national capacity building and the institutionalization of a results-oriented culture.
                         National coaches will be selected on the basis of international standards and will be institutionally
                         anchored in one or more training national institution (eg. The National Administration and
                         Magistrates School - ENAM).

                         Sub-component 2.3 Training

                         This sub-component will focus on building the skill set of civil servants to undertake core public
                         sector management functions through in-service training. The project will strengthen national
                         training institutions and establish possible partnerships with foreign institutions, in order to upgrade
                         the skills of current staff and also build the skill base of new entrants to the civil service. It will
                         facilitate large scale training of civil servants and young people by local institutions such as the
                         ENAM and, on an exceptional basis, by foreign training institutions. In particular, support will be
                         given to (a) develop an accreditation program for national training institutions to ensure good quality
                         and standardized training, (b) improve upon, and scale up, modular training of civil servants in
                         planning, budgeting, monitoring, procurement, tax management and customs administration; and (c)

                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           develop an accreditation program for trained civil servants.

                           Sub-component 2.4 Project Implementation Support
Public Disclosure Copy




                           31.     Additional support will be provided to the Monitoring and Evaluation Unit in the Ministry of
                           Planning to optimize coordination and swift implementation of the project. Given the added
                           responsibilities that the unit will assume with respect to the implementation of the Project, extensive
                           support will be required from both the Government and the donors to strengthen the unit’s operating
                           capacity. This sub-component will accordingly support: (i) the recruitment of and payment of
                           qualified staff (not public servants), as well as the provision of technical assistance and other
                           capacity building inputs; (ii) a monitoring and evaluation review; and (iii) annual project external
                           audits.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                        Page 8 of 10
                           None
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Robert A. Yungu
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Abdoul Wahabi Seini (RSA)                    Date: 30-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Miria A. Pigato (SM)                         Date: 31-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
