                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6832

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                       Project ID:      P146464
                            Project Name:      Multipurpose Disaster Shelter Phase II (P146464)
                            Task Team          Anna C. O'Donnell
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Sep-2014                      Estimated        18-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDA                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%), Primary education (22%),
                                               Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (13%), Gen eral water, sanitation
                                               and flood protection sector (30%), Other social services (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (67%), Other public sector governance (10%),
                                               Rural policies and institutions (15%), Other social develop ment (8%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    370.00                     Total Bank Financing:        370.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  370.00
                              Total                                                                        370.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to improve the protection of the coastal population to
                           cyclone and extreme weather events through improving access to effective multi-purpose shelters in
                           fourteen coastal districts
                           C. Project Description
                         Component A: Reconstruction and Improvement of Multipurpose Shelters (US$352 million).

                         Bangladesh has considerable experience with cyclone shelters since massive construction started
Public Disclosure Copy




                         after the 1970 cyclone. Lessons learned and continuous upgrading of the designs has led to a
                         typology of shelters today that feature resilience to high wind speeds, safe haven for animals and
                         livestock, water supply systems, separate sanitation facilities, and safe haven from storm surges. In
                         addition, the shelters serve as community centers or primary schools during the year, providing wider
                         community benefit to the coastal population.

                         Subcomponent A1: Construction of new shelters (US$220 million). This component will finance the
                         construction of 550 new shelters. The construction of shelters will be carried out by LGED as
                         multipurpose buildings for primary schools, community centers or other community buildings, in full
                         coordination with local government, local communities and education departments. Lessons learned
                         from ECRRP demonstrated that the construction of new shelters increased access for coastal
                         communities to essential protection from cyclones, and also provided local communities with
                         necessary community amenities, such as schools or community centers through the multi-purpose
                         uses of the buildings. Shelter designs were updated under ECRRP to include separate toilet facilities
                         for men and women, and to include a safe space for livestock.

                         Subcomponent A2: Rehabilitation of existing shelters (US$40.5 million). This subcomponent will
                         finance repairs and improvement to existing shelters that are damaged or cannot be used as shelters
                         due to inadequacies. These shelters will be rehabilitated to bring these back into use, and to update
                         and modernize the facilities.

                         Subcomponent A3: Improvement of communication network to shelters (US$71.5 million). This
                         component will support reconstruction of around 550 kilometers of rural road networks as well as
                         communication networks to the shelters constructed under the project to make them more accessible.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent A4: Social and Environment Management (US$8 million). As part of the designs of
                         the construction activities, social assessments (SA) and environmental impact screenings (EIS) will
                         be required. This component will finance costs associated with the preparation of Social
                         Management Plans (SMP), Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) and Environmental Management Plans
                         (EMP). While it is expected that land acquisition will be minimal under the project, this component
                         will also finance any costs associated with land acquisition and resettlement. An Environment and
                         Social Management Framework is currently being prepared. All site specific SMP/RAP and EMP
                         will be reviewed by the Monitoring and Evaluation consultants (component B3) and cleared by the
                         Bank.

                         Subcomponent A5: Design and construction supervision of shelters (US$12 million). This
                         component will finance the costs associated with consulting services for surveys, designs and
                         construction supervision of multipurpose disaster shelters and all works covered under
                         subcomponents A1 to A3. This would include facilitating consultations with the local communities in
                         identifying sites, needs and suitable design of the shelter as well as coordination with other
                         government agencies and stakeholders, such as the Ministry of Education, local governments, and
                         upazilla and union level governments.

                         Component B: Project Management, Monitoring and Technical Assistance and Training (US$18
                         million)
                         This component will support the Government in implementing the project, and in coordinating all
                         project related activities, monitoring, technical assistance and training. It will include: (B1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) within the Local Government Engineering
                         Department; (B2) support for the operation of the Project Monitoring and Coordination (PCMU)
                         within the Ministry of Planning (US$3 million); (B3) monitoring and evaluation; and (B4) technical
                         assistance and training in such areas as disaster management and preparedness, construction, contract
                         management, financial management, preparation of environmental impact screenings and social
                         assessments, and preparation of EMPs and RAPS (US$4 million). The monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) activities would provide continuous feedback to the Government, the Bank, and
                         implementing agencies on the project’s performance and impact of its various components, so that
                         corrective actions could be undertaken in a timely manner. They will also supervise implementation
                         of the overall EMF and SMF, careful review and monitoring of sub-project specific social and
                         environmental management plans and impact screenings, and supervision of their implementation.

                         Component C - Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million)

                         In the case of a major natural disaster, the Government may request the Bank to re-allocate project
                         funds to this component (which presently carries a zero allocation) to support response and
                         reconstruction Disbursements under an Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) will be
                         contingent upon the fulfillment of the following conditions: (i) the Government of Bangladesh has
                         determined that an eligible crisis or emergency has occurred and the Bank has agreed and notified the
                         Government; (ii) the Ministry of Finance has prepared and adopted the Contingent Emergency 30
                         Such a reallocation would not constitute a formal Project Restructuring. Response (CER)
                         Implementation Plan that is agreed with the Bank; (iii) Local Government Engineering Department
                         has prepared, adopted, and disclosed safeguards instruments required as per Bank guidelines for all
                         activities from the CER Implementation Plan for eligible financing under the CERC. Disbursements
                         would be made either against a positive list of critical goods and/or against the procurement of
                         works, and consultant services required to support the immediate response and recovery needs of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government of People's Republic of Bangladesh (GoB). All expenditures under this component,
                         should it be triggered, will be in accordance with BP/OP 8.0 and will be appraised, reviewed and
                         found to be acceptable to the Bank before any disbursement is made.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed MDSP will expand the coverage of cyclone shelters to all coastal districts facing high
                         risks from cyclones, and where comprehensive early warning systems are currently present. The aim
                         of the project will be to meet at least two thirds of the required shelters for nine coastal districts. The
                         project interventions for construction and improvement of shelters will be located in four Sidr-
                         affected coastal districts including Bhola, Barisal, Pirojpur and Patuakhali and five other coastal
                         districts including Chittagong, Cox’s Bazaar, Feni, Laksmipur and Noakhali.

                         Cyclone shelters are constructed for multipurpose use largely for education centers. These
                         multipurpose shelters are generally established on the lands of existing education centers, community
                         centers, and offices. Shelter connectivity under ECRRP has been developed using the existing
                         designated roads in agreement with the community and in circumstance when additional lands for
                         expansion of the roads was needed, with the land owners along those roads. As MDSP targets
                         expansion of the facility in critically vulnerable areas, private lands may also be used in unavoidable
                         circumstances, for construction of new shelters and improvement of the existing ones and for access
                         road construction.

                         The existing educational institutions, especially the primary schools – under the project - will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developed into multipurpose disaster shelters enabling an improved environment for class works by
                         the students and school managements including safe building, furniture, water supply tube-wells,
                         sanitary latrines, electricity and the like. The improved buildings of the schools/community centres
                         will be used as shelters only in events of cyclone and flooding. The existing use of the premises will
                         continue without any interruption from any corner, public or private.

                         Location of new disaster shelters, site for improvement of existing shelters and alignment of shelter
                         connecting roads will be identified through all inclusive consultative process. Population, location,
                         vulnerability of communities to disasters and availability of shelters around the location will provide
                         the bases for demand and availability of land for civil works construction will provide site readiness.
                         Final site selection will review and confirm agreement of the communities and availability of lands
                         for construction. In case of voluntary donation of land, direct purchase or exchange of lands for sites
                         (building and/or road), the land owners must voluntarily agree on such acts and LGED will execute
                         the land taking with documentary evidences under national legal framework. In circumstances that
                         lands through donation, direct purchase or exchange are not available but the intervention is critically
                         required; LGED will go for involuntary acquisition of lands, as the last resort, complying with the
                         requirements of the Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Voluntary donation, direct purchase
                         or exchange of lands will be executed in a manner that the acts are voluntary and are at the unbiased
                         will of the owners without any threat or coercion.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will be implemented by LGED under the Local Government Division (LGD) of the
                         Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and Cooperatives (MLGRDC). LGED has long
                         working experience with IDA investments complying with the safeguard policies of the World Bank
                         and it is currently implementing the ECRRP for construction and improvement of multipurpose
                         disaster shelters in the coastal region. Depending on the project objective, designs and expected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts, ECRRP was designated as safeguard category B and only policy OP/BP 4.01 was triggered.

                         LGED – under the current ECRRP - is carrying out SA and SMP for all packages of shelter
                         construction and improvement works, development of shelter connecting roads and construction of
                         killas (cattle shelters). The SAs are comprehensive capturing data on disaster vulnerability of the
                         impact area population, availability of lands, social issues and demand for improved shelters and
                         connectivity. LGED is reviewing the land ownership of sponsoring schools/community shelters,
                         obtaining documentary evidences of land ownership and attaching them with the SA reports. Social
                         screening is being done for all sites and the filled out screening formats are signed by the participants
                         and certified by the heads of sponsoring institutions. Project activities are largely being carried out
                         within existing lands of the sponsoring institutions and in special circumstances of unavailability of
                         lands, voluntary donation, direct purchase or exchanges have been resorted to. The ongoing ECRRP
                         provides the lessons that site selection should also confirm the transfer of lands in the name of the
                         sponsoring institutions before contract bidding. To ensure this, SA and SMP should identify all social
                         issues with a management plan for LGED to execute before contract bidding. Additional lands may
                         need to be acquired for social safeguards compliance of connecting roads and critical sites for shelter
                         construction.

                         All environmental and social issues and impacts of the project at subproject sites will be captured
                         through a comprehensive EMF and an SMF, those will lay out the policy requirement, likely impacts,
                           environmental code of practice and how these will be addressed under the project. Once the sites of
                           the shelters are known, site specific Environmental Impact Screening, Social Assessment, and
                           Environmental and Social Management Plans, and, if applicable, a Resettlement Action Plan, will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           prepared and submitted at the time of detailed designs of the shelters. These will be independently
                           reviewed by Environment and Social Specialists, to be retained by the PMU. Lessons from previous
                           project will be utilized for site selection and improved design of shelters and connecting roads.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nadia Sharmin (SASDC)
                           Md. Akhtaruzzaman (SASDS)
                           Iqbal Ahmed (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The new shelter/school building with access
                           BP 4.01                                            road will be constructed at the same premises of
                                                                              the existing schools. The specific locations will
                                                                              be identified during implementation stage The
                                                                              environmental impacts of the project are
                                                                              expected to be mostly construction related and
                                                                              limited within the project boundaries. These
                                                                              impacts can be mitigated through
                                                                              implementation of appropriate environmental
                                                                              code of practice and environmental management
                                                                              plan.

                                                                              In view of subprojects nature, the project is
                                                                              classified as a Category ‘B’ and the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              policy OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure
                                                                              that the sub project design and implementation
                                                                              will be focused on reducing adverse impacts and
                                                                              enhancing positive impacts. Since the exact
                                                                              location of the project will not be known before
                                                                              implementation, a framework approach for both
                                                                              environment and social will be adopted for
                                                                              proper environment/social management.

                                                                              Environment and Social Management
                                                                              Framework will lay out the policy requirement,
                                                                              likely impacts, environmental code of practice
                                                                              and how these will be addressed under the
                                                                              project. Once the sites of the shelters are known,
                                                                              site specific Environmental Impact Screening
                                                                              and Social Assessment will be conducted, and,
                                                                              if applicable, a Resettlement Action Plan, will
                                                                              be prepared and submitted at the time of
                                                                              detailed designs of the shelters. These will be
                                                                 independently reviewed by Environment and
                                                                 Social Specialists, to be retained by the PMU.
                                                                 Lessons from previous project will be utilized
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 for the improved design of shelters by
                                                                 incorporating environmental and social aspect.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project does not involve any conversion or
                                                                 degradation of critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The new shelter cum school building with
                                                                 access road under the project will be constructed
                                                                 at the open premises of the existing schools.
                                                                 There is no possibility for affecting forest
                                                                 consist of either closed forest formations or
                                                                 open forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The activities of the project will not involve any
                                                                 pesticide application and no environmental and
                                                                 health risks are associated
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The new shelter cum school building with
                         BP 4.11                                 access road under the project will be constructed
                                                                 at the open premises of the existing schools,
                                                                 There is no possibility of any adverse impacts
                                                                 on archaeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                 architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other
                                                                 cultural resources resulting from project
                                                                 activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project will be implemented in nine coastal
                                                                 districts. A tiny little portion of the country’s
                                                                 tribal communities (having characteristics like
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 indigenous language and culture laid out in OP
                                                                 4.10) are living in these districts. The tribal
                                                                 peoples in the plain land do not possess any
                                                                 ancestral territory and they are living within the
                                                                 mainstream population. They have their own
                                                                 language and culture but also speak national
                                                                 Bangla language. However, the project will be
                                                                 socially inclusive to share the benefits of the
                                                                 project equally to the tribal peoples and will
                                                                 exclude any activity that may affect them
                                                                 adversely. Application of OP 4.10 on
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples to a specific work package,
                                                                 will only be known, when the sites will be
                                                                 identified and detailed engineering design done.
                                                                 LGED is, however, is developing a Social
                                                                 Management Framework (SMF) that will cover
                                                                 the rights of the ethnic minority groups and
                                                                 tribal peoples and will also include the
                                                                 indigenous peoples framework. LGED will
                                                                include the exclusion criteria and a social
                                                                inclusion mechanism/framework in the SMF.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project aims to maximize access to disaster
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                   shelters for the coastal population and reduce
                                                                their vulnerability to cyclones and extreme
                                                                weather events. This objective will be achieved
                                                                by improving existing multi-purpose shelters,
                                                                constructing new disaster shelters, and
                                                                improving roads and connectivity in the area.
                                                                The construction and improvement works will
                                                                be carried out within existing lands of local
                                                                educational and social institutions. However,
                                                                lands under some of these existing
                                                                infrastructures are likely to be under authorized
                                                                and unauthorized private uses (residential,
                                                                commercial and others). Infrastructure
                                                                improvement may also need additional lands in
                                                                critical situations to be obtained from private
                                                                ownerships or occupancies. Although minimum,
                                                                additional private land and/or displacement of
                                                                private people from public lands are likely in
                                                                cases of development of shelter connecting rural
                                                                roads. Application of Bank policy on
                                                                Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) will be
                                                                understood only when sites for construction or
                                                                improvement of shelters will be identified and
                                                                design. The SMF will therefore include
                                                                resettlement policy framework (RPF), consistent
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                with the OP 4.12, to address social safeguard
                                                                issues arising at project design and
                                                                implementation stage. The social inclusion
                                                                framework with the SMF will guide inclusive
                                                                design and implementation. The SMF will guide
                                                                LGED in carrying out social assessment of each
                                                                construction site (shelters and connecting
                                                                roads), and prepare social management plan
                                                                (SMP), resettlement action plan (RAP) for
                                                                annual construction packages in compliance
                                                                with the OP 4.12 and where applicable with the
                                                                OP 4.10. The elements of RPF will guide LGED
                                                                in preparing RAPs or Abbreviated RAPs as
                                                                necessary. The SMP will be prepared for sites/
                                                                packages where additional lands will not be
                                                                acquired and displacement of peoples will not
                                                                be involuntary covering GRM, consultation,
                                                                M&E, and the like. The SMF should provide an
                                                                entitlement framework outlining eligibility and
                                                                                                                                 entitlement based on tenancy, extent of losses
                                                                                                                                 and vulnerability, and intuitional and legal
                                                                                                                                 framework for management of voluntary land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 donation, direct purchase and exchange of lands
                                                                                                                                 for construction new shelter buildings and
                                                                                                                                 shelter connecting roads.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not finance any new dams.

                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project activities does not disturb any river,
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            canal, lake, or similar body of water that forms a
                                                                                                                                 boundary between, or any river or body of
                                                                                                                                 surface water that flows through, two or more
                                                                                                                                 states or any bay, gulf, strait, or channel
                                                                                                                                 bounded by two or more states.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The subprojects will not fall any disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguards-related study has already begun and is expected to be completed by August 31,
                                      2014. Separate environmental and a social management frameworks will be prepared based on
                                      information for the targeted district and lessons learnt from ECRRP. Both frameworks will be
                                      disclosed before appraisal: (i) at the InfoShop, and (ii) in-country at publicly accessible locations
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Anna C. O'Donnell

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 21-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                                                                                               Date: 23-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
