                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5135

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kosovo                           Project ID:      P133829
                            Project Name:       Kosovo Water Security and Canal Protection Project (P133829)
                            Task Team           Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Gha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           24-Nov-2014                      Estimated        31-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSAR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Irrigation and drainage (40%), Water supply (25%), General energy sector
                                                (25%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Water resource management (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                      Total Bank Financing:          17.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             3.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   17.00
                              Total                                                                         20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the project is to improve the Iber-Lepenc Canal efficiency and
                           strengthen the Iber Basin protection and management. This will be achieved through investing in
                           ensuring the canal structural safety, improving the canal conveyance and operational efficiencies,
                           protecting the canal water from the major pollution effluents, and developing the technical capacity
                           of the service provider, the Iber Company, as well as of the water-resource regulator, the Ministry of
                           Environment and Spatial Planning (TBC).
                         C. Project Description
                         This project objective will be achieved by undertaking the investments needed to secure
                         uninterrupted and good quality water supply from the Iber-Lepenc Canal. The ongoing feasibility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         study will analyze a list of potential investments and measures. The project would consist of three
                         components: (i) Canal infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization, (ii) Water resources protection
                         and monitoring, and (iii) Project management support.

                         Component 1: Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Modernization

                         This component would focus on physical improvements to the deteriorated sections of the canal and
                         its structures as well as improved hydraulic operations. Activities under this component would
                         include:
                         (i)      Works for canal repair and increased stability and for protection against renewed physical
                         damage from landslides, and unstable soils (through lining, abutments, foundations, cuttings,
                         aqueducts, culverts, tile drains to control uplift pressure). This may include installing bituminous
                         geo-membrane or equivalent on top of existing concrete lining, if structurally sound.
                         (ii)     Equipment for better management of gates and regulation of water flows, water monitoring
                         (for the main Iber canal and for its secondary delivery system), including provisions for remote
                         monitoring and controlling of related structures. A relatively advanced SCADA could be installed
                         given the importance of the canal. The equipment may also include instrumentation for optimized
                         operational schedule of the Gazivoda reservoir and its downstream balancing reservoir in Pridvorica,
                         integrated with the proposed canal SCADA (to balance the releases for hydropower with the releases
                         for the Iber canal).
                         (iii)    Developing few emergency/balancing reservoirs along the canal (short-term storage along
                         the canal to bridge peak water demand and temporary outages for repair purposes). For instance the
                         government and donors have been considering to build a 15-day emergency supply reservoir for
                         Kosovo C Power Plant (TBD). The project will attempt to apply this principle of short-term water
                         storage through building emergency reservoirs for the other benefiting sectors. The feasibility study
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will explore this possibility and provide recommendations for such investments under the proposed
                         project. The project will attempt to apply this principle of short-term water storage through building
                         emergency reservoirs for the other benefiting sectors. The feasibility study will explore this
                         possibility and provide recommendations for such investments under the proposed project.

                         Component 2: Water Resources Protection and Management

                         The project may also cover related water resources management options in the Iber-river basin (as
                         related to the water balance of the Iber basin), including, inter alia:
                         (iv)     Protection of the canal against renewed pollution, accidental pollution and other threats and
                         man-made disruptions (through fencing, selective covers, or parallel interceptor drains with
                         vegetative beds). This would help address the ambient water quality in the canal, particularly to meet
                         the inflow quality requirements for the power plants and for the new Pristina Water Treatment Plant.
                         (v)      Understanding impact from groundwater that is hydro-geologically connected to the canal.
                         This would include, as a first priority, studying the geo-technical aspects which could affect the
                         stability of the canal conveyance system; and as a second priority, studying and monitoring the
                         quantity and quality of the groundwater resource within the Iber basin. The Swiss donor office in
                         Kosovo has expressed interest to support the groundwater monitoring activities, likely through
                         project co-financing.
                         (vi)     Supporting the ongoing preparation of an EU-compliant River Basin Management Plan
                         (TBC).
                         (vii)   Studying/demonstrating few on-farm measures to improve water-use efficiency and reduce
                         diffused pollution in irrigated agriculture (building on EU-funded study currently being undertaken
Public Disclosure Copy




                         under the Irrigation Department of the Ministry of Agriculture) (TBC).
                         (viii) A rapid study on the potential hydrological and operational implications (relevant to m
                         anagement of water in the Iber canal), of a tentative proposal to establish a "pumped storage
                         hydropower plant" which would involve pumping water from Pridvorica Lake ("lower reservoir") up
                         to Gaziovoda Reservoir ("upper reservoir") during non-peak hours and releasing it back down to the
                         Lake to produce hydropower during peak hours.

                         Component 3: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation

                         This component would cover overall project management as well as coordination among the
                         different ministries/agencies involved in water management as related to the Iber-Lepenc Canal. The
                         Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be located within the Iber-Lepenc Company, will be
                         responsible for day-to-day management of project activities and will work with relevant staff in other
                         ministries such as the Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning on the safeguard aspects of the
                         project (Environmental and Social Assessment and Management Framework, ESMF, and
                         Resettlement Policy Framework, RPF) as well as on Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).

                         The project will also establish a Project Steering Committee, comprising high level officials from the
                         various ministries engaged in the water sector (MESP, MED, Water Task Force, MAFRD) who
                         would work together to provide advice and oversight for project activities. Given the multi-sectoral
                         nature of water use, the Committee would be charged with reaching agreements as necessary in the
                         efficient management and distribution of water from the Iber canal. As for gender development, the
                         socioeconomic studies under the ESMF will include the identification of any vulnerable groups,
                         including internally-displaced people or refugees, ethnic groups such as Roma, landless laborers, and
                         the rights of female household heads and women in common-law unions. The public consultation
                         and grievance procedure under the RPF/ESMF will comprise measures ensuring that such vulnerable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         groups are consulted during subproject design and implementation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is along the Iber Lepenc CKanal, as the core of the investment project loan will
                         be on the rehabilitation of the canal. The Iber Canal is 49 km long with designed capacity of 10 m3/
                         s. Its conveyance efficiency is about 65 % (to be verified by the feasibility study), as there are
                         operational and seepage losses which would be reduced by the project. lining is in very poor
                         condition. Additionally, the project will invest in equipment for optimization of the reservoir
                         management.

                         The Ibër water infrastructure—its reservoirs, canals, and related structures / works, was designed
                         more than 30 years ago. At that time, there were plans to irrigate 20,000 ha in Central Kosovo which
                         capacity of the canal allows, however, in 20120 less than 1,000 ha were irrigated (due to market
                         limitations and also due to the encroachment of urban areas into rural lands).

                         Social Safeguards - As the project will invest in the rehabilitation of the canal, one obvious impact
                         will be temporary land acquisition of the right of way to the canal and doing the rehabilitation works.
                         Depending on from the feasibility study, and where the location of the short term storage will be
                           permanent, land acquisition impacts might be expected (and much less likely involuntary
                           resettlement or demolition of structure in use).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As Kosovo is relatively new country, capacity for EIA is assessed to be low. Due to the low EIA
                           capacity in Kosovo, the borrower is assisted through the Feasibility Study for Protection of Iber
                           Canal (P143130) TA, financed by the WBIF, which includes guidance on preparing the
                           environmental and social safeguards documents. The scope of the Feasibility study (FS) includes ,
                           the preparation of a site-specific EIA/EMP for the first year of project implementation and an ESMF
                           for the remaining rehabilitation investments (i.e. the same consultant is helping the government to
                           prepare both the FS and EIA/ESMF documents, which is allowable for a Category B project).
                           The FS consultant will coordinate with the Ministry of Environment and include all the required/
                           additional provisions in the scope of EIA if the Ministry concludes that the EIA will be required
                           according to national legislation. The consultant will also assist the client in coordinating the EIA
                           and RAP with relevant agencies, as the client will consult with concerned groups likely to be affected
                           by the investment project and with local NGOs on the environmental and social aspects of the
                           project. The implementing agency, Iber – Lepenc Irrigation Company, also has a low EIA capacity.
                           These capacity issues will be tackled through the capacity building component of the project.

                           The Ministry of Environment comprises a department tasked with the land acquisition and
                           resettlement activities, with previous experience in World Bank requirements related OP/BP 4.12.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)
                           Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              For project preparation, a Feasibility Study (FS)
                           BP 4.01                                              is being prepared, as well as an EIA with EMP
                                                                                for at least the first year of project
                                                                                implementation (or for the site-specific
                                                                                investments known by the end of the FS
                                                                                preparation), together with an environmental
                                                                                and social management framework ESMF for
                                                                                the remaining planned investments.
                                                                                The project will finance solely rehabilitation of
                                                                                the main Iber channel and there will be no
                                                                                additional construction, extension or widening.
                                                                                The project however might support construction
                                                                                of additional reservoirs which will serve during
                                                                                temporary outages for routine or emergency
                                                                                repair purposes, or to bridge peak water
                                                                                demands. The feasibility study and EIA will
                                                                                determine the need, the number, and location of
                                                                                needed reservoirs (if any).
                                                                                The team considers the impact of works and
                                                                intervention to be site-specific; few if any of
                                                                them irreversible; and in most cases mitigation
                                                                measures can be easily designed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Although there are a number of planned off-
                                                                takes from the Iber canal (a new power plant
                                                                (Kosovo C), a new water supply and intake for
                                                                Pristina and Mitrovice water supply) these
                                                                planned investments are not considered to be
                                                                associated/linked with the present project
                                                                because they are expected to proceed with our
                                                                without the canal upgrading.
                                                                Each of the planned projects will have an EIA
                                                                carried out under national law and/or the
                                                                requirements of involved IFIs (e.g. KFW) or
                                                                private investors.
                                                                The EIA and ESMF will be disclosed and
                                                                consulted with the public through website and
                                                                public consultation meeting.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   Based on provided information, the works
                                                                envisaged on the existing Iber channel will not
                                                                impact any protected areas, will not have
                                                                adverse impact on natural habitats and would
                                                                not lead to the significant loss or degradation of
                                                                any Critical Natural Habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   Based on provided information the channel
                                                                rehabilitation will not affect forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   Although the canal provides water for irrigation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                studies have shown that market access/
                                                                conditions, rather than water, are the primary
                                                                constraint to agriculture in the service area.
                                                                Thus, increased availability of water is not
                                                                expected to lead to an expansion or
                                                                intensification of agriculture. The project will
                                                                not support extension of irrigation services. The
                                                                use of pesticide and fertilizers is a source of
                                                                pollution of Iber Channel.As the use of
                                                                pesticides and fertilizers is a source of limited
                                                                pollution of Iber Channel, the project might
                                                                support demonstrating a few on-farm measures
                                                                to improve water-use efficiency and reducing
                                                                diffused pollution in irrigated agriculture. The
                                                                EIA will look into these issues, if relevant to the
                                                                project area and the PDO.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The project rehabilitation works will not impact
                         BP 4.11                                in any way physical or cultural resources. Due
                                                                to envisaged earthworks, EIA and EMP will
                                                                have chance finds clauses.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   OP 4.12 is triggered because the area through
                         4.12                                   which the canal passes is densely populated, so
                                                                some of the protection measures (e.g. fences
                                                                along canal banks) are likely to require some
                                                                minor land acquisition, though not expected to
                                                                require any physical relocation. In addition,
                                                                land acquisition would probably be required for
                                                                the storage reservoirs if they are included in the
                                                                project (pending the FS outcome). A RAP will
                                                                be prepared for the first years’ works, which
                                                                will be defined prior to Appraisal, and an RPF
                                                                for works to be defined and designed in the
                                                                following years.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes   The flow of Iber canal is regulated by Gazivoda
                                                                dam. The dam specialist and the team will
                                                                review recent studies (DHV 2004 and 2012) of
                                                                the dam’s structure and function and determine:
                                                                (i) whether any additional assessments are
                                                                needed, and (ii) measures need if any to ensure
                                                                the safety of the dam and the downstream
                                                                investments and population. Under the EU
                                                                financed Kosovo Irrigation Rehabilitation
                                                                Project, Dam Safety assessment was carried out
                                                                by DHV Consultants in 2004. The report
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                assesses the structural safety of the 5 dams
                                                                (including Gazivoda) and concludes that their
                                                                relatively recent construction and good building
                                                                standards have prevented development of major
                                                                emergencies thus far. However, on all dams
                                                                safety issues are emerging (piping, bulging,
                                                                sagging, etc.) and concerns are arising regarding
                                                                the adequacy of the spillway and emergency
                                                                procedures. The report accepts that repair is not
                                                                yet a high priority but recommends vigilance
                                                                and closer follow-up. An additional report with
                                                                similar findings was prepared in 2012. The
                                                                balancing/emergency reservoirs that may be
                                                                introduced along the canal are of the shallow
                                                                low-risk type in connection to OP4.37.
                         Projects on International        Yes   The water in the Iber canal is abstracted from
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   the Iber river which, downstream from the
                                                                reservoir and after its use in Kosovo, returns to
                                                                Serbia and flows into the Morava and from
                         there to the Danube. The requirements for prior
                         notification of riparian countries on significant
                         investments on the river are complicated since
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Serbia and other downstream riparians on the
                         Iber-Morava-Danube system do not recognize
                         the Government of Kosovo.

                         The proposed project will finance solely canal
                         repair / rehabilitation and therefore the team
                         considers it to be rehabilitation of existing /
                         ongoing scheme. Possible addition of
                         equipment for better management, and few
                         emergency or balancing reservoirs along the
                         channel, would not change the purpose of the
                         canal, nor appreciably change the Iber-river
                         water quantity or quality.
                         This implies that the project will not cover
                         works nor activities that would develop the
                         original scheme, change its nature, or so alter or
                         expand its scope and extent as to making it
                         appear as a new or a different scheme.
                         Therefore the opinion of the team is that the
                         project will not appreciably change the quality
                         or quantity of water flows to the other riparians;
                         and will not be adversely affected by the other
                         riparians' possible water use.

                         Thereupon, the team intends to seek an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         exemption to the notification requirement,
                         provided that the EIA outcome corroborates the
                         above. Per the advice from LEGEN, the team
                         could seek an exemption from the notification
                         once there is enough information (e.g. from the
                         draft EIA) indicating there is no appreciable
                         impact on the quantity or quality of the water
                         flowing back to Serbia, especially as a result of
                         building small balancing reservoir(s) along the
                         canal, if any. Even if a small reservoir is built,
                         canal operators are aware that the river flows
                         required by Serbia need to be maintained
                         (including the minimum environmental flow for
                         the Iber/ Sitnica river, estimated at 0.50 m3/sec
                         in monthly average or 1.5 m3/sec in monthly
                         peak, which can be easily met given that the
                         “as-designed” canal discharge ranges from 3 to
                         15 m3/sec).
                                                                                                                                 Prior to appraisal, e.g. after obtaining the EIA
                                                                                                                                 results, the team will re-consult with LEGEN.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Early November 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Gha

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Dec-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                                                                                            Date: 18-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
