                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5551
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina             Project ID:    P143580
                            Project Name:      Bosnia and Herzegovina Energy Efficiency Project (P143580)
                            Task Team          Jari Vayrynen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Dec-2013                        Estimated   13-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (95%), Public administration- Energy and
                                               mining (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Climate change (80%), Other social development (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        32.00           Total Bank Financing:  32.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 32.00
                              Total                                                                                       32.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to demonstrate the benefits of energy efficiency in public sector
                           buildings and support the development of scalable energy efficiency financing models.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will be supported by a US$32 million IDA Credit for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BH),

                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         which will be on-lent to the two entities through Subsidiary Agreements. The project will consist of
                         three components implemented separately in each entity: (1) an investment component; (2) a
                         component to support scalable mechanisms and build capacity; and (3) a component for project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management. The paragraphs below summarize the main activities financed under each component.

                         Component 1: Energy efficiency investments in public facilities. This component will support energy
                         efficiency investments (‘subprojects’) in schools, hospitals and clinic centers. A small number of
                         other public facilities (e.g., elderly homes, orphanages, other administrative buildings) may also be
                         included. The component will finance energy efficiency upgrades, as well as related technical
                         consultancy services (e.g., energy audits, technical and social monitoring and evaluation, technical
                         designs, supervision and subproject commissioning). These investments will reduce the energy
                         consumption of selected public buildings, and demonstrate the economic viability of energy
                         efficiency improvements, including reduced recurring energy costs and associated public
                         expenditures. In addition, the subprojects will generate demonstrable co-benefits, such as reduced
                         CO2 emissions and improved indoor comfort levels.

                         Component 2: Support for the development of scalable financing mechanisms and capacity building.
                         This component will support the development of sustainable energy efficiency financing mechanisms
                         in the public sector, strengthen implementation capacity and help to increase public awareness on
                         energy efficiency.

                         Component 3: Project Management. This component will ensure effective project management by
                         the PIUs through financing additional experts, trainings for PIU staff, and covering incremental
                         operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented at various sites located throughout Bosnia-Herzegovina, in entities,
                         the Federation of BiH, and Republika Srpska. Since the precise locations are not known at the time
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of Appraisal, an Environmental Management Framework document that includes an Environmental
                         Management Plan was established, which shall in turn be revised and adapted for each and every
                         project location, once determined.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jorge E. Villegas (ECSSO)
                         Esma Kreso (ECSEN)
                         Sandra Kdolsky (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes               Since the first component will finance small-
                          BP 4.01                                             scale construction activities on improving energy
                                                                              efficiency in public buildings, a framework
                                                                              document (EMF) with a template EMP will
                                                                              provide guidance on mitigating the related
                                                                              environmental impacts, including management of
                                                                              dust and noise, safety of the construction site,
                                                                              management of construction and other wastes.




                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09               No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No               There is a potential for works on some parts of
                            BP 4.11                                               the building may be under forms of protection as
                                                                                  cultural heritage. In such cases, the framework
                                                                                  document (EMF) has included provisions that the
                                                                                  works will receive adequate guidance from the
                                                                                  Entity or State Level authorities on monument
                                                                                  protection. The policy is not triggered as there are
                                                                                  no specific sites of protected cultural heritage
                                                                                  identified as of Appraisal.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        No               As the project envisages retrofitting of already
                            4.12                                                  existing public buildings within their existing
                                                                                  footprint, no land acquisition, resettlement, or any
                                                                                  other adverse social impacts (such as loss of
                                                                                  assets, loss of income due to retrofitting works)
                                                                                  are expected. OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                                                  Resettlement is not triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No

                            Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The planned energy efficiency measures are expected to have many positive social impacts. The
                              retrofitting works will consist of retrofitting of systems and installations - therefore, no job losses
                              are envisaged and instead a positive employment impact is expected in the construction sector.
                              Other positive impacts include increased awareness of energy efficiency among the participating
                              communities, reduced local pollution (due to reduced use of energy in local boiler houses), and
                              improved conditions to both staff and patients in the retrofitted buildings.

                              The associated environmental impacts, as related to the construction works on the selected
                              buildings will be temporary and easily mitigated (and include potential dust and noise generation,
                              management of construction and other wastes, and ensuring minimal disruptions to building users
                              and neighbors). Care should be exerted in planning the exact timing of works in schools (during

                                                                          Page 3 of 5
                           breaks) or hospitals. The EMF and template EMP also provide provisions on the proper
                           management of asbestos and other hazardous materials, such as mercury-containing light bulbs.
                           The long-term effects of the project are positive, and will be reflected in the savings made in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           heating bills, efficient use of natural resources and energy, and decrease in emissions into the
                           atmosphere, in particular CO2, SOx, NOx, and PMs.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The only anticipated long-term effects in the project area can be positive, and are reflected in the
                           decreased energy consumption and therefore decreased emissions into the air from furnaces and
                           fuels used.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project will be implemented through entity-level PIUs and overseen by a Project Steering
                           Committee in each entity, composed of relevant Ministries. . The PIUs will not have
                           environmental safeguards specialists per-se, but will have this task assigned to one of their
                           members. In addition, the EMPs will be made a part of the individual design documents, and the
                           supervising engineers will specifically be asked to monitor compliance with the EMPs. Adequate
                           training can and will be organized by the World Bank environmental specialist in Sarajevo prior to
                           start of Project activities
                           The criteria for the selection of buildings (e.g. excluding buildings where ownership issues are
                           unclear) or the bidding and contractual documentation (e.g. obliging the contractor to consider all
                           possible alternatives for civil works avoiding resettlement and expropriation) will ensure to avoid
                           resettlement and land acquisition issues. The PIU will monitor and ensure that proposals clarify
                           and confirm that no private land is needed for structures to be retrofitted or constructed for any of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the sub-projects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The framework document with template EMP has been disclosed on 19.09.2013 in RS and
                           24.10.2013 in FBiH with public consultations held on 08.10.2013 in RS and 31.10.2013 in FBiH.
                           The public consultations were announced on 24.10.2013 (FBiH) and 20.09.2013 (RS) in the daily
                           papers: Oslobodjenje and Nezavisne novine. The consultations were public and open to all
                           interested parties, that could see the invitations in the daily papers and on the websites. Specific
                           and targeted invitations were sent to the institutions and organizations (including academia and
                           NGOs) to the consultations meeting. The site-specific EMPs will also be disclosed at the project
                           location prior to start of works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          05-Nov-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       06-Nov-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           06-Nov-2013
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Jari Vayrynen
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                        Date: 20-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 5 of 5
