                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5668

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                            Project ID:      P133312
                            Project Name:      Uganda Energy for Rural Transformation III (P133312)
                            Task Team          Somin Mukherji
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-May-2014                       Estimated        02-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTG1                             Lending          Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        118.90                Total Bank Financing:          100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   100.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                               8.90
                              Total                                                                         118.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                             1. Project Development Objective(s)
                             The program’s long-term objective of rural area transformation is retained in this project because it
                             is as relevant now as it was when the program was first designed. It is also clear that some
                           changes are needed in view of the implementation experience, changing conditions in the power
                           and ICT sectors, and changes in the Ugandan economy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project development objective is to increase rural access to electricity.
                           2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The GEF objective is to increase the use of renewable energy and promote energy efficiency.
                           Energy efficiency was not originally included in the long-term program but was added during
                           Phase I when Uganda’s unexpected shortage of power at peak times created an opportunity to
                           initiate energy efficiency measures.

                           These objectives will be achieved by accelerated investments and shifting from the case-by-case
                           approach of ERT-1 to processing projects through the institutional framework developed during
                           implementation of ERT-2.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project will be designed in line with the 2001 description of the ERT Program as
                         approved by the World Bank and the GEF Council with minor adjustments needed to reflect better
                         the current country and sector context and requirements. It will provide US$100 million (eq.) in IDA
                         funds (as a Credit) and US$8.9 million in GEF funds (as a Grant). The proposed components are
                         shown below with initial cost estimates and an indicative financing plan. The GoU is preparing a
                         “Project Summary” paper that will include a complete proposal on project components (including
                         cost estimates) and their financing and implementation arrangements. These details are expected to
                         be in line with discussions held during the last preparation mission (June 2013) and will be used for
                         further processing of the proposed Project.

                         Component 1: Rural Energy Infrastructure: (US$95.4 million – US$82.3 million IDA, US$3.1
                         million GEF; US$10.0 million GoU). On-grid investments will finance all on-grid activities. Off-grid
                         investments will include installation of fixed solar home systems (SHS). Possibilities are being
Public Disclosure Copy




                         explored to include financing of mobile solar systems as well on a pilot basis under collaboration
                         with the Africa Lighting Initiative. All on-grid activities will be implemented by REA. For
                         implementation of off-grid activities (SHS), the implementation arrangements are under discussion.
                         Technical Assistance will be provided to finance the necessary consultancy services and training.

                         Component 2: Energy Development, Cross Sectoral Links and Impacts Monitoring: (US$17.4
                         million – US$13.0 million IDA, US$4.4 million GEF). This component will finance installation of
                         solar PV systems for institutions such as schools, health centers and water pumping stations – as was
                         done for the ERT-2, these will be implemented by the respective line ministries (i.e., MoH, MoE&S
                         and MWE). The PSFU will continue with their successful investment components such as Power
                         Factor Correction Equipment, Solar Water Heaters and Private Sector Small Hydropower
                         Development etc. It could also include supporting the Efficient Cooking Stove initiative that is
                         currently under discussion and funded by a Russian Trust Fund. Finally, the UECCC will utilize their
                         portion of funds to facilitate local commercial finance by providing credit enhancement products
                         such as partial risk guarantees, and other refinance facilities. Technical Assistance provided under
                         this component will finance the necessary consultancy services, capacity building and operations
                         costs as agreed.

                         Component 3: Renewable Energy Development: (US$ 6.1 million – US$4.7 million IDA, US$1.4
                         million GEF). This component will finance development of other renewable energy resources such as
                         geothermal energy, studies for small hydropower development etc., and will be implemented by the
                         MEMD. Technical Assistance provided under this component will finance the necessary consultancy
                         services, capacity building and operations costs as agreed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Changes in Project Design:
                         The proposed design and preliminary allocation of funds responds to the implementation experience
                         of ERT-1 and ERT-2 as well as overall changes in Uganda’s economy and the power sector as
                         described below.

                         Changes Based on Implementation Experience of ERT-1 and ERT-2
                         Based on implementation experience of ERT-1 and ERT-2, the most significant change in project
                         design is to drop the Information and Communication Technology (ICT) component. Although,
                         under the ERT-1, there was a general increase noted in the usage of mobile phones and internet
                         services in the project areas, there has been no conclusive evidence to attribute this to the project.
                         Additionally, despite the slow implementation of the ICT component of the ERT-2, the ICT sector
                         has steadily grown by about 30 % mainly through private sector led investments. However, this has
                         started in the urban areas and is expected to expand and gradually cover the rural areas as well. In
                         view of this, the GoU is considering not to borrow any further from IDA in support of the ICT
                         sectoral development. On providing connections to agro-industries, other donors (such as the
                         USAID) have shown interest in financing electricity connections for the agro-industry. This will be
                         supplemented by GoU budgetary support to promote further growth of the industry. Consequently,
                         no support to the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industries and Fisheries (MAIIF) has been
                         considered under the proposed Project at this time. Finally, in terms of providing PV systems to
                         schools, the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoE&S) has demonstrated satisfactory
                         implementation capacity and will carry out these installations. As such, contrary to the ERT-2 design
                         of supporting the capacity building of the MoLG through their implementation of PV systems for
                         schools, the current project design will not require the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) to
                         implement any new PV systems for schools.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Changes Based on Sectoral Development
                         While the design of ERT-1 and ERT-2 was guided by the policy parameters of the RESP-1, the
                         design of the proposed ERT-3 will be guided by the policy directives of the recently approved
                         RESP-2. For each Service Territory, the relevant Service Provider will be accountable for increasing
                         access, both on-grid and off-grid. Agreed targets will form a part of performance indicators and will
                         be included in a “Lease Agreement” between REA and individual SPs. While capital financing for
                         on-grid electrification shall be provided under a system of long-term leasing and financing contracts
                         to be concluded with the SPs, off-grid electrification services comprised of other energy service
                         technologies not dependent on grid electricity shall be planned, offered and supplied to eligible
                         consumers in the STs in tandem with on-grid electrification services.

                         Changes Based on Implementation Arrangements
                         The recent approval of the RESP-2 will lead to significant changes in implementation arrangements
                         for on-grid connections that are aligned with the principles developed under the AF-ERT-2. Unlike
                         implementation of the RESP-1, where accountability for increasing access was not clearly defined,
                         under the RESP-2, the SPs will be responsible for carrying out connections and increasing access.
                         Given the overall financial weakness of the SPs, REA will procure service connections materials
                         (that will be financed through the proposed Project) in bulk and have them delivered at the individual
                         stores of the SPs. As a part of common utility practice, the SPs will finance consumer connections
                         through advances paid by the consumers. Through special arrangements as stipulated in the legal
                         agreements between REA and individual SPs, the recipient SPs will pay back REA the cost of
                         materials received in a manner satisfactory to REA and individual SPs. These amounts will be
                         deposited in a dedicated account managed by REA who will then reuse these funds for future
Public Disclosure Copy




                         procurement and supply of service connection materials. Thus, the recycling of funds – “Revolving
                         Funds” will make additional funds available even after the project financing has ceased. Appropriate
                         audit arrangements (non-consultancy services) will be in place to verify the connections made
                         including adherence to technical standards. This will ease the shortage of funds somewhat (para.11)
                         but more funds will still be needed to attain the target of “Vision 2040”. For development of off-grid
                         electrification, on the solar home systems, implementation experience of the SHS under the ERT-2
                         through the Photo-Voltaic Targeted Market Approach (PVTMA) has not been satisfactory. During
                         the four year period (2009-2013), only 6817 SHS were installed, that too on a highly subsidized
                         basis. This is very low compared with some of the better implementation experiences in other
                         countries. As such, the GoU is considering several options that will aim at accelerating the
                         installation of SHS including extending refinancing facilities to solar vendors on the basis of a
                         declining subsidy regime leading to its ultimate removal.

                         Changes on Monitoring and Evaluation
                         Under ERT-2, overall, 109,000 new connections were expected to be made; of this, 52,000
                         connections were to be installed on newly built grid schemes within the project areas (new areas )
                         and 57,000 connections were to be installed on the existing grid system outside the project areas (old
                         areas). As explained earlier (para. 16), delays in implementation of new grid schemes had
                         undermined any initiative to increase access in the new areas. Also, since the ERT-2 project design
                         did not allocate any separate funds for procurement of connection materials, the project could not
                         finance any new connections. However, during implementation of ERT-2, some connections were
                         made outside the ERT program in the existing distribution networks (old areas) from sources other
                         than the project (non-ERT program). Linkage of project performance to the availability of funds
                         from sources other than the project (non-ERT program) and relevance of its monitoring and
                         evaluation was discussed during preparation of the AF-ERT-2. This has been considered not
                         reflective of the project’s implementation performance; as such connections made outside the ERT
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program could not be attributed as an output of the ERT-2. At the time of the original Closing Date
                         of the ERT-2 (June 30, 2013), no connections had been made on account of the ERT program.
                         In order to address this issue, financing for service connection materials was arranged and the
                         GPOBA grant (US$5.5 million) and the AF-ERT-2 credit (US$12.0 million) – both linked to the
                         ERT-2, were approved. Together, these will play a crucial role in increasing electricity access in rural
                         areas and are expected to finance about 120,000 connections by project closing that has now been
                         extended until the end of FY16. This will facilitate meeting the targets for the ERT-2 (109,000) and
                         through scaling up (to 120,000 connections), accelerate the electricity access agenda.

                         Changes Based on National Developments
                         The RESP-1 did not meet all its intended objectives. Unlike the earlier RESP-1, where electricity
                         access was expected to increase through targeting electrification such as in areas within one
                         kilometer on either side of the distribution line (1-km foot print), the RESP-2 takes an area coverage
                         approach, whereby the country is covered and divided into 13 STs each to be served by an SP that
                         will be responsible for all management, operational and maintenance activities within its dedicated/
                         assigned territory. Its design has also taken cognizance of the United Nations (UN) initiative on
                         modern energy for all – Sustainable Energy for All (SE4ALL) which calls for all governments to
                         ensure the availability of clean and affordable modern energy in all homes by 2030.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is expected to be implemented in selected areas across the country. The salient physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           characteristics are prominent in the power-line construction sub-components, which shall involve
                           excavations and earthworks, vegetation clearance of both grass and trees, formation of murram bunds
                           for pole structures in wetland areas, creation of wetland access paths, establishment of equipment
                           storage areas, land take/ displacement of land-uses and thus associated compensation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Through implementation of ERT-1 and ERT-2, MEMD and REA have had substantial safeguards
                           capacity developed over time. Both institutions, being the main implementing agencies have
                           Environmental Specialists. However, whereas MEMD has a Social Development Specialist, REA
                           does not have, and instead has a Wayleaves Officer who supervises compilation and implementation
                           of RAPs. The implementing institutions have also occasionally hired consultants to undertake
                           safeguards studies and supervision. Regular environmental monitoring and reporting was undertaken
                           by REA under ERT-2. In order to address the staffing shortage, REA has recruited two
                           Environmental Specialists and have also been recommended to recruit a Social Development
                           Specialist to handle social issues. In terms of environmental institutional set up, the overall
                           environmental management is under the Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) policy-wise,
                           and the regulatory function being undertaken by the semi-autonomous National Environment
                           Management Authority (NEMA). NEMA as the principal agency for management of environment is
                           charged with the duty of coordinating monitoring and supervising all activities in the field of
                           environment. They undertake among other functions review and approval of ESIAs and conducting
                           compliance monitoring. However, during ERT-2, NEMA’s participation in oversight compliance
                           monitoring of the projects was minimal and this could be attributed to NEMA’s under-staffing and
                           inadequate operational resources. In terms of environmental policies and laws, there are in place the
                           Environmental Management Policy, the National Environment Act, and the EIA Regulations,
                           Environmental Audit Regulations and other associated laws and regulations that are adequate to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           guide the management of environmental aspects at country level. The only challenge relates to weak
                           institutional coordination and enforcement of the laws. Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban
                           Development is in-charge of land and compensation related matters and the approval of
                           compensation rates and property valuation reports. Property valuation is undertaken by hires
                           consultants. However, during ERT-2, there has been apparent low commitment to compensate PAPs
                           before start of the construction activities and this resulted in a number of complaints from the
                           affected communities.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Triggered because the program will support
                           BP 4.01                                              investments with potential adverse
                                                                                environmental and social impacts arising mostly
                                                                                from the construction of the 33/11 kv power
                                                                                distribution lines. The specific locations of all
                                                                 the physical components have not yet been
                                                                 determined and therefore ESMF shall be
                                                                 prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 appraisal. Once sites have been identified,
                                                                 specific ESIAs and ESMPs shall be prepared.
                                                                 For now, two powerline routes are known and
                                                                 thus two ESIAs shall be prepared in a
                                                                 consultative manner, and disclosed before
                                                                 project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Triggered because some power lines may pass
                                                                 through and affect natural habitats such as
                                                                 forests, and wetlands. Any likely impacts shall
                                                                 be addressed through the ESMF, specific ESIAs
                                                                 and ESMPs.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Triggered because some power lines may pass
                                                                 through forest areas with a potential of causing
                                                                 adverse impacts. Any likely impacts shall be
                                                                 addressed through the ESMF, specific ESIAs
                                                                 and ESMPs.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Not triggered because the project will not
                                                                 involve use of pesticides or pest management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Triggered because of the civil and earthworks
                         BP 4.11                                 during construction of the power lines -- which
                                                                 may affect or involve physical cultural
                                                                 resources. A chance finds procedure shall be
                                                                 developed as part of the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The project proposes to have a grid extension
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 lines in Rwenzori area along Karugutu -
                                                                 Ntoroko including Semiliki Safari Lodge and on
                                                                 North West region for Buseruka - Kabaale -
                                                                 Kasio Tonya - Kyenzige, areas with possible
                                                                 settlements of Batwa. This will be established
                                                                 and defined during the preparation process,
                                                                 prior to appraisal to take the necessary steps,
                                                                 including the possible preparation of an
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Triggered because the project may involve land
                         4.12                                    take and displacement of land-uses, limiting
                                                                 access and livelihoods. An RPF shall be
                                                                 prepared, consulted upon and disclosed before
                                                                 appraisal and when specific locations are
                                                                 known, RAPs shall be prepared. For the current
                                                                 two sites that have been determined, the RAPs
                                                                 shall be prepared following a consultative
                                                                 process and disclosed before project appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not triggered because the project will not be
                                 7.60                                                                                            implemented in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The preparation of the frameworks for the project, namely ESMF and RPF commenced in August
                                      2013, and is currently being reviewed by the Bank. Preparation of specific safeguard instruments
                                      notably ESIAs and RAPs for the two known power lines will commence in September 2013 and
                                      shall be completed and disclosed before appraisal. Appraisal is expected to take place in
                                      mid-2014. Any remaining ESIAs, RAPs and ESMPs shall be prepared during project
                                      implementation phase but immediately after confirmation of specific sites and before startup of
                                      any construction works.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Somin Mukherji

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 22-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Lucio Monari (SM)                                                                                                    Date: 26-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
