                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA885
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P118826
                            Project Name:      India: Bihar Integrated Social Protection Strengthening Project (P118826)
                            Task Team          Jessica Leigh Leino
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Oct-2013                       Estimated   16-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASSP                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (50%), Other social services (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (50%), Other social protection and risk management (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        120.00                Total Bank Financing:          84.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        36.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               84.00
                              Total                                                                                    120.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen institutional capacity of the Department of Social Welfare and the Rural Development
                           Department to deliver social protection programs and services and expand outreach of social care
                           services for poor and vulnerable households, persons with disabilities, older persons and widows in
                           the state of Bihar.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 15
                         The proposed project focuses on programs administered by the Department of Social Welfare
                         (DoSW) including social pensions and social care services for older persons, widows, and persons
                         with disabilities, and by the Rural Development Department (RDD) which oversees the provision of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS) and Indira Awaas
                         Yojana (IAY). Specifically, the project would provide support for: (1) Strengthening capacity to
                         implement and monitor these programs at the state, district and block levels; and (2) Strengthening
                         outreach and social protection service delivery.

                         The proposed project includes two components:

                         Component 1: Strengthening Social Protection Systems and Capacity (Total estimated cost US$32.9
                         million, of which US$23.0 million IDA financing).
                         This component will strengthen core systems and capacity of the Bihar Rural Development Society
                         (BRDS) and the State Society for Ultra-Poor and Social Welfare (SSUPSW), which are the program
                         implementation arms of the Rural Development Department and the Department of Social Welfare
                         respectively, at the state, district and block levels. This component has two sub-components,
                         reflecting support to each of the two state implementing agencies, BRDS and SSUPSW, as follows:

                         Sub-Component 1.1: Strengthening systems and capacity for safety net delivery (total estimated cost
                         US$ 24.4 million, of which US$ 17.1 million IDA financing): Support will be provided to BRDS to
                         strengthen the delivery of MGNREGS and IAY programs, focusing on: (i) Streamlining program
                         delivery mechanisms by developing standardized procedures and tools for effective management of
                         the benefits process, for outreach and communications to citizens, and for disbursement of benefits
                         and grievance redressal. The creation of a Bihar State Resident Registry (BSRR) to track
                         beneficiaries of selected social protection schemes will be supported along with strengthening
                         financial management systems and capacity at the state, district and block levels for all central and
                         state schemes and scaling up e-payments to beneficiaries; (ii) Strengthening staff capacity and
                         performance incentives by developing a HR policy, performance management system, and training
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system for building staff capacity and for monitoring the quality of training delivered; and (iii)
                         Putting in place monitoring and accountability mechanisms to enable program and project
                         implementation, monitoring and evaluation. A comprehensive M&E strategy will be developed and
                         capacity built to operate management information systems (MIS) as well as to undertake field
                         assessments and social audits. Procedures for dealing with appeals/grievances related to selected
                         social protection schemes, especially MGNREGS and IAY, will also be developed. Consulting and
                         non-consulting services, additional technical staff, required training and capacity building, goods,
                         and incremental operating costs will be provided.

                         Sub-Component 1.2: Strengthening systems and capacity for social pension and social care service
                         delivery (total estimated cost US$8.5 million, of which US$ 5.9 million IDA financing): Support
                         will be provided to SSUPSW to strengthen the delivery of social pensions and social care services for
                         persons with disabilities, widows and older persons, focusing on: (i) promoting an enabling policy
                         environment by developing policies, programs and operational guidelines for institutional and non-
                         institutional care targeted to persons with disabilities, older persons and widows; (ii) Streamlining
                         program delivery mechanisms by developing standardized procedures and tools for effective
                         management of the identification, disability certification and enrolment of intended beneficiaries, for
                         outreach and communications to citizens, for disbursement of benefit payments, and for grievance
                         redressal. Procedures for public-private-community partnerships would be developed and capacity
                         would be built for contract and performance management of private sector service providers and


                                                                      Page 2 of 15
                         other partners to support SSUPSW. Information Technology (IT) applications for social pensions and
                         social care services will be developed to enable case management and tracking of all stages of
                         service delivery; (iii) Strengthening staff capacity and performance incentives by developing a new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         HR policy, a new performance management system, and a training system for building staff capacity
                         and for monitoring the quality of training delivered; and (iv) Setting up monitoring and
                         accountability mechanisms to enable the monitoring of social pensions and social care services. A
                         comprehensive M&E strategy will be developed and capacity built to operate the management
                         information system (MIS) as well as to undertake field assessments and social audits. Support for
                         improving funds management by designing and piloting e-payments for social protection schemes
                         will be provided. Consulting and non-consulting services, technical staff, required training and
                         capacity building, goods, and incremental operating costs will be provided.

                         Component 2: Strengthening Outreach and Social Protection Service Delivery (total estimated cost
                         US$ 87.1 million, of which US$ 61.0 million IDA financing).
                         Under this component, the Project would support state-wide coverage of social care services by
                         establishing 101 Social Care Service Centers. The component would also support pilots to improve
                         outreach through mobile therapy services, test models of community based rehabilitation, and an
                         “Innovation Window,? which would test innovative proposals to further improve social services.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Establish and Strengthen Social Care Services (total estimated cost US$ 69.5
                         million, of which US$ 48.6 million IDA financing): This sub-component would support establishing
                         social care services across the state through Social Care Service Centers (referred to as Buniyad
                         Centers) that would provide high quality care, support and rehabilitation services for older persons,
                         widows and persons with disabilities. A Buniyad Center would be set-up in each of the 101 sub-
                         divisions across the state. From among the 101 centers, 38 centers would be strengthened as ‘district
                         level centers’ with additional human resource and infrastructure to undertake monitoring and
                         supervision of social care services in each district. The services offered at the Buniyad Centers would
                         include basic care and support, legal aid, therapy, counseling and rehabilitation, emergency outreach
                         services through a state level toll free Helpline Service and district level response teams, assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and disability determination, provision of assistive devices, and would be provided either in-house or
                         through a referral network. This sub-component would finance the construction, maintenance and
                         operations of the Buniyad Centers. It would also finance renovations of select government buildings,
                         which will house temporary centers where service provision will be initiated during the initial project
                         period in order to fine-tune the service delivery model before the state-wide expansion of services
                         and basic building infrastructure development takes place.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Pilot Models in Social Protection Delivery (total estimated cost US$ 12.7
                         million, of which US$ 8.9 million IDA financing): Under this sub-component, the Project would
                         support strengthening access and outreach of select social protection services in the state through:

                         (i)      Establishing mobile outreach and therapy services to improve coverage and outreach of
                         social care services and other social protection services for the target beneficiary groups. The project
                         would support one mobile therapy service van in each district, fully equipped with diagnostic,
                         therapeutic equipment and audio-visual systems.

                         (ii)     Developing and piloting workable models for Community Based Rehabilitation (CBR) of
                         older persons, widows and persons with disabilities. This would involve provision of care and
                         rehabilitation services in family and community settings for the poorest and most vulnerable
                         individuals. Local community facilitators identified through partnerships with community based

                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         organizations (CBOs) and NGOs) would be trained to serve as focal service providers for these
                         groups.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 2.3: Innovation window (total estimated cost US$ 4.9 million, of which US$ 3.4
                         million is IDA financing): This sub-component would finance small-scale pilots that contribute
                         toward the project objectives by testing innovative mechanisms for increasing community level
                         outreach for effective delivery of social protection programs and services at the local level;
                         enhancing promotion and participation of stakeholders and project beneficiaries; and providing social
                         protection for the poor and vulnerable during emergencies and disasters. This sub-component would
                         be initiated in the third year of the project and would finance eligible expenditures (including goods,
                         services and operating costs) for the pilots.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the State of Bihar, India with sub-project implementation spread
                         across all the administrative divisions in the state. Bihar is India’s third largest state with a
                         population of 104 million and approximately 54 million people currently living below the poverty
                         line. Bihar state is 12th largest in terms of geographical size (94,163 sq. km) and 3rd largest by
                         population (10.38 crores) in the country as per Census 2011. It is also known for its abundant natural
                         resources, perennial rivers, fertile lands and a long glorious history. In spite of all these conditions,
                         the state remained one of the poorest states in the country since independence. The humid West
                         Bengal in the east and the sub humid Uttar Pradesh in the West provides it with a transitional
                         position in respect of climate, economy and culture.

                         The state is vulnerable to natural disasters, with nearly three-fourths of the state prone to seasonal
                         flooding. About 73 percent of the geographical area of the state is flood-prone due to heavy rainfall
                         in the catchments of the rivers that originate in neighboring countries and due to shifting river
                         courses. Water logging affects over 1550 sq. km of land in Bihar and the state on the whole has very
                         small area under forest cover (6.87 percent).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The state’s over-all economy has grown rapidly at 11 percent per annum between 2004-05 and
                         2010-11 with agriculture and related activities growing at 4 percent per annum during this period. In
                         the last decade, Bihar has also made impressive improvements in human development outcomes in
                         terms of access to schooling and health. However, illiteracy, under-nutrition, infant and child
                         mortality continue to be issues of concern. Bihar is primarily rural and agrarian, with high levels of
                         landlessness, land fragmentation, dependency on agriculture and high levels of seasonal migration.
                         Though recent years have witnessed a spurt in economic growth, Bihar has continued to perform
                         poorly with respect to poverty reduction.

                         Certain groups including persons with disabilities, older persons and widows, are especially
                         vulnerable to economic shocks and rising living costs. The census of 2001 estimated that there are
                         about 5.5 million people aged 60 and above; 2 million widowed, separated or divorced women and;
                         about 1.9 million persons with disabilities (PWDs) in Bihar, constituting about 6.6 percent, 2.4
                         percent and 2.3 percent of the population respectively. According to the census of 2011, the
                         population of people aged 60 and above has gone up to 7.7 million comprising of 7.4 percent of the
                         total state population. Data on persons with disabilities of census 2011 is currently not available.

                         About 28 percent of Bihar’s physically challenged population is economically dependent on others,
                         while the dependency ratio amongst the disabled elderly and among older women, particularly


                                                                       Page 4 of 15
                         widows, is even higher. Households with one or more physically challenged members also tend to be
                         poor. Poverty among the elderly is often not significantly different from the general population
                         although a key source of vulnerability for the elderly is rising health expenditure at a time of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         declining income. The state on its part has initiated many programs for development and welfare of
                         these population groups.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                         Kalyani Kandula (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The project proposes to support establishment of
                         BP 4.01                                            social care services across the state through
                                                                            Social Care Service Centers (Buniyad Centers)
                                                                            that would provide quality care, support and
                                                                            rehabilitation services for older persons, widows
                                                                            and persons with disabilities. A Buniyad Center
                                                                            would be set-up in each of the 101 sub-divisions
                                                                            across the state. From among the 101 centers, 38
                                                                            centers would be strengthened as ‘district level
                                                                            centers’ with additional human resource and
                                                                            infrastructure to undertake monitoring and
                                                                            supervision of social care services in each district.

                                                                            The EA has identified that this intervention
                                                                            entails some environmental impacts, which
                                                                            include: (a) impacts related to inappropriate site
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            selection and design of such centers (leading to
                                                                            sub-optimal access, ventilation, drainage,
                                                                            sanitation, loss of trees); (b) construction related
                                                                            impacts (such as worker and public safety issues,
                                                                            improper management of borrow areas and
                                                                            debris, waste material management); and (c)
                                                                            impacts related to the operation/management of
                                                                            the centers (such as inadequate water and
                                                                            sanitation facilities, noise and air pollution from
                                                                            generators, poor waste management and building
                                                                            maintenance).

                                                                            In addition, certain environmental impacts related
                                                                            to MGNREGS works (such as change in land use,
                                                                            poor drainage, abandoned borrow pits, loss of
                                                                            trees) and impacts related to IAY housing (such
                                                                            as poor ventilation, indoor air pollution, lack of
                                                                            sanitation facilities, risk from AC roofing sheets)
                                                                            also need to be considered as the project seeks to



                                                                    Page 5 of 15
                                                                     strengthen delivery mechanisms and improving
                                                                     capacity for such programs even though no direct
                                                                     physical investment would be made for these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     social protection programs under the project.
                                                                     Considerations of environment, health and safety
                                                                     dimensions in the project design would help in
                                                                     ensuring the soundness and sustainability of such
                                                                     specific programs from an environmental
                                                                     perspective.

                                                                     To support integration of environmental aspects
                                                                     into the decision-making process by addressing
                                                                     the identified issues and to improve the
                                                                     sustainability of investments made under the
                                                                     project, OP/BP 4.01 is being triggered.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No              No physical interventions proposed under the
                                                                     project are expected to affect natural habitats. No
                                                                     civil works will be financed under the project in
                                                                     designated protected areas/wilderness areas/
                                                                     critical natural habitats. The environment
                                                                     screening tool will be used to ensure compliance
                                                                     in this regard. Therefore, OP 4.04 is not being
                                                                     triggered for the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes             No civil works will be financed under the
                                                                     project in forest areas or over land designated for
                                                                     forests. The environment screening tool will be
                                                                     used to ensure compliance in this regard.
                                                                     However, the project seeks to strengthen the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     delivery of MGNREGS, which involves works
                                                                     being taken up on forest land as part of “drought
                                                                     proofing including afforestation? and “tree
                                                                     plantation?. It also includes works related to
                                                                     water conservation and rural road construction,
                                                                     which again may have some impact on forests.

                                                                     Due to such works, no significant impact on the
                                                                     health and quality of forests is likely to occur.
                                                                     Such works are also not likely to impact the rights
                                                                     and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                     dependence upon the forests. These works are not
                                                                     expected to bring about major changes in the
                                                                     management, protection or utilization of natural
                                                                     forests or plantations. However, strengthened
                                                                     delivery of MGNREGS may contribute to
                                                                     improved results on the ground and therefore
                                                                     keeping this fact in mind, OP 4.36 has triggered
                                                                     for this project.


                                                             Page 6 of 15
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             OP 4.09 is being triggered for this project as
                                                                         biological/environmental control methods or
                                                                         reliance on chemical pesticides for afforestation/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         tree plantation activity under MGNREGA is
                                                                         envisaged. Even though investment of this nature
                                                                         (tree plantation or procurement of pesticides/
                                                                         fungicides) will not be directly funded the
                                                                         project, the technical and funding support to
                                                                         strengthening delivery of MGNREGS (which
                                                                         supports such works) requires that mechanisms
                                                                         are ‘built’ into the program itself to appropriately
                                                                         manage such issues.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             By and large, implementation of sub-projects is
                         BP 4.11                                         not likely to affect religious structures of local
                                                                         significance. Screening and site verification
                                                                         protocols will help establish this. However, a few
                                                                         sub-project sites may be located close to sites,
                                                                         structures, natural/man-made features that have
                                                                         historical, archaeological, religious or other
                                                                         cultural significance. Also, since civil works are
                                                                         involved, ‘chance finds’ at work sites is a likely
                                                                         impact that will have to be managed by
                                                                         incorporating appropriate provisions in the
                                                                         bidding/contract documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The Project triggers OP/BP 4.10 because project
                                                                         beneficiaries include tribal population. Such
                                                                         beneficiaries account for more than 2 percent of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the total population in 10 districts of Bihar. As
                                                                         per the census of India (2011), the population of
                                                                         Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is 16.56
                                                                         million and 1.33 million respectively comprising
                                                                         15.91 percent of the total population. The policy
                                                                         is triggered to ensure that any adverse effects of
                                                                         the project are avoided or minimized and that the
                                                                         Scheduled Castes and Tribes receive culturally
                                                                         appropriate social and economic benefits.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              OP 4.12 is not triggered as involuntary land
                         4.12                                            acquisition and land purchase will not be done for
                                                                         any project activity, and are included in the
                                                                         project’s negative list. In blocks where the
                                                                         government land is not available, the project will
                                                                         not be undertaking construction of Buniyad
                                                                         Centers.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                         there is no construction of new dams or activities




                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                                                                 that are concerned with safe functioning of
                                                                                 existing dams.
                            Projects on International            No               OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 there are no interventions planned/ proposed over
                                                                                 or around an international waterway that could
                                                                                 cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                                 activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                                 waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is
                            7.60                                                 not proposed in any disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project involves building capacity of state level institutions (BRDS of RDD and SSUPSW of
                              DoSW) and state-wide piloting of innovations. By improving access to public services and
                              strengthening social care services for the vulnerable, including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
                              Tribes, widows, elderly persons and persons with disabilities, the project is likely to have an over-
                              all positive impact.

                              Environmental Impacts/Issues. Project activities, if not properly planned, managed and mitigated,
                              could have some local level adverse environmental impacts. Primarily, these are associated with
                              establishment of social care services across the state through Social Care Service Centers (Buniyad
                              Centers) that would provide quality care, support and rehabilitation services for older persons,
                              widows and persons with disabilities. A Buniyad Center would be set-up in each of the 101 sub-
                              divisions across the state. From among the 101 centers, 38 centers would be strengthened as
Public Disclosure Copy




                              ‘district level centers’ with additional human resource and infrastructure to undertake monitoring
                              and supervision of social care services in each district.

                              The EA has identified some environmental impacts that may arise on account of creation of
                              Buniyad Centers. This includes: (a) impacts related to inappropriate site selection and design of
                              such centers (leading to sub-optimal access, ventilation, drainage, sanitation, loss of trees); (b)
                              construction related impacts (such as worker and public safety issues, improper management of
                              borrow areas and debris, waste material management); and (c) impacts related to the operation/
                              management of the centers (such as inadequate water and sanitation facilities, noise and air
                              pollution from generators, poor waste management and building maintenance). However, these
                              impacts can be addressed through integration of environmental, health and safety concerns into
                              sub-project planning (site selection), design (design of the building and campus management),
                              construction (management of civil works) and operation (maintenance).

                              Accordingly, the Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment has been triggered, and the
                              project is designated as Category B. The three other Operational Policies that have been triggered
                              for the project include: Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management (OP 4.09) and Physical Cultural
                              Resources (OP/BP 4.11). On the whole, with proper management, the project interventions are not
                              likely to cause large scale, significant or irreversible damage to natural, physical or social
                              environment.

                                                                         Page 8 of 15
                           Social Issues/Impacts. The negative social impact (displacement) is unlikely, as the Service
                           Centers will be established on available government land and will not involve any change in land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           use.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            By strengthening delivery mechanisms for MGNREGS (an employment guarantee scheme
                           involving public works such as rural roads, water conservation structures, plantations, etc.) and
                           IAY (cash transfer for rural housing), the project may contribute to an increased uptake of these
                           programs – and hence to their environmental impact – both positive and negative. Such
                           environmental impacts related to MGNREGS works include change in land use, poor drainage,
                           abandoned borrow pits, loss of trees and those related to IAY housing include poor ventilation,
                           indoor air pollution, lack of sanitation facilities and risk from AC roofing sheets. These need to be
                           considered as the project seeks to strengthen delivery mechanisms and improving capacity for
                           such programs even though no direct physical investment would be made for these programs
                           under the project.

                           Further, some specific long-term environmental impacts are related to the management of the
                           Buniyad Centers include inadequate water and sanitation facilities, noise and air pollution from
                           generators, poor waste management and improper building/asset management. However, such
                           adverse impacts are not likely to be large-scale or irreversible in nature. These can be avoided/
                           minimized to a great extent and the positive outcomes from the social protection programs can be
                           enhanced substantially by putting appropriate institutional mechanisms, procedures and capacity in
                           place. Considerations of environment, health and safety dimensions in the project design would
                           help in ensuring the soundness and sustainability of such specific programs from an environmental
                           perspective.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             As part of the project preparation process, a screening exercise on randomly selected potential
                           sub-project sites was conducted. This screening allowed for identification of key environmental
                           issues early-on. Based on these results, a guidance note to facilitate appropriate selection of sites
                           (new) and buildings (existing) was developed for the project. This mechanism also allows for
                           avoiding potential impacts on environmentally sensitive features/areas.

                           While a Buniyad Center has been planned for each of the 101 sub-divisions across the state of
                           Bihar, in cases where government land is not available (this will be ascertained after the on-going
                           exercise for land identification is completed), the project will not undertake/support construction
                           of a Buniyad Center. The Social Service Centers (Buniyad Centers) will be established only on
                           available government land and will not involve any change in land use. However, before this
                           action is taken, alternatives will be explored in cases where site assessment indicates impact on
                           structures, water bodies, cultural/religious properties or other such features that are locally
                           considered important.

                           Further, through the application of the Environment Management Framework, it is planned that as
                           and where required, building orientation/design alternatives will be explored to take into account
                           site specific features/constraints.




                                                                      Page 9 of 15
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Safeguard policy issues have been considered by carrying out environment and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessments and by applying OP 4.01, OP 4.36, OP 4. 11 and OP 4.10, which has resulted in
                           preparation of distinct instruments. The safeguard instruments, thus prepared for the project
                           include: (a) Environment Management Framework (EMF) and (b) the Social Management
                           Framework (SMF). Specific details are given in the sections below:

                          Management of Environmental Issues and Risks

                          Environment Assessment. An Environmental Assessment (EA) study was undertaken by the
                          Government of Bihar for the proposed project. The EA study provides an analysis of the potential
                          positive and negative impacts of the three primary project activities that are relevant from the
                          environmental management and safeguards perspective. These are: (1) creation of Social Care
                          Service Centers (Buniyad Centers); (2) strengthening mechanisms, including institutions to
                          improve delivery of MGNREGS works and (3) strengthening institutions for the improving IAY
                          program delivery.

                          As part of the EA, the existing capacity of the Bihar Rural Development Society (BRDS) of the
                          Rural Development Department (RDD), the State Society for Ultra Poor and Social Welfare
                          (SSUPSW) of the Department of Social Welfare and Bihar State Building Construction
                          Corporation Limited (which will provide design and supervision services for the construction of
                          Buniyad Centers) from an environmental management perspective, was also reviewed.

                          Environment Management Framework. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                          developed as an outcome this assessment provides guidelines for site selection, design,
                          construction and maintenance of environment-friendly Service Centers in line with relevant legal
                          and regulatory requirements of Govt. of India, Govt. of Bihar and the environment safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                          policies of the World Bank. The EMF also provides guidance to enable their adoption as a good
                          practice for MGNREGS works and IAY housing program. The environment management process
                          and tool (EMF) for the project have been designed keeping in mind this varied scope of work and
                          the limited capacity in the state to manage environmental issues.

                          The EMF has been informed by: (a) the results of an environment screening exercise that was
                          conducted for selected proposed sub-project sites; (b) experiences from the Bank-funded projects
                          in the state, particularly the Bihar Panchayat Strengthening Project; and (c) experiences from
                          similar building construction and natural resource management projects implemented/being
                          implemented elsewhere in the country.

                          For effective implementation, the requirements set forth in the EMF will be appropriately
                          integrated and cross-referenced in the detailed designs, contract conditions and Bills of Quantities.
                          Institutional arrangements and a plan for monitoring safeguard compliance is part of the EMF.
                          Further, a comprehensive assessment report on environmental performance will be prepared by the
                          Project Authority at mid-term and end-term.

                          Implementation Arrangements for Environmental Management: Both the Rural Development
                          Department (RDD) and Department of Social Welfare (DoSW) work with specifically mandated
                          entities which will function as the implementing agencies for the purpose of the BISPSP. The


                                                                    Page 10 of 15
                         Project would rely on the existing institutional mechanisms for management oversight and
                         streamlined coordination between the activities of both Societies. BRDS and SSUPSW would
                         organize their staff into specialized cells for program management, monitoring and evaluation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communication, training, e-governance and partnerships, for implementing their respective
                         mandates and supervising project operations. The society staff would also include domain
                         specialists for their respective areas of business, i.e. programs and services targeted to the rural
                         poor and vulnerable, older persons, widows and persons with disabilities.

                         Specifically for environment management, the responsibility for ensuring the implementation of
                         the EMF will be (is) anchored with an identified/designated officer in the State Units of both
                         BRDS and SSUPSW to over-see, coordinate and monitor environment management aspects. An
                         expert, whose services will be hired from the market to support the implementation of EMF will
                         be a part of the project team at SSUPSW (under DoSW). The roles and responsibilities for
                         ensuring EMF implementation have also been detailed for both the RDD and DoSW programs at
                         the district and block levels.

                         In addition to periodic internal monitoring, an independent external monitoring of the Buniyad
                         Centers will be undertaken during the project duration to check compliance, assess impacts and
                         identify ways of strengthening environmental management.

                         Capacity Building for Environmental Management. The project may result in improving the
                         exposure and over-all capacity in managing environment issues, which presently remains weak in
                         this lagging state. A training plan has been prepared incorporating the project needs as well as the
                         short and longer term capacity building needs of the project entities. The plan consists of training
                         modules specific to various target groups.

                         Management of Social Issues and Risks.

                         The over-all project design itself focuses on social inclusion. In addition to the detailed social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessments carried out under other relevant Bank funded projects in the state such as the Bihar
                         Rural Livelihoods Project (BRLP), National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) and Bihar
                         Panchayat Strengthening Project, several field-based assessments have been undertaken during the
                         current project preparation to inform the overall project design.

                         A Social Management Framework was prepared with the following objectives: (i) to ensure the
                         objectives of the BISPS are fully addressed especially for the poorest and most vulnerable people
                         in the project areas, including Scheduled Tribes, Scheduled Castes and poor minorities; (ii) to
                         integrate social inclusion, accountability, safeguards, risk management and sustainability strategies
                         in the structures, institutions and interventions of BISPSP; and (iii) to ensure that the BISPS does
                         not support any activities likely to cause significant adverse social impacts and that all activities
                         comply with the laws, regulations and policies of the Government of India, Government of Bihar
                         and the social safeguard policies of the World Bank.

                         The SMF is designed as a guidance tool for implementation, monitoring and supervision of
                         interventions that address social issues and risks, including social safeguard risks. It, therefore
                         addresses the needs of the World Bank’s Operational Policy (O.P. 4.10) on Indigenous Peoples (or
                         Tribals, as they are known in India), and includes a Tribal Development Plan. The SMF also
                         provides a strategy to promote inclusion by gender and vulnerability as part of over-all project
                         design and identifies the procedures to be followed for selection of land for Service Centers.

                                                                    Page 11 of 15
                           Staff in the BRDS and SSUPSW and community mobilisers shall be trained in socially- and
                           culturally-sensitive ways of working with tribal people and others. Institutional arrangements and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a plan for monitoring safeguard compliance is part of the SMF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of
                           the social protection programs being supported under the project - the poor and vulnerable rural
                           households, persons with disabilities, older persons and widows. There are about 5.5 million
                           people aged 60 and above and about 1.9 million persons with disabilities (PWDs) in Bihar, and 2.0
                           million widowed, divorced and separated women who could benefit from the project. These
                           groups are characterized by high levels of illiteracy and face barriers of access to services. The
                           project focuses on building effective mechanisms for reaching out to these groups, ensuring their
                           rights and providing them an effective and responsive safety net.

                          The secondary stakeholders include officials from BRDS, SSUPSW, RDD, DoSW and Bihar State
                          Building Construction Corporation Limited and representatives from the Community Based
                          Organizations (CBOs) and Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), including Disabled Persons
                          Organizations (DPOs) and Senior Citizen Associations. The local governments like panchayats
                          and the administration at the district and block levels in in the state are important stakeholders as
                          well.

                          Consultations: Stakeholder consultation mechanisms are central to the design and implementation
                          of sub-projects and provide for information sharing and collaboration measures. These
                          mechanisms set out the procedures for dissemination of information and consultation with
                          communities and the affected people in particular through various stages of the sub-project cycle.
                          A consultation strategy/mechanism has been laid out in the Environment Management Framework
                          and Social Management Framework to ensure proper stakeholders consultation at all key stages of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          sub-project preparation and implementation. The consultation process is designed such that: (i)
                          affected people are included in the decision making process; (ii) public awareness/information
                          sharing on project alternatives, benefits and entitlements is promoted and; (iii) views and design
                          solutions from the communities are solicited.

                          Public consultation was undertaken as part of the EA study. Field studies including site visits and
                          consultations were undertaken in the project districts covering Block Development Offices, the
                          District Disability Rehabilitation Centre (DDRC), a representative sample of MGNREGS works
                          and IAY housing program. Discussions with the staff of the Block Development Office, the
                          DDRC, MGNREGS staff and with representatives of Gram Panchayats has been undertaken in the
                          districts covered under the EA study.

                          Additionally, consultation workshops have been held at the state level twice (in August 2012 and
                          in October 2013) and in the seven districts of Katihar, Madhubani, Buxar,Nalanda, Motihari, Gaya
                          and Purnea to elicit comments and inputs on the draft safeguard instruments (Environment
                          Assessment & Environment Management Framework and the Social Assessment & Social
                          Management Framework). The public consultation process so far has indicated that the people
                          strongly support the proposed project interventions.

                          Follow-up consultations will be conducted as needed through pre-construction and construction


                                                                    Page 12 of 15
                           stages of the project. Outputs from this process have been/will be integrated into the design to the
                           extent possible. Once the project commences implementation, the project team is expected to have
                           regular consultations with local stakeholders on environmental issues. To respond to the Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                           OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), the project shall continue to ensure free prior and informed
                           consultations with tribal people, their consent to and broad community support of its activities
                           during project implementation. It shall aim to provide equitable and culturally compatible benefits
                           to tribal people and the other socially disadvantaged groups identified.

                           Disclosure: The draft safeguard instruments (EA/EMF and SA/SMF) have been in public domain
                           since August 2012. The same instruments have been revised/modified after changes were
                           introduced in the project scope. The revised versions of EA/EMF and SA/SMF have been
                           disclosed in the Govt. of Bihar’s website and copies for reference are being sent to the co ncerned
                           units/officials at the district level. The revised/modified safeguard documents are also being sent
                           for disclosure in the Bank’s Infoshop. The executive summary of the safeguard documents will be
                           translated in vernacular for information and use of key stakeholders and will be placed in locations
                           accessible to public.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     21-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                              21-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     21-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                              21-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Pest Management and Physical Cultural Resources - Done - Covered under EMF.

                                                                     Page 13 of 15
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                    Page 14 of 15
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Jessica Leigh Leino
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 21-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Cem Mete (SM)                                  Date: 22-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 15 of 15
