                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA9342
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Feb-2013, 06-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                       Project ID:    P132317
                            Project Name:      Philippine Rural Development Program (P132317)
                            Task Team          Carolina V. Figueroa-Gero
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Feb-2013                       Estimated   29-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal          Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban
                                              Roads and Highways (40%), Irrigation and drainage (10% )
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Climate change (20%), Rural markets
                                              (20%), Decentralization (10%), Rural non-farm income ge neration (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     671.59           Total Bank Financing:                501.25
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                163.34
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   501.25
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                         7.00
                              Total                                                                                   671.59
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The PRDP aims to increase rural incomes and enhance farm and fishery productivity in targeted
                            areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The Project will promote more inclusive rural development by supporting smallholders and
                            fishers to increase their marketable surpluses, and their access to markets. The PRDP would also
                            support changes in the planning, resource programming and implementation practices of the
                            Department of Agriculture. It will facilitate the integration and financing of priority local
                            investments derived from the DA’s agricultural and fisheries modernization plans which have
                            been developed using a value chain approach, and through a consultative process with local
                            stakeholders.

                            The results indicators for the Program are: (a) at least five (5) percent increase in annual real
                            household incomes of farmer beneficiaries and 30% increase in incomes for targeted beneficiaries
                            of Enterprise development, (b) seven (7) percent increase in value of annual marketed output, and
                            (c) twenty (20) percent increase in the number of farmers and fishers with improved access to DA
                            services.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            The Global Environment Objective (GEO) is to strengthen the conservation of the coastal and
                            marine resource base in targeted program areas through biodiversity conservation and fisheries
                            resources management. This would be achieved through (i) enhancing institutional and planning
                            capacities of LGUs and communities, (ii) providing support to MPAs in particular areas of global
                            biodiversity significance and select fishery co-management arrangements, and (iii) sharing of
                            knowledge and best practices.
                         3. Project Description
                         PRDP would have four inter-linked components: Local Planning, Infrastructure Development,
                         Enterprise Development, and Program Support. The Local Planning Component will strengthen the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional planning and budgeting modalities needed to implement the Project, while the Program
                         Support Component will encompass the implementation aspects, including the mainstreaming and
                         harmonizing of PRDP modalities with the Department of Agriculture's other programs. The
                         Infrastructure and Enterprise Development Components would support small-scale producers and
                         enterprises to increase their productivity and marketable surpluses through improvements in
                         infrastructure, technical services and facilitated market linkages, marketing contracts and use of
                         private sector providers, agricultural and fisheries state universities and colleges, for the delivery of
                         extension services.

                         Component 1: Local Planning (US$14.29 M equiv. IBRD&US$1.40 M equiv. GEF grant)

                         a) Subcomponent 1.1: Enhancing the AFMPs Process ($11.61 M IBRD and US$1.40 M GEF grant).
                         This would support the institutional reforms of the Department of Agriculture's (DA) planning,
                         programming and budgeting processes through technical assistance, training and workshops. At the
                         national level, processes will be developed to ensure coherence and consistency of DA agency and
                         commodity programs with the AFMP. At the regional level, some realignment of the DA’s budget
                         programming and execution processes would be made to divest authority and accountability for
                         AFMP implementation and budget execution to the RFOs, and to ensure that DA Technical Agencies
                         align their support to the priorities and programs of the RAFMPs. Institutional processes will also be
                         established to undertake joint work programming with LGUs and to administer co-financing and


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         fund flow arrangements with LGUs. The key intermediate results would be: (i) Enhanced Planning,
                         Programming and Budgeting Guidelines, (ii) Harmonized Operation Manuals for Planning,
                         Programming, and Budgeting, (iii) Enhanced/ Validated AFMP and RAFMPs, (iv) Provincial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Commodities Investment Plans (PCIPs) and (v) by mid-term, updating of the AFMP and RAFMPs.
                         GEF-financed activities would focus on incorporating measures to conserve and sustainably use
                         biodiversity in policy and regulatory frameworks at the provincial and local levels, especially the
                         PCIPs. In addition, improved MPA management plans and fishery co-management plans would also
                         be financed under this component.

                         b) Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting AFMP Implementation ($2.68 M IBRD). This would fund
                         technical assistance, studies, training and workshops that will help in the design of coordinated
                         systems of technical support for the value chains and sub projects prioritized in the PCIPs. Prior to
                         mid-term, the key intermediate results would be the approved program agreements for PCIP
                         technical support between the DA-RFOs and national technical agencies, as well as the evaluation of
                         best practices for wider application on approaches for providing integrated technical support to small
                         scale producers following the commodity value–chain approach. It will also inventory various
                         modalities of integrated technical support delivery for pilot-testing under the Enterprise Development
                         Component. After mid-term, it is expected that this joint annual work programming and budgeting
                         between DA-RFOs and national technical agencies of the DA and other departments are expected to
                         be mainstreamed and institutionalized into the regular planning and budgeting processes of the
                         Department.

                         Component 2: Infrastructure Development (US$361.71 M IBRD)

                         a) Sub-component 2.1: Value Chain Infrastructure Support (US$354.47 million IBRD). This would
                         finance infrastructure investments by LGUs supporting priority commodity value chains. Support
                         would be provided for a flexible menu of investments, including farm-to-market roads, bridges, tire
                         tracks, communal irrigation, potable water systems, post-harvest facilities, production facilities, fish
                         landings, fish sanctuaries, tram lines, cold storage facilities, trading posts, green houses, solar driers,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         watch towers, nurseries and slope stabilization works. Cost sharing between the Department of
                         Agriculture and the concerned LGU would be on a 90:10 basis. Provincial Governments would be
                         responsible for the O& M of investment s. Geo-tagging would be used to facilitate planning,
                         procurement, and monitoring of sub projects. Intermediate results would include (i) improving the
                         links from production areas to markets to enhance the efficiency of transporting agricultural
                         products, (ii) higher productivity as a result of increased cropping intensity and yields, and (iii) lower
                         post-harvest losses resulting in higher volume of outputs and more efficient support infrastructure.

                         b) Sub-component 2.2: Approaches for Improving the Effectiveness and Sustainability of
                         Infrastructure Investments (US$7.23 million IBRD). Consultancy services, training, workshops,
                         supplies and travel expenses would be provided for developing technical specifications which will
                         improve climate resiliency and disaster risk mitigation for local infrastructure. Technical training and
                         workshops to enhance the capabilities of DA-RFOs and LGUs will also be conducted.

                         Component 3. Enterprise Development (US$100 M IBRD and US$5.60 M GEF grant)

                         a) Subcomponent 3.1: Rural agri-fishery enterprise and productivity enhancement (estd. US$90 M
                         IBRD and estd. US$3.36 M GEF). This would support vertical and horizontal clustering, joint
                         business planning and investments of producer groups comprising smallholders (farmers and fishers)
                         associations. Funding would be shared by the DA and provincial LGUs (PLGUs) on an 80:20 basis.

                                                                        Page 3 of 13
                         PLGUs would assist proponent groups through capital investments, facilities, inputs and technical
                         assistance. Funding for enterprises would range from PhP 1 million to 10 million with proponent
                         groups contributing an amount equal to at least 20% (in cash or in kind) of the incremental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enterprise cost. GEF support will be catalytic in terms of ensuring that biodiversity conservation and
                         coastal resources co-management arrangements are included in the determination of interventions
                         needed to support commodity value chains. The types of activities supported at each GEF target site
                         will be adapted based on regional and local needs. Specific activities will be selected at the site level
                         based on the information generated by the VCA, PRA-RSA, and GEF Tracking Tools.

                         b) Subcomponent 3.2: Technology and Information for Enterprise and Market Development (US
                         $10M IBRD and US$2.24M GEF). This would complement the enterprise sub-project development
                         under Component 3.1 through technical assistance including support for GEF-supported activities. A
                         particular focus would be on facilitating vertical and horizontal integration and include trade
                         facilitation, trial shipments, assistance in preparing market contracts; market promotion, field days,
                         trade fairs and caravans, cross visits, training and workshops. New and sustainable technologies and
                         approaches would be introduced in collaboration with agencies such as the Department of Science
                         and Technology (DOST), the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), and State and Private
                         Universities and Colleges. Technical assistance requirements would be determined as part of the
                         annual PCIP process and would be provided by DA agencies or contracted by the Province with
                         private service providers based on available expertise. Program Agreements would be used as a
                         temporary instrument to provide the incentive for DA agencies to tailor their services to local needs,
                         until planning and budgeting guidelines are issued (see Component 1.2).

                         Component 4: Program Support (US$24M IBRD). This would support the day-to-day coordination,
                         implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the PRDP across each of the 16 regions of the country.
                         The management support will follow the system that has worked well in Mindanao for MRDP2.
                         Under PRDP, expansion to include the rest of the country (Central & Northern Philippines) has
                         entailed the establishment and mobilization of a National Program Coordination Office (NPCO),
                         additional Project Support Offices (PSOs) for Visayas and Luzon, and designation of staff to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Program Coordination Offices (RPCOs) for Luzon and Visayas. Technical assistance,
                         training, workshops, equipment and incremental operating costs would also be supported.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The PRDP will be implemented nationwide, in all 16 regions of the Philippines. In general, sub
                         projects will be located in rural, agricultural and coastal areas of Luzon, Mindanao and Visayas
                         islands. Some sub projects will be located in areas with indigenous people or in areas that have been
                         declared as the ancestral domain of certain indigenous people groups.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Josefo Tuyor (EASDE)
                         Jonas Garcia Bautista (EASPS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The Program will fund rural infrastructure, agri-
                          BP 4.01                                              enterprise development sub projects and technical
                                                                               assistance to the Department of Agriculture (DA)
                                                                               and Local Government Units (LGUs). These



                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                                                                         activities are expected to have environmental and
                                                                         social impacts, hence the policy is triggered.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Given that the sub projects are implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         nationwide, most of which will be identified
                                                                         during implementation, it is highly likely that
                                                                         some sub projects would affect natural habitats,
                                                                         hence this policy is triggered. However, the
                                                                         Project will not finance sub projects that would
                                                                         significantly degrade or convert critical natural
                                                                         habitats. The Project however will support sub
                                                                         projects that would improve the management of
                                                                         natural resources such as near shore marine areas
                                                                         by supporting community-managed marine
                                                                         protected areas, fish sanctuaries, mangroves and
                                                                         coral reef rehabilitation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The policy is triggered as the Project may fund
                                                                         mangrove rehabilitation as part of its support to
                                                                         coastal/marine resource management. Other NRM
                                                                         activities that will benefit existing forests may
                                                                         also be financed.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The project will fund crop production and post-
                                                                         harvest activities which may inevitably involve
                                                                         use of pesticides, although the project itself would
                                                                         not finance purchase of pesticides. Use of
                                                                         pesticides may also increase in PRDP-supported
                                                                         areas when commercial production increases in
                                                                         these areas. For these reasons, the policy is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The PRDP is unlikely to affect any physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Sub projects could be located in areas where there
                                                                         are IP communities or in areas declared as
                                                                         ancestral domain of certain IP groups. IPs are
                                                                         often socially and economically marginalized and
                                                                         there is a possibility that they would be unable to
                                                                         participate and share the benefits of the Project if
                                                                         measures are not properly in place.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Rural infrastructure sub projects may involve
                         4.12                                            involuntary land acquisition which in rare cases
                                                                         may entail displacement of homes and/or
                                                                         livelihood. Crops and properties may also be
                                                                         damaged or temporarily affected by construction
                                                                         activities and farm owners would need to be
                                                                         justly compensated.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes           The PRDP will finance communal irrigation
                                                                         systems which may involve dam construction or


                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                                                                               rehabilitation. These dams will be small dams as
                                                                               defined under OP 4.37 (i.e., dams with height of
                                                                               less than 15 meters) and most likely be ogee weirs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               for run-of-river irrigation systems or dirt dams for
                                                                               small water impounding.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP/BP4.01 (Environmental Assessments) - The project is not expected to have large scale,
                              significant and/or irreversible impacts based on the actual experience of implementing the First
                              and Second Mindanao Rural Development Projects (MRDP1 and MRDP2), which are the
                              predecessors of PRDP. The types and nature of sub projects to be supported are assessed to cause
                              localized and temporary environmental and social impacts, which can be readily mitigated through
                              proper planning, design and engineering measures. These impacts include loss of vegetation, soil
                              erosion and sedimentation of waterways, and elevated levels of noise and dust during construction.
                              The same types and magnitude of impacts have been assessed in the PRDP year-1 sub projects.

                             OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management) – It is a policy of the Philippine Department of Agriculture not to
                             fund purchase of pesticides hence the project will not be financing the procurement and purchase
                             of chemical pesticides. However, the Project could indirectly result in increased use of pesticides.
                             The Project will be financing crop and animal production, post-harvest handling and processing
Public Disclosure Copy




                             enterprises which may involve the use of pesticides from time to time using other sources of funds.
                             Also, pesticide use may increase over time in the influence areas of infrastructure sub projects as
                             commercial production increases in these areas due to improved market access. The increase in
                             pesticide usage, however, is likely to be mitigated by the promotion and support of DA’s
                             Integrated Pest Management Program through the KASAKALIKASAN program under PRDP.

                             OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitat) – Based on experience with MRDP1 and MRDP2, rural
                             infrastructure may affect natural habitats during construction. The year 1 Infrastructure sub
                             projects have been assessed and for sub projects which will affect natural habitats, the EMP
                             includes measures to address such impacts.

                             OP/BP 4.36 (Forests) – The World Bank Policy on Forests was not triggered under MRDP1 and
                             MRDP2. However, experiences under these projects indicate that the PRDP’s support to natural
                             resource management would include management and rehabilitation of mangrove areas and
                             watersheds, which may change and improve the management regimes of these areas.

                             OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) – MRDP2 did not trigger this policy. However, based on MRDP2
                             experience, there will be sub projects that would involve construction or rehabilitation of ogee
                             weirs for run-of-river irrigation systems. It was observed that small run-of-river diversion dams do
                             not really impound large volumes of water. The safety issues for these dams often relate to

                                                                       Page 6 of 13
                           accidental drowning of children at intake and the ogee weirs which are sometimes used by
                           residents as footpaths to cross rivers. The same issues are expected under PRDP. The Borrower
                           has indicated that the Project may fund water impounding dams of up to less than 15 meters in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           height; the safety concerns would now also include potential breach of dam structures. Based on
                           assessments done, none of the proposed year 1 sub projects have so far involved dams.

                           OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) – Under MRDP2, minority groups were purposively targeted as
                           beneficiaries of the project to fulfill the project's poverty alleviation objectives. This would no
                           longer be done under the PRDP. However, under PRDP, sub projects located in areas where there
                           are IP communities would be undertaken in accordance with the Indigenous Peoples Framework
                           which was implemented quite successfully under MRDP and now has been enhanced for PRDP
                           use.

                           OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) – Based on MRDP1 and MRDP2 projects, there will be a
                           few infrastructure sub projects that would require physical relocation of residents, particularly
                           where there are no alternative sites such as in the construction of bridges and roads near the village
                           centers. Under MRDP2, almost all sub projects have required land or right-of-way acquisition and
                           only two have required physical relocation of households. All of the year 1 sub projects have
                           involved minor land acquisition and/or updating and firming up of the documentation of existing
                           right-of-ways but none will involve displacement of homes or livelihoods.

                           Procedural and Capacity Issues – Since social and environmental safeguards for this project
                           would rely on frameworks, the greatest challenge would be the establishment of an internal system
                           of screening, assessment, planning, review and approval of sub projects on safeguard aspects and
                           the building of capacities within the various units of the project organization to implement
                           safeguards system. These will be addressed through enhanced staffing for safeguards, capability
                           trainings, and close supervision and monitoring, especially in the first two years of the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           The indirect and long term impacts would include: (i) potential agricultural encroachment into
                           forest areas where farm-to-market roads will be rehabilitated and/or built; and (ii) potential
                           increased use of pesticides due to increased commercial production in project-supported areas. The
                           LGUs and RPCOs need to be aware of these potential impacts. In very critical areas such as
                           upland areas near public forests, LGUs would be required to submit sustainable agriculture
                           development/watershed management plans and to implement measures to prevent further human
                           encroachments into the forests. LGUs are also required to avail of the Department of Agriculture's
                           Integrated Pest Management – Farmer Field School (IPM-FFS) program, which the project will
                           support.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Project has adopted a set of general policies pertaining to the types and location of
                           infrastructure or development in the project areas, which were formulated under MRDP2. These
                           policies will guide LGUs on the proper use of the uplands, lowlands, and coastal areas. In
                           addition, alternatives will be considered at the sub projects level. All sub projects are subjected to
                           social and environmental screening in order to encourage LGUs to consider various
                           environmentally and socially sound alternative sites and subproject configurations.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an


                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                         assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                         The Borrower has developed an Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) which
                         builds on the existing MRDP2 frameworks and instruments. Included in this ESSF document are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Environmental Management Framework and Guidelines (EMFG), the Indigenous Peoples
                         Policy Framework (IPPF), the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Framework
                         (LARRF) and the Grievance Redress Mechanism Framework (GRMF). These frameworks would
                         govern the processes and procedures, and documentary requirements in the validation, screening,
                         preparation, evaluation, approval and monitoring of sub projects in order to ensure compliance
                         with the various applicable Safeguard policies of the World Bank.

                         The EMFG is designed to ensure that PRDP sub projects comply with the Philippine
                         Environmental Impact Statement Law (P.D. 1586) as well as the World Bank policies on
                         Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitat (OP 4.04), Forests (OP 4.36), Pest
                         Management (OP 4.09) and Safety of Dams (OP 4.37) which are triggered in PRDP. It contains:
                         (i) general policies pertaining to types and locations of agricultural development; (ii) technical
                         environmental guidelines and design specifications for the most common sub projects; (iii)
                         detailed description of the documentary requirements and the processes and procedures for
                         screening and evaluating the environmental aspects of subproject proposals; the procedures were
                         designed to facilitate compliance and ensure sub projects are cleared of safeguards requirements
                         before being approved for implementation; (iv) guidance in preparing and evaluating the
                         environmental aspects of subproject proposals; and (v) various forms and templates. Under the
                         EMFG, participating LGUs are encouraged to adopt land use and protection policies which would
                         help determine the types and locations of agricultural development in their areas. All Sub project
                         proposals will undergo environmental and social screening to determine their eligibility and the
                         applicable safeguard requirements vis-à-vis other World Bank safeguard policies, and to determine
                         coverage under the Philippine Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) law (PD 1586). Sub projects
                         that are deemed covered under the Philippine EIS law be required to secure Environmental
                         Compliance Certificate (ECC) from DENR. For sub projects deemed not covered under the PD
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1586, the Feasibility Studies of these sub projects shall include sections on Environmental and
                         Social Assessments which shall be the bases for the preparation of sub project's Environmental
                         and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). The Environmental and Social Assessment sections of
                         the FS will include assessments of impacts to natural habitats, forests, pesticide use, physical
                         cultural properties, involuntary resettlement and land acquisition and Indigenous People. The
                         mostly localized impacts of construction will be mitigated through strict adherence to guidelines in
                         terms of site selection, technical and engineering design and adoption of measures in operations
                         and maintenance systems. The required management measures of the applicable safeguard policies
                         will also be reflected in the ESMPs. The EMFG also provides for the following requirements:

                         (a) Pest Management. Sub projects proposals which involve procurement of chemical pesticides
                         using Project funds (i.e. including proponent's equity) shall be ineligible for funding, consistent
                         with the policy of the Department of Agriculture. The potential increase in use of pesticide will be
                         addressed through the promotion and support of Integrated Pest Management system under the
                         DA’s successful KASAKALIKASAN program, which is already widely practiced in the
                         Philippines. Hence, no separate Integrated Pest Management Plan for the Project was prepared.
                         For sub projects that would require regular application of pesticides, beneficiaries will be required
                         to attend a seminar on the proper use, handling and storage of pesticides and IPM.

                         (b) Natural Habitat. Sub projects that would significantly convert or degrade critical natural


                                                                    Page 8 of 13
                         habitats shall not be eligible for PRDP funding. The EMFG includes provision for screening of
                         sub projects for impacts on natural habitats and measures to address these impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (c) Forests. The EMFG has the provisions for screening of sub projects for impacts on forest,
                         forest health and forest-dependent communities and measures in case impacts arise.

                         (d) Safety of Dams. Only small dams as defined in OP/BP 4.37 will be eligible for funding which
                         include dams of less than 15 meters in height. Proposals for dams of up to 10 meters will follow
                         the procedures outlined in the EMFG, while those which are more than 10 meters to less than 15
                         meters in height would need to follow the procedures outlined in OP/BP 4.37 and would require
                         prior evaluation and approval from the Bank. All dams that qualify for funding should be designed
                         and supervised by a qualified engineer. The environmental assessment section of the feasibility
                         studies of sub projects involving dams shall include a brief risk assessment of dam failure and
                         impacts on environment and on downstream communities and assets with corresponding
                         mitigating measures reflected in the ESMP. Moreover, sub projects involving dams should submit
                         dam safety plans which should include measures against accidental drowning at dam sites.

                         (e) To address the inadequacy of skills in assessing and reviewing environmental and social
                         aspects of sub projects, a guideline for preparing and reviewing the Environmental and Social
                         Assessment section of the Feasibility Studies have been developed while ESMP templates have
                         been developed for the most common infrastructure sub projects based on MRDP2 experience. In
                         particular, the ESMP template for FMRs ensures that slope stabilization measures are applied on
                         critical road slopes, road safety issues are considered in the design including installation of guard
                         rails or planting of hedge rows while the impacts of quarrying and damage to existing roadway are
                         assessed and addressed accordingly. The ESMP template for irrigation ensures that
                         Schistosomiasis control and prevention and concerns for accidental drowning at dam sites and
                         deep canals are addressed.

                         Based on the social assessment conducted during the preparation of MRDP, indigenous peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are often socially and economically marginalized in the areas where they are a minority. Unlike
                         the First and the Second MRDP, PRDP will not purposively target IP communities. Instead, under
                         the IPPF prepared by the Borrower, the Project will ensure that: (i) IP communities in the regions
                         and provinces are able to meaningfully participate in the conduct of I-PLAN activities, including
                         the preparation of the Provincial Commodity Investment Plans (PCIPs); (ii) the selection,
                         screening and preparation of sub projects under the infrastructure and enterprise development
                         components will be undertaken with the involvement and participation of the IP communities in
                         the target areas in partnership with National Commission on Indigenous People (NCIP) and the
                         Local Government Units; and (iii) whenever the proposed subproject site is located within or will
                         directly impact on any declared or proposed ICC/IP Ancestral Domain, the requirements for
                         government-sponsored development projects under the Indigenous Peoples Rights Act (IPRA) as
                         stipulated in the Free and Prior Informed Consent (FPIC) Guidelines (i.e. NCIP Admin Order No.1
                         Series of 2006 or its successor issuances) are complied with. Otherwise, if the project site is
                         situated outside any declared or proposed Ancestral Domain but nevertheless will directly affect
                         and/or benefit any ICC/IP community or communities, a “free and prior informed consultation” is
                         undertaken, resulting in “broad community support” for the subproject. An IPP will be required
                         where the affected/benefited ICC/IP community is not the proponent or constitute only a minority
                         of the proponents of the Subproject. Environmental and Social Screening will determine whether a
                         subproject would require an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). To guide IPP preparation, an IPP
                         template has been developed and provided as an Annex in the ESSF.

                                                                   Page 9 of 13
                         The LARRF on the other hand, will ensure that all involuntary losses (i.e. whether lands,
                         structures, crops or other properties) of project-affected persons (PAPs) are properly and justly
Public Disclosure Copy




                         compensated and all those who are displaced (whether physically or economically) are resettled
                         and/or provided with assistance to improve, or at least maintain, their pre-Project living standards
                         and income earning capacities. The LARRF prepared by the Borrower spells out the documentary
                         requirements and the processes and procedures to be followed in securing sites and easement for
                         sub projects and in compensating project-affected persons for any damaged crops or properties.
                         Under the LARRF, subproject proponents are required to conduct and submit the results of PAP
                         and entitlement survey, conduct and submit evidences of consultations with the PAPs regarding
                         their compensation, and proper land acquisition documents. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                         would be required whenever there are PAPs to be physically or economically displaced by the
                         subproject.

                         The Grievance Redress Mechanism Framework (GRMF) for the Project requires that a Grievance
                         Redress Mechanism shall be set up within each participating LGU which shall conform to the
                         Framework and which shall serve all components and activities of the Project being undertaken
                         within the LGU, including implementation of any RAP. The framework which can be found in the
                         PRDP ESSF outlines thekey aspects of the grievance redress process from submission to the
                         resolution of complaints.

                         The PRDP will be implemented by the Department of Agriculture (DA) and participating
                         provincial and local government units all over the country. In terms of the preparation and
                         implementation of safeguards, the accountability would rest primarily on the concerned LGUs
                         with DA providing technical support and oversight. For sub projects under Component 3.1, while
                         sub project implementation will rest primarily with the proponent beneficiary groups, safeguards
                         preparation and implementation will still be the main responsibility and accountability of the
                         concerned LGUs. Within DA, three (3) additional Program Support Offices (PSOs) will be
                         organized, one for Visayas and two for Luzon. The existing Mindanao Rural Development Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PSO will eventually be absorbed under PRDP to serve the Mindanao regions. These PSOs will be
                         responsible for orchestrating project activities and providing support to participating DA Regional
                         Field Offices (RFOs) within the three main island groups. To facilitate project coordination at the
                         region, a Regional Program Coordinating Office (RPCO) has been organized in each of the sixteen
                         (16) DA RFUs. Except for Mindanao, environmental and social safeguard capacities of these
                         RFOs are still weak. For these RFOs, the Project has provided staffing complement for safeguards
                         in the RPCOs, which are being trained and oriented in the past year on the basic elements of
                         safeguards frameworks and guidelines, environmental and social assessments, subproject
                         screening, preparation, review and approval process, as well as the preparation of ESMPs. DA has
                         already designated Safeguards focal persons for the NPCO, PSO and RPCOs. Consultations on the
                         ESSF have been conducted among DA-RFUs and LGUs in various regions of the country from
                         October 8, 2012 to June 2014. The ESSF has been updated and integrated into the Project
                         Operations Manuals.

                         The Borrower has already prepared the safeguards documents for Year 1 sub projects following
                         the existing subproject preparation and approval processes outlines in the Operations Manuals.
                         These safeguards documents which include ESMPs, PAP and entitlement survey results, land
                         acquisition documents and IP endorsements where applicable, have been disclosed at the LGUs
                         and at the MRDP and PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net). None of the year-1
                         sub projects thus far has caused physical or economic dislocation and hence, no RAP has been

                                                                   Page 10 of 13
                           required.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During project preparation, an institutional and stakeholder assessment (ISA) was conducted
                           nationwide through focused group discussions and interviews involving about 2,000
                           representatives of government agencies, private sector, civil society and rural farming and fisher
                           communities which include subsistence and commercial smallholders and fishers, women and a
                           sample of IP groups. During the discussions, the stakeholders have voiced out their needs and
                           constraints and these were considered in the project conceptualization and overall project design.
                           The project is expected to benefit women and indigenous peoples (IPs). IP areas would be covered
                           by the Project while enterprise development and the business aspects of farming and post-harvest
                           handling and processing, which are roles traditionally played by women in the Philippines will be
                           supported. PRDP will also employ participatory approaches in the planning of interventions at the
                           regional and local levels, particularly in the value chain analyses and resource assessments which
                           would input into the formulation of the Provincial Commodity Investment Plans. The Project will
                           also continue to use the same participatory approach which has been proven effective in MRDP in
                           the identification and preparation of sub projects of LGUs and communities. Project-affected
                           persons will be consulted and compensated following the Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and
                           Resettlement Framework.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   06-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                06-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Philippines                                                   05-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Posted in the Department of Agriculture's website (www.da.gov.ph), MRDP and
                                         PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net).
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   06-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                06-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                   05-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Posted in the Department of Agriculture's website (www.da.gov.ph), MRDP and
                                         PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net).
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   06-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                06-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                   05-Jun-2014
                           Comments: Posted in the Department of Agriculture's website (www.da.gov.ph), MRDP and
                                         PRDP websites (www.damrdp.net and www.daprdp.net).


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?


                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Carolina V. Figueroa-Gero
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)                            Date: 06-Jun-2014



                                                                       Page 13 of 13
