                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5588
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Niger                              Project ID:    P132405
                            Project Name:      Niger - GPE - Basic Education Support Program (P132405)
                            Task Team          Kirsten Majgaard
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Nov-2013                        Estimated   15-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Primary education (70%), Secondary education (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Managing for development results (10%), Education for all (80%), Education for
                                              the knowledge economy (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     100.00           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                        15.80
                              EFA-FTI Education Program Development Fund                                                  84.20
                              Total                                                                                      100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve access, retention, and the quality of the teaching and
                           learning environment at the basic education level, in targeted areas of Niger
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         The proposed project is based on the 10-Year PSEF, and informed by the 2010 Niger Country
                         Education Status Report “Le Système Educatif Nigerien? (RESEN) along with its updated 2012
                         version, the July 2012 National Education Sector Joint Annual Review and the lessons learned from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the EFA/FTI Basic Education Project which closed on May 31, 2012. It is being developed as part of
                         a larger program of donor support to the Niger education sector. As a source of financing, the project
                         supports areas that complement the government’s expenditures as well as other sources of financing
                         to the sector. Despite the large education budget, investments are inadequate and inefficient to
                         sustain a dynamic and equitable quality education system. Salary expenditures, for instance, crowd
                         out investment in learning materials, infrastructure and pedagogical support. At the same time there
                         is still insufficient emphasis on factors which are critical to improve the equity, quality and efficiency
                         of the system such as girl’s access to education, student health, learning outcomes, teacher and
                         school management. The project will address these constraints by supporting an ambitious reform
                         program centered around three main pillars: i) Expanding access to and retention in basic education
                         in an equitable way, with particular focus on education infrastructure, girls’ education and feeding
                         interventions; ii) Improving the quality of teaching and learning, through more and better
                         pedagogical inputs and teacher/teaching skills with more emphasis on learning outcomes; and 3)
                         Strengthening management capacity, with focus on improving institutional capacity and incentives at
                         the ministry, system and school level.

                         The Project will specifically support the first phase (2014-2016) of Niger’s PSEF (2014-2024).
                         Therefore, the following paragraphs do not present the entire PSEF, but only the activities directly
                         financed by the GPE grant. By the same token, the description below does not detail the various
                         strategies adopted by the Government for the implementation of the PSEF activities, which can be
                         found in the Lettre de Politique Educative (LPE), as mentioned above, and which were evaluated
                         during Niger’s endorsement process to GPE. It also does not detail the technical evaluation of the
                         PSEF activities, which could be made available upon request. The program design has so far been
                         developed around the following three components as described below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Expanding equitable access to and retention in basic education (estimated base cost:
                         US$54.0m)

                         Access to and retention in basic education is constrained by supply and demand factors. On the
                         supply-side, the insufficient number of classrooms and the poor quality of classrooms stand out. This
                         situation has a negative impact on enrollment in rural areas, urban slums and especially for girls.
                         Indeed, 21% of primary schools are not able to offer 6 grades of schooling due to lack of classrooms;
                         46% of the classrooms are provisional shelters ; and 34% of classrooms in urban areas have a class
                         size over 60 students. Also, numerous schools lack the basic furniture as well as basic facilities
                         (latrines and water): only 15% of the schools are equipped with latrines. Action is needed to increase
                         both the quantity and quality of classrooms. Replacing shelters with standard classes, for instance,
                         will not only increase their capacity to welcome students but also increase their durability during the
                         rainy season, which will have a significant impact on time at school and thus also on the quality of
                         instruction.

                         In addition, there are still demand side constraints related to repetitive drought and famine in certain
                         areas, and to opportunity costs that are particularly high for girls. On this second point, specific
                         constraints often militate against girls’ schooling – long distances between the family home and the
                         school, absence of school monitoring, affirmation of program and textbook stereotypes as well as
                         teachers’ attitudes and behaviors usually detrimental to girls, preference given to boys in schooling


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         material, etc. Most of these constraints are detrimental to girls’ attendance by decreasing household
                         demand for their schooling, a nd therefore need to be addressed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The main objective of this component is to increase equitable access to and retention in basic
                         education by tackling supply and demand-side constraints to enrollment. It will involve replacing
                         unsuitable classrooms, build related facilities and stimulate demand in areas most prone to food
                         insecurity, with focus on areas which display gross school enrolment rates below the national
                         average. Special attention will be paid to gender issues. In particular, the project will finance: (i) the
                         construction, including replacement, and equipment of about 2,000 classrooms; (ii) other important
                         school infrastructure (i.e. latrines, water points, construction of wells etc.), where possible; (iii)
                         incentive schemes to promote girls’ education in both primary and lower secondary education; and
                         (iv) enhancement of student nutritional status through school feeding. The Component is divided
                         into three sub-components: (A): Education infrastructure; (B) Girls’ enrollment; and (C) School
                         feeding programs.

                         Subcomponent 1 (A): Education infrastructure (US$40.0m). This subcomponent aims at providing
                         quality basic education for about 260,000 children (including both new students enrolled and
                         students already in school benefitting from better teaching environment) of which 75% will come
                         from the rural areas, within which 20 to 30% will come from the districts with the lowest enrollment
                         ratios. It will support the program presently conducted by public authorities to provide universal
                         primary education and will involve building roughly 1,500 classrooms equipped with pupil benches
                         and teacher desks, latrines and water supply points, where possible . These buildings will be provided
                         for primary schools (CB1) and lower secondary education (CB2) - to cope with the increased number
                         of students achieving primary education, with priority given to schools with no permanent structures,
                         for pupils to be accommodated during seasons when straw huts (temporary structures) cannot be
                         used. Areas with the poorest access indicators will be given priority. The emphasis will be on priority
                         areas identified by the government and agreed with TFPs. The selection of localities will be based on
                         both need and demand. The program will also involve building Alternative Rural Schools (smaller
                         facilities better adapted to the most remote areas).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In addition to construction and replacement of classrooms, the project will finance equipment,
                         facilities (i.e. latrines, water points, wells) and other critical inputs such as student desks and teacher
                         desks for: (i) 1,000 new classrooms (50% of which will serve to complete existing schools; 30% to
                         reduce the number of overcrowded classrooms in urban areas; 20% for low density population and
                         nomadic zones); and (ii) 1,000 classrooms to be rebuilt. The classrooms will be disability-friendly to
                         providing education access to children with disabilities and other special needs, and they will be
                         complemented with gender-friendly latrines and water access.

                         Based on the difficulties encountered in using previous project resources for implementation of the
                         construction program, MEN/A/PLN will ensure that central and local government agencies as well as
                         contracted firms and individuals have the required staff and equipment for successful
                         implementation. The costs of these would be controlled by focusing sequentially on specific regions
                         and included in project financing. A more detailed description of the implementation arrangements of
                         this sub-component is included in Annex 2.

                         Subcomponent 1 (B): Girls’ Education (US$5.0m). This sub-component aims at reducing gender
                         disparities in access to education by supporting incentives to promote girls’ enrollment in both
                         primary and lower secondary education in targeted areas, including awareness activities, payment of
                         teachers' overtime for girls' tutoring and Girls' Education Grants. The project would provide funding

                                                                        Page 3 of 11
                         to continue activities which were successful under the previous IDA-funded project, focusing on
                         areas where there is more resistance to female schooling and very low enrollment rates. It is
                         anticipated that 51,700 girls will benefit from this subcomponent and that access and retention for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         girls will improve in the targeted areas.

                         To complement the promotion of girls' enrollment through the construction of classrooms and
                         latrines, supported by the infrastructure sub-component, this sub-component will: (a) continue the
                         information campaign to sensitize and increase awareness of the population on the benefits of girls'
                         education, supported by decentralized units, CGDES (Decentralized School Management
                         Committees) and NGOs; (b) scale up and provide support to "mères educatrices? by organizing focus
                         groups with young women and families to discuss factors limiting girls’ participation and proposing
                         solutions relevant to existing conditions on the ground including proper use of water and sanitary
                         facilities to make schools more female friendly; (c) develop and implement tutoring programs for
                         poorly performing students in selected schools in targeted areas with the aim of improving retention
                         rates and reducing dropouts; (d) provide awards to promising students at the regional level through
                         “girls’ graduation ceremonies? rewarding girls with the highest final exam score during a public
                         ceremony with a small monetary incentive (i.e. the equivalent of US$20/girl); and (e)increase girls'
                         enthusiasm for, and retention in, lower secondary school through an incentive scheme (grant scheme)
                         to study science subjects and to provide incentives for staying in school beyond the lower secondary
                         level. The project will also support an impact evaluation of the different approaches to assess their
                         relative cost-effectiveness.

                         Subcomponent 1(C): School feeding and hygiene programs (US$9m). This sub-component aims at
                         reducing the prevalence of nutritional deficiencies and support student health by promoting good
                         nutrition practices and school hygiene and providing food. The program will target the districts
                         affected by severe and recurrent droughts, and consequently food crisis, and by the recent flood
                         damage. Priority will be given to areas where: (i) the enrolment ratios are the lowest (mainly in the
                         poorest regions and in rural areas, which coincides with where girls’ attendance is the lowest); and
                         (ii) schools buildings are incomplete and/or destroyed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The sanitary situation for children following recurrent droughts and flooding has deteriorated
                         drastically, especially in the affected areas. To address these issues, the sub-component proposes to:
                         (i) support the extension of school feeding programs (canteens) in areas suffering from acute food
                         shortage and/or prone to natural disasters or with consequences arising from certain crises (conflicts).
                         Canteens are a major school enrolment factor, especially amongst populations with the lowest
                         schooling rates (girls, remote areas, nomadic peoples, etc.). The operation will complete the action
                         that the WFP has been carrying out for several years now with a view to reaching out to
                         approximately 300,000 more children over a 3-year period; (ii) support school de-worming; and (iii)
                         train/sensitize teachers and other key school administrative staff on health and nutrition-related issues
                         and in the development of a nutrition policy at the school level. In addition to the likely positive
                         impact of these interventions on the health status of children, it is expected that school attendance
                         and learning capacity will improve, leading to reductions in grade repetition and dropouts.

                         The component will target the locations of Niger where: (i) the enrolment ratios are the lowest
                         (mainly in the poorest regions and in rural areas, which coincides with where girls’ attendance is the
                         lowest); (ii) the pupil-classroom ratios are the highest; (iii) schools are incomplete and/or were
                         affected by flood damages. Consequently the new constructions will support strongly the reduction
                         of disparities in school access between urban and rural areas, richest and poorest and boys and girls.



                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         To finalize the preparation of this component, especially the construction activities, a committee in
                         charge of the school building strategy will be set-up. This committee and the related worki ng group
                         will, in the coming weeks and months: (i) define the norms and standards of the school buildings; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         define modalities and prepare implementation of the various approaches; (iii) prepare the documents
                         types (including contracts, execution manual and inspection/community convention); and (iv) set-up
                         the monitoring system. In addition, the merits and feasibility of various incentives to promote girls
                         schooling such as school supplies, uniforms, take home rations or cash transfer for girls of primary
                         education, girls' graduation ceremonies and distribution of awards, and teachers’ overtime for girls’
                         tutoring will be analyzed.

                         Component 2: Improving the quality of teaching and learning (estimated base cost: US$23.0m)

                         The education system in general and the basic education sub-sector in particular suffer from certain
                         weaknesses, principally: (i) the lack of focus on the skills acquisition expected of learners; (ii) the
                         inadequate programs, combined with the shortage of textbooks and teaching aids; and (iii) the limited
                         subject knowledge and poor teaching methods of teachers. This second component will aim at
                         addressing some of these constraints to help improve the quality of teaching and learning outcomes
                         in Niger.

                         The main Objective of this component is to improve the quality of teaching and learning in the two
                         cycles of basic education by supporting: (a) increased provision of teaching and learning materials
                         and a curriculum review; (b) pre-service and in-service teacher training; and (c) better tools for the
                         measurement and improvement of learning outcomes in reading and math. Component 2 is divided
                         into three sub-components: (A) Pedagogical inputs; (B) Teacher training; and (C) Learning
                         outcomes.

                         Subcomponent 2(A): Pedagogical inputs (US$8.0m). This sub-component will support higher quality
                         of teaching and learning through the provision of teaching and learning materials and the initiation of
                         a curriculum and textbook review of primary education. The textbooks program should provide all
Public Disclosure Copy




                         students with textbooks and teacher's guides in core subjects (mathematics, reading, sciences) at a
                         ratio of 1:1 book in primary schools and at a ratio of 2:1 in lower secondary schools. Thus the project
                         will provide about 6 million primary textbooks and 1 million secondary school textbooks, while also
                         providing about 125,000 teacher's guides.

                         Key activities supported by this sub-component include: (i) the re-printing or acquisition of
                         textbooks for the first and second cycles of basic education (for about 2 million students); (ii) the
                         provision of selected pedagogical materials to primary and lower secondary schools, for which a list
                         of eligible items have been elaborated and approved; and (iii) launching a curriculum and textbook
                         review of the first cycle of primary education. Pedagogical materials will largely include teachers’
                         guides and students’ learning materials to support better teaching and learning in core subjects. The
                         assistance envisaged for textbooks is twofold: i) acquisition and distribution, from the inception of
                         the project, of textbooks using the current editions to make up for the shortages in schools; and ii)
                         designing of new textbooks aligned with the new curricula being finalized with national copyrights
                         for subsequent printing. It is envisaged that these new books be printed in limited numbers to test the
                         new curriculum.

                         Subcomponent 2(B): Teacher (initial and continuous) training (US$11.0m). This sub-component will
                         support higher quality of teaching and learning through more and better teacher pre-service and in-
                         service training so as to increase by 20% the number of actual trained contractual teachers in the

                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                         project target areas and help all teachers acquire the fundamental teaching skills and practices, with
                         particular focus on subject knowledge and more practical teaching methods. About 3,500 contractual
                         teachers will benefit from in-service training in the areas targeted by the project and 375 teacher
Public Disclosure Copy




                         trainers will be trained.

                         The sub-component will support: (i) the expansion of the capacity of teacher training schools through
                         the construction of three new primary teacher training schools (ENIs) in the South (Tessaoua, Region
                         of Maradi), So uth-East (Magaria, Region of Zinder) and East (Doutchi, Region of Dosso) of the
                         country, envisaged over the next three years; (ii) higher quality training through the training of
                         trainers at those and all other training institutions; (iii) the provision of in-service training for
                         contractual teachers; and (iv) the development of new training modules and teacher guides for
                         trainers and teachers on early reading. In terms of the training of trainers, focus will be put for both
                         pre-service (PRESET) and in-service trainers (INSET) on improving their capacity for hands on,
                         practical and class oriented teacher training to help them transfer well defined basic skills and
                         practices in all teaching domains, starting from early reading and early math.

                         Subcomponent 2(C): Learning outcomes (US$4.0m). This sub-component will support higher
                         quality of teaching and learning through better tools for the measurement and improvement of
                         learning outcomes, with focus on numeracy and literacy. It will include support to the development
                         and implementation of: (a) a students’ learning assessment evaluation and monitoring system; and
                         (b) the piloting of an early grade reading assessment (EGRA) and reading improvement tools in
                         grades 1, 2 and 3. Both activities will feed to the extent possible in subcomponents A and B.

                         Component 3: Strengthening management and implementation capacity (estimated base cost: US
                         $18.0m)

                         While unit costs for primary education in Niger align broadly with other countries in the region,
                         learning outcomes, attainment and retention results rank among the lowest pointing to important
                         inefficiencies in the use and allocation of financial and human resources. These inefficiencies are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         symptomatic of lack of a high-level managerial and technical capacity to provide a clear strategic and
                         operational direction for the sector; a limited capacity for personnel planning, management and
                         supervision, as well as overall M&E; and limited school management and planning capacity. These
                         factors are made worse by the lack of linkages between resources and outcomes (lack of incentives to
                         perform). The program, through its third component, will strive to address some of these constraints.
                         Sustained by national organizations (both at central and regional levels), the project will help to build
                         their capacities. The project contracting assistance that will be provided will have the twofold aim of
                         supporting project implementation and building the capacities of the stakeholders.

                         Component 3 will support more efficient use of resources for improved access and quality through
                         the development of management and institutional capacity and better incentives at the central, district
                         and school and project levels in several critical areas. Component 3 is divided into three sub-
                         components: (A) Capacity Enhancement of the MEN; (B) System and school management; and (C)
                         Project management and coordination.

                         Subcomponent 3(A): Capacity Enhancement of the Ministry in charge of Basic Education (MEN)
                         (US$6.0m). This sub-component will enhance the capacity of the MEN to manage and coordinate the
                         primary education system effectively by supporting institutional strengthening activities. It will build
                         the organizational capacities of the MEN at both central and decentralized levels by implementing
                         new tools, changing the division of tasks, networking the central and decentralized services,

                                                                       Page 6 of 11
                         providing equipment and/or organizing training sessions. Synergies will be developed among the
                         programs financed by various partners that support improvements of the pedagogical and
                         administrative management of the MEN to ensure progressive and sustainable capacity building.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The activities of this sub-component will derive from a comprehensive organizational review
                         (complementing institutional analyses carried out during preparation of the PSEF) to be undertaken
                         in the next six months prior to program implementation to delineate roles and functions in primary
                         education policy-making, planning and financing, management, system support, and monitoring at
                         each level.

                         Subcomponent 3(B): System and school management (US$10.0m). This sub-component will support
                         the Government’s initiatives to strengthen the planning, management, and monitoring capacity and
                         the incentives to perform of the central administration, the deconcentrated agencies, the schools and t
                         he communities to implement system-wide primary and lower secondary education programs
                         effectively and efficiently.

                         More specifically, the sub-component will support capacity development for: (i) education sector
                         planning and management; (ii) school planning and management, including staff and CGDES
                         training; (iii) school financing, including through introducing School Improvement Grants (SIGs);
                         and (iv) better monitoring through an Education Management Information System (EMIS) at all
                         levels, including data collection and school surveys.

                         Subcomponent 3(C): Project management and coordination (US$2m). This sub-component will
                         support program coordination and M&E, with the view to facilitate implementation. It will aim at
                         ensuring effective implementation of the proposed project through efficient coordination
                         mechanisms, proper FM and procurement practices, and effective monitoring and evaluation of
                         project outcomes at the national and sub-national levels. Specifically, support will be given to the
                         strategic committee in charge of the education sector plan, to the central level staff (in Finance,
                         Procurement, Human Resources Management, M&E, Statistics), to the regional level staff and to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities. This sub-component will notably train communities on procurement and M&E aspects
                         for the implementation and supervision of school buildings. A key element would also be the
                         establishment of an effective two way communications system between government (central and
                         local) and communities to promote timely and continued exchange of information and assessments of
                         project implementation so that successes can be enhanced and issues addressed quickly.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is national in scope and school construction will be undertaken at a large number of sites
                         in many parts of Niger. The exact location of the sites is not known at the time of project preparation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The policy is triggered due to the school
                          BP 4.01                                             construction activities included in Sub-
                                                                              component 1A. An Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF) was deemed



                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                                                                            appropriate due to the fact that sites for the works
                                                                            are not yet known. The works are expected to
                                                                            have minimal to moderate environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            impacts. The ESMF has been prepared, submitted
                                                                            to and approved by the Bank, and was disclosed
                                                                            through Infoshop on October 21, 2013. The
                                                                            ESMF outlines the procedures which will be used
                                                                            to screen sub-projects for environmental and
                                                                            social impact, and for preparing and carrying out
                                                                            specific environmental and social management
                                                                            plans, as relevant.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             This policy is triggered as land acquisition
                            4.12                                            resulting from school construction activities may
                                                                            lead to temporary or permanent limitations in
                                                                            access to natural resources by local populations.
                                                                            The project is not expected to lead to involuntary
                                                                            resettlement. As the sites of school construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            are not yet known, the preparation of a
                                                                            Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                            deemed appropriate. The RPF was prepared,
                                                                            submitted to, and approved by the Bank, and
                                                                            disclosed through Infoshop on October 21, 2013.
                                                                            In the event that project activities--particularly
                                                                            school construction--will restrict peoples access
                                                                            to resources, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                            will be prepared and implemented by the
                                                                            Government of Niger, as appropriate.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           As a Category B, the potential environmental and social impacts of this project will not be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adverse; they are likely to be small-scale, site-specific and thus easily manageable. The activities
                           consist of primarily: construction and rehabilitation of classrooms; construction of latrines for
                           public primary schools; construction of wells for primary schools; provision of furniture to
                           classrooms in public primary education.

                           The project triggers two safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, and OP/
                           BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Two safeguards documents were prepared: An
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF). These instruments outline the potential negative impacts of the project, provide
                           mitigation measures to eliminate or minimize these impacts, screening mechanisms to assess the
                           impacts of proposed activities, and the implementation arrangements for the mitigation measures.
                           Moreover, the clauses and procedures for civil works rehabilitation will be inserted into contracts.
                           Detailed environmental assessments or Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement
                           Action Plans, if necessary, will be carried out for project activities that require them and disclosed
                           in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop before specific or rehabilitation civil works can start.

                           Consultations were held with stakeholders to present and discuss the safeguards instruments. Both
                           the ESMF and the RPF have been reviewed, approved in-country, and approved by the Bank.
                           They have been disclosed at the Infoshop and the Bank's Public Information Center in Niger, and
                           in-country by the Ministry of Primary Education.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The potential negative impacts of this project are likely to be small, site-specific and easily
                           mitigated thus no direct or indirect long term impacts are anticipated from the implementation of
                           the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to cover all project-financed activities. These documents
                           outline detailed institutional arrangements and capacity building plans for relevant stakeholders.
                           This includes plans for technical and institutional support, and training. During implementation,
                           Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management
                           Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared as needed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project unit has a poor capacity to monitor the social and environmental mitigation measures.
                           Capacity building activities will be organized for the project team and a strong supervision
                           capacity will be arranged by the safeguards team and local NGOs to mitigate the poor capacity. In
                           case of resettlement, the Project Coordination Unit will put in place a Support Group (NGOs)
                           which will be responsible, in liaison with local authorities to monitor the implementation of the


                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                           resettlement process.

                           During the elaboration of the safeguards the following structures were consulted:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           -       The Ministry of Education
                           -       The decentralized institutions of the Ministry of Education
                           -       The Communes
                           -       Local authorities
                           -       NGOs
                           -       Local populations
                           -       Parents associations
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            05-Nov-2013
                           Comments: The ESMF has been disclosed in-country by the Ministry of Primary Education
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            05-Nov-2013
                           Comments: The RPF has been disclosed in-country by the Ministry of Primary Education
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?



                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Kirsten Majgaard
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 11-Nov-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                         Date: 11-Nov-2013




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
