                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC5000

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sierra Leone                    Project ID:      P143588
                            Project Name:      Sierra Leone Safety Nets Project (P143588)
                            Task Team          Suleiman Namara
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Nov-2013                     Estimated        27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTSW                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (50%), Primary education (25%), Health (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         10.00                Total Bank Financing:       10.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 10.00
                              Total                                                                       10.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to establish the key building blocks for of a basic
                           national safety net system and provide income support to poor and vulnerable households in Sierra
                           Leone.
                           C. Project Description
                           A.     Concept
                           The proposed project will be implemented using an Investment Project Financing (IPF) for a period
                         of 4 years starting in FY14. The project is expected to be financed by an IDA credit of US$ 15.00
                         million. Government has indicated its commitment to make a financial contribution to this project
                         with amounts that will be firmed up during pre-appraisal. The project will establish the key building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         blocks of a safety net system, while launching a targeted cash transfer program in selected initial
                         districts in the country.

                         The proposed operation will support the creation of a national safety net system, focusing a cash
                         transfer program that will target extremely poor households. Building on the lessons learned from the
                         ongoing public works programs implemented under the Sierra Leone Youth Employment Support
                         Project and other small programs, the SSN project will put in place the building blocks of a safety
                         nets system aimed at reducing poverty and making economic growth equitable. Project coverage will
                         be based on transparent criteria that will be agreed during project preparation. Based on the
                         preliminary discussions with Government, the project will make small but regular transfers for 2-3
                         years to extremely poor households. The transfers will be accompanied with soft conditions and will
                         provide an opportunity to poor households to smooth consumption and invest in the human capital of
                         their families, particularly young children and pregnant and lactating mothers. There is limited
                         experience in Sierra Leone with targeted cash transfer programs and therefore the operation will be
                         simple, starting with 4 out of the country’s 14 districts and implemented with a significant focus on
                         building systems, learning and capacity building. The Government has intentions of scaling up the
                         program to cover all the districts as lessons emerge.

                         The proposed project is expected to have the following components:
                         Component 1. Development of Systems for Implementation of Social Safety Net Intervention

                         Component Objective. The objective of this component is to put in place the building blocks of a
                         basic national safety net system in Sierra Leone. Specifically, this component will finance
                         development of a set of safety net instruments and systems that need to be in place before or during
                         the initial stages of the project including the following activities: (a) design of targeting tools; (b)
                         building a beneficiary registry; (c) setting up of a payment system; and (d) development and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthening of a grievance redress mechanism.

                         Targeting system. The project will develop targeting tools to support the SSN project. The following
                         elements of the targeting system will be supported by this component:
                         (a)     Development of tools for a 3-stage targeting mechanism combining geographical, proxy
                         means testing (PMT), and community-based targeting. This will include: (i) tools to guide districts
                         and local councils in targeting geographical areas below the district level (i.e., to chiefdoms and
                         wards); (ii) tools to be used in the PMT targeting process, including data collection; and (iii) tools to
                         carry out the community-based targeting process (e.g., participatory poverty assessments).
                         (b)     Design and implementation of a beneficiary registry (i.e., database). This registry will
                         include beneficiary information collected during the targeting processes for the SSN project and will
                         potentially be linked to the national identification system. Development of these tools will build on
                         the experience of the ongoing public works program. This database will be housed in the Social
                         Protection Secretariat and managed by NaCSA, but will be accessible to other social programs.

                         Payment system. Building on the ongoing pilot under the national public works program, the
                         component will further build and scale up an e-payment system under the SSN project. Alternative
                         payment mechanisms will be explored in areas where the e-payment mechanisms may not be initially
                         feasible.
                         Grievance redresses mechanism (GRM). The component will support the Government to implement
                         a grievance mechanism. The GRM will provide beneficiaries a channel through which they can raise
                         any concerns or complaints about the implementation of the SSN project, in particular, during
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selection and payments processes. This mechanism will build on the existing GRM system being
                         used under in the ongoing public works program.

                         Capacity building on safety net tools and systems. The project will provide capacity building to
                         stakeholders at central and local levels, including training for communities, on the use of the tools
                         and systems developed under this component, as well as on the program's operations, and on their
                         respective responsibilities.

                         Component 2. Cash Transfers

                         Component Objective. The objective of the component will be to provide income support to
                         extremely poor households. The component will provide regular transfers to eligible households
                         based on emerging evidence from Africa and other existing international experiences and in the
                         process test functionality, performance and the efficiency of the SSN system. The target group will
                         include extremely poor households, as these are also the most food insecure and likely to have the
                         highest risks of malnutrition and poor maternal health. The component will be implemented in
                         targeted geographical areas of Sierra Leone within four districts selected based on poverty criteria,
                         one in each of the country’s four regions.

                         Beneficiary households will be selected using a targeting mechanism consisting of three stages: (i)
                         geographical targeting to allocate resources to target areas; (ii) community-based targeting to
                         generate a list of potential participants within selected communities identified through the
                         geographical targeting mechanism; and (iii) verification of these participants' eligibility through
                         application of a proxy means test (PMT). In the first stage of targeting, various sources of data will
                         be used to select the project’s geographical coverage. First, the four target districts will be selected
                         for coverage among the country's 14 districts based on their poverty status using estimates from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         various data sources, including the most recent nationally representative household survey, the 2011
                         Sierra Leone Integrated Household Survey (SLIHS). See Annex 2 for a detailed description of the
                         proposed targeting mechanism. In the second stage, beneficiaries will be selected through a
                         community-based targeting process, in which the communities themselves generate a list of potential
                         beneficiaries using transparent criteria. In this stage, the targeting process used in the ongoing public
                         works program and other small programs will be built on and refined. In the final stage, it is expected
                         that a proxy means test would be applied to the list of potential beneficiaries generated through the
                         community-based targeting stage. The purpose of the PMT is to verify that the beneficiaries selected
                         by communities for the programs are in fact eligible, based on indicators that are correlated with
                         poverty (proxies).

                         Given the relatively low capacity environment, the transfer will have a fixed structure (i.e., will not
                         vary across households). Transfers will be delivered to households on regular basis throughout the
                         year, most likely quarterly, depending on the payment system that is ultimately selected. The size of
                         the transfer will be determined during project preparation; however, it should be high enough to
                         provide meaningful support to poor households’ income but low enough to avoid negative incentives
                         (e.g., reduced work).

                         This component will also support workshops (“soft conditions?) to reinforce human capital
                         investments, particularly those associated with maternal and child health. The aim of these
                         workshops will be to provide beneficiary households with information on project objectives,
                         encourage beneficiary households to put the transfers toward investments in human capital and to
                         adopt good practices (e.g., on proper health and nutrition, child care, home hygiene, water usage, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         well as other topics including the importance of starting education at the right age). It is expected that
                         transfers will be made to a woman within each targeted household in order to incre ase the potential
                         for higher program impacts on human capital (i.e., the female member in the household with the
                         most knowledge of or responsibility for household spending decisions related to maternal and child
                         health).

                         Component 3. Project Management and Administration

                         The objective of this component is to finance program management and administration of the SSN
                         proje ct implemented by the National Commission for Social Action (NACSA). Specifically, the
                         component will finance the delivery of cash transfers to beneficiaries and staff costs related to
                         development of SSN systems including the following activities: (i) developmen tand strengthening of
                         the M&E system; (ii) information, education, and communication campaigns; (iii) workshops,
                         seminars, and knowledge exchange events; (iv) recurrent operational costs; (v) fiduciary aspects; and
                         (vi) studies linked to implementation. Given that the SSN projects are relatively new in Sierra Leone,
                         there is need to provide ongoing support and assistance and to strengthen coordination across the
                         Ministries (e.g., Social Welfare, Health, Labour, Education, Agriculture) in carrying out the required
                         operational reform to effectively implement the SSN. The component will also support the relevant
                         district councils in implementation of the project.

                         Development and strengthening of the M&E system. The proposed component will help to set up an
                         M&E system for SSN project. The M&E system will provide information to program implementers
                         at both central and district levels necessary to track the program’s progress and results. The M&E
                         system will not only be useful for program management, but will also generate new knowledge. The
                         main elements of the M&E system this component will support are:
                         (a) Management Information System (MIS). The component will seek to develop and implement an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MIS system to facilitate the project monitoring. The MIS will incorporate data from the beneficiary
                         registry and will be capable of providing the necessary information to generate payment sheets,
                         reconcile payments, and calculate key process indicators. The MIS will build on the experience of
                         the ongoing public works program, which has recently introduced a similar system to record
                         attendance and payment information.
                         (b) Process Evaluation(s). The component is expected to support a minimum of one process
                         evaluation about a year into SSN project program’s implementation. Such a process evaluation
                         would assess each of the program processes to assess whether they are being conducted as designed
                         and to recommend any necessary improvements. The main processes covered under this evaluation
                         would include: (i) targeting, registration, and enrollment of beneficiaries into the program; (ii)
                         application of the soft conditions (i.e., human capital workshops); (iv) functioning of the M&E
                         system; (v) payment processes; and (vi) financial monitoring. This evaluation will be carried out by
                         an independent firms or consultants contracted by NaCSA.
                         (c) Spot checks. The component is expected to support central level staff in carrying out field visits
                         to a random sample of communities participating in SSN project program to verify the accuracy of
                         the data entered in the MIS and provide recommendations on how to improve data collection,
                         processing, and analysis. The frequency of these visits is yet to be determined. The proposed project
                         will draw from the existing experiences with mobile monitoring initiatives being implemented under
                         the Youth Employment Support Project.
                         (d) Impact Evaluation. The component will include a randomized impact evaluation of the cash
                               transfer program to examine the effects on beneficiary households’ welfare.

                               IEC. The component will provide support in designing and implementing a strategy to communicate
Public Disclosure Copy




                               information about the project activities to beneficiaries and relevant stakeholders. In particular, the
                               IEC activities will seek to: (i) inform program beneficiaries about SSN project program details
                               including activities, targeting, benefits, and soft conditions; and (ii) inform stakeholders at the central
                               and local levels about the program's progress and results.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)
                               The project will target four districts in Sierra Leone. These districts, which have yet to be identified,
                               will be selected based on poverty and geographic criteria. The project activities will have no or
                               negligible environmental social safeguards impacts, and the project does not involve land acquisition
                               leading to involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods. There are no
                               Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                               Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not finance any activities that
                                 4.12                                                                                            will result in impacts detailed in OP 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2013
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             September 30, 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Suleiman Namara

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 18-Oct-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                     Date: 21-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
