                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA5637

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Nov-2013
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2013
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Kenya                            Project ID:    P144197
                                                      Parent         P074091
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Kenya Health Sector Support Project - Additional Financing (P144197)
   Parent Project    Health Sector Support (P074091)
   Name:
   Task Team         Gandham N.V. Ramana
   Leader:
   Estimated         24-Oct-2013                      Estimated   20-Dec-2013
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTHE                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Health (100%)
   Theme(s):         Child health (20%), Health system performance (40%), Population and
                     reproductive health (20%), Other human development (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:              30.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              30.00
     Total                                                                                    30.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                            Page 1 of 8
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The proposed project's development objectives are to: (i) improve the delivery of essential health
   services for Kenyans, especiallythe poor; and (ii) improve the efficiency of pharmaceutical
   planning, procurement and management.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   To improve (i) the delivery and utilization of quality essential health and nutrition services by
   women and children especially among the poor and drought affected populations; and (ii) the
   effectiveness of planning, financing, procurement and distribution of pharmaceutical and medical
   supplies.
 3. Project Description
The proposed additional credit from IDA (US$30 million) and HRITF (US$20 million) together with
the restructuring of ongoing KHSSP would fall primarily under Component 1.

Component 1: (US$50 million): Delivering Kenya Essential Package of Health Services.
Theproposed additional financing will enhance ongoing efforts by Government of Kenya and its
partners to deliver essential health and nutrition services to women and children by (i) supporting
ongoing government policies to improve delivery of quality health services for women and children
in rural areas with strong focus on results; (ii) complementing the government's commitment to
reduce inequities in access to health care by contributing to the health insurance premiums for the
poor; and (iii) building sustainable institutions at the county level to effectively manage the devolved
health systems.

Component 2: Provision of essential medicines and medical supplies. Considering the continued
need for the nutrition supplementation for the drought prone populations, it is proposed to reallocate
US$8 million made under the Crisis Response Window for Essential Medicines and Medical
Supplies (EMMS) to purchase and distribute nutrition commodities.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
NHSSP II, which the Project supports, covers the whole country. As per the descriptions above,
implementation will be at all levels of the health system.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gibwa A. Kajubi (AFTCS)
Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)
Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
 BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No




                                              Page 2 of 8
   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

   Pest Management OP 4.09             No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The proposed additional financing will not change the environmental category of the KHSSP
     which is rated Category B. Safeguard policies triggered in the original project were Environmental
     Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and no new safeguard policies
     will be triggered. No exceptions to Bank policies are required.

    OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment: The potential negative environmental impacts of the project
    relate to issues of health care waste management, in particular the risks associated with the
    handling and disposal of medical waste. For malaria control, the EMMS-pooled fund only
    supports anti-malarial drugs, bednets and diagnostics. No indoor residual spraying will be
    supported in the Project. The Project does not support civil works other than maintenance and very
    minor renovation of existing health facilities under the Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF).

    The National Health Care Waste Management Plan (NHCWMP) was publicly disclosed by the
    Ministry of Public Health and Sanitation (MOPHS) and Ministry of Medical Services (MOMS) in
    Kenya, and in the InfoShop on February 4, 2010, in association with the East Africa Public Health
    Laboratory Networking (EAPHLN) Project. The plan was re-disclosed again in the InfoShop in
    May 2010 for Additional Financing done under Crisis Response Window. The Bank did not ask
    for any revisions to the NHCWMP. Under the new Constitution and Devolution the counties are
    now responsible for the delivery of essential health services. The KHSSP has been piloting the use
    of a results based indicator for waste care management in 5 locations and the National MOH will
    continue to work with the 5 counties to continue implementing the pilot. Further, the Results
    Based Financing now being scaled up to 20 counties includes this cross cutting indicator for
    counties to comply with the Health Care Waste Management.

    The Project does not finance activities involving the involuntary taking of land, loss of assets or


                                               Page 3 of 8
access to assets, loss of income sources or means of livelihood or the involuntary restriction of
access to legally designated parks and protected areas. OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not
triggered.

OP 4.10 - Indigenous People. The Kenya Health Sector Support Project (KHSSP) aims to improve
delivery of essential health services for Kenyans, especially the poor. Although the projects does
not anticipate negative impacts on Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups (VMGs), the World Bank
Operational Policy (OP4.10) Indigenous Peoples has been triggered to ensure pro-active steps are
taken for such groups to benefit from the project. The KHSSP has a Vulnerable and Marginalized
Peoples Planning Framework (VMPPF) focusing on a pro-active approach that ensures VMGs are
included, mainly through effective targeting and/or assistance in preparing sub-projects. It is
generally envisaged that the Vulnerable and Marginalized Populations do not have access to these
services in a similar way to other ethnic communities in Kenya.

An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was developed by the Ministry of Public
Health and Sanitation (MOPHS) and Ministry of Medical Services (MOMS) for the EAPHLNP
and then updated to include the new health Project too. The documents were reviewed by IDA and
found to be acceptable. The MOMS and MOPHS disclosed the documents in the country on
February 4, 2010, and the Bank disclosed them in the InfoShop on February 5, 2010. The
framework was disclosed again in the InfoShop in May 2010 to ensure clarity about the
application of the safeguards documents to the Kenya Health Project.

The MOPHS, through its projects: the Kenya Health Sector Support Project (KHSSP), the East
African Public Health Laboratory Network (EAPHLN) and the Total War Against AIDS (TOWA)
project under the National AIDS Control Council (NACC)in 2011 sought to jointly develop,
separately implementable Vulnerable and Marginalized Peoples Plans (VMPPs) to increase the
accessibility of health services to the Vulnerable and Marginalized Populations (VMPs). In 2012,
the consultant selected undertook a social assessment and developed project specific Vulnerable
and Marginalized Peoples Plans (VMPPs) for each of the three projects through free, prior and
informed consultations with the local vulnerable and marginalized ethnic groups based on existing
VMPP frameworks, that will enable such groups in the project areas to access benefits from each
project equitably and in a culturally appropriate manner under the three projects.

Specifically, the exercise sought to establish the (i) extent to which the Indigenous Peoples (IPs)
are benefiting from the three projects, (ii) the barriers to accessing services provided under the
three projects and (iii) to develop action plans which provide implementers with practical
measures to guide implementation, monitoring and evaluation of IPs benefits from the project
activities given the geographical, financial and socio-cultural factors.

Information was collected from thirteen communities in eight Counties/Districts. The 13
communities were: Sengwer, Ngikebotook, IL Chamus, Endorois, Sabor, Ogiek, Konso,
LKunono, IL Waana/Malakote, Waata, Boni/Aweer, Saanye and Munyoyaya. Three separate
Vulnerable and Marginalized Plans (VMPPs) have been developed with an aim of enhancing
access to basic health services including laboratory testing and diagnosis and increased
participation of the VMPs in the TOWA grants. The VMPPs made recommendations in the
following areas based on the following thematic areas; community empowerment, promotion of
good and desirable health practices, making health services affordable, ensuring that health
facilities serving the VMP communities have adequate medicines and supplies as well as
equipment and infrastructure; and enhancement of social accountability to strengthen governance,

                                           Page 4 of 8
 representation and information flow to the VMPs with regard to health services delivery.

 The main recommendations included the following: i) There is need to enhance awareness of the
 existing health services among the VMG communities ii) Improve utilization of available services
 by promoting positive health care seeking behavior iii) Put in place plans to enhance access to
 health services in the communities by adopting the pro-poor strategies in health financing, iv)
 Continued strengthening of Social Accountability mechanisms to enable proper strategies for
 grievance resolution and a monitoring mechanism, v) Build the capacity of the VMG communities
 to participate in health activities, vi) Address the identified gaps in HIV/AIDS service provision
 among the VMG populations and vii) Enhance service delivery, equipment and infrastructure of
 East African Public Health Laboratory Network. The VMPPs have been disclosed in-country and
 at the Ministry of Health’s website on August 6, 2013. The VMPP has been submitted to the Bank
 for disclosure in the InfoShop.

  Currently implementation arrangements are being discussed with the counties which will be
  responsible for delivering essential health services in the devolved health system.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  There are no potential impacts other than medical waste, as discussed above.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Medical waste is inevitable in health care. There were therefore no alternatives considered, other
  than various methods of managing such waste.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Government of Kenya has already prepared a National Health Care Waste Management Plan,
  which focuses on existing healthcare waste generation as well as segregation, storage, collection,
  transport, and final disposal practices; technologies for waste disposal; public awareness
  programs; and relevant national legislation. This plan was reviewed and accepted in the
  EAPHLNP.

 Under the new Constitution and Devolution the counties are now responsible for the delivery of
 essential health services. The KHSSP has been piloting the use of a results based indicator for
 waste care management in 5 locations. The National MOH will now work with the 5 counties to
 continue implementing the pilot. Further, the Results Based Financing now being scaled up to 20
 counties includes this cross cutting indicator for counties to comply with the Health Care Waste
 Management. This will be the way forward for improving practices and compliance with the
 national guidelines as demonstrated in the pilots. Tracking this indicator will the key tool MOH to
 improve practices and track compliance with the national guidelines as demonstrated in the
 Samburu pilot.
 The Kenya Health Sector Support Project has developed a Pilot to Integrate Social Accountability
 Approaches in the Health Sector Services Fund (HSSF). The pilot will include (i) preparatory
 activities for holding two health baraza with communities and health staff at each facility, (ii) )
 planning and implementing support activities to strengthen social accountability at health facilities
 and their communities; (iii) providing hands-on training to health staff and Health Facility
 Management Committees (HFMC) to takeover implementation of social accountability at their
 facilities and communities; and (iv) preparing reports on lessons learnt from implementing social


                                            Page 5 of 8
  accountability for further scaling up.
  A “Draft Operational Manual? with appropriate tools for integrating social accountability (SA)
  into HSSF has been developed focusing on three aspects of social accountability - transparency,
  effective complaint redress, and participation. The pilot was successfully implemented at nine (9)
  locations, reflecting different socio-economic settings in Kenya, which include: arid and semi-arid
  including pastoral, fishing, agriculture, semi-urban, and coastal. Based on the findings of the pilot
  a comprehensive manual for scaling up social accountability has been prepared for national scale-
  up and a national stakeholder consultation is scheduled in August 2013 following which the scale-
  up will be done in consultation with the Counties.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders include Ministry of Health, NGOs, private and mission health facilities,
  municipal councils and health facilities, health workers, patients, and people living near health
  facilities and dump sites. Consultation for the NHCWMP was through public hearings, stakeholder
  workshops and meeting of the heads of the implementing agencies. For disclosure, the NHCWMP
  and related documents were posted on the websites of the Ministry of Health and the National
  AIDS Control Council (NACC). The plan was also disseminated through local newspapers and
  radio. In addition, it was disclosed at the World Bank Information Center in Nairobi and the
  InfoShop in Washington DC. Additional consultations will be done to inform the stakeholders of
  the new implementation arrangements, relevant roles and responsibilities, and a reminder of the
  project environmental and social impacts.

  An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was developed by the MOPHS and MOMS
  for the EAPHLNP and then updated to include the KHSSP Project. The document was reviewed
  by IDA and found to be acceptable. The MOMS and MOPHS disclosed the document in the
  country on February 4, 2010, and the Bank disclosed them in the InfoShop on February 5, 2010.
  The framework was disclosed again in the InfoShop in May 2010 to ensure clarity about the
  application of the safeguards documents to the Kenya Health Project. A Vulnerable and
  Marginalized Group Plan has been developed in close consultations with select groups and has
  been disclosed in country on August 4, 2013 and has been submitted to the Bank for disclosure. .
  A time bound action plan has been developed for the implementation of the VMGP with assigned
  agency responsibilities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Nov-2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      02-Dec-2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya                                                               04-Feb-2010
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Oct-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Oct-2013



                                             Page 6 of 8
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya                                                            06-Aug-2013
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
 the project legal documents?


                                            Page 7 of 8
III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Gandham N.V. Ramana
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 07-Nov-2013
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)         Date: 07-Nov-2013




                                        Page 8 of 8
