                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1924
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Africa                             Project ID:    P132123
                            Project Name:     South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth Project 1
                                              (P132123)
                            Task Team         Xavier F. P. Vincent
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       09-Jul-2014                          Estimated   25-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GENDR                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (66%), Environmental
                                              policies and institutions (34%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      91.00           Total Bank Financing:                75.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            42.70
                              IDA Grant                                                                              32.80
                              Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds                                  15.50
                              Total                                                                                  91.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The Project Development Objective is to improve the management effectiveness of selected
                            priority fisheries at regional, national and community level.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            The Global Environment Objective is to improve the management effectiveness of selected
                            priority fisheries at regional, national and community level.
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1. Enhanced regional collaboration (Comoros, Kenya, Madagascar, Maldives, Mauritius,
                         Mozambique, Seychelles, Somalia, South Africa, Tanzania, Yemen, France - IOC: US$3.0 million
                         IDA). All SWIOFC countries will participate in this first component, implemented by the IOC. It
                         will support the provision of a regional public good through regional coordination and cooperation
                         for the management and sustainable development of fisheries in the SWIO. Sub-component (1.1)
                         (Enhancing capacity for managing priority regional fisheries and challenges) will support
                         engagement with all SWIOFC countries to start developing a regional strategy to increase national
                         and regional benefits from priority regional fisheries, collaboration on trans-boundary living marine
                         resources, and address shared challenges. It will also support implementation of a core regional work
                         plan toward implementing this strategy. Sub-component (1.2) (Regional coordination and
                         collaboration) will support the further development and consolidation of institutional arrangements
                         for regional fisheries collaboration, through the SWIOFC and the IOC. The sub-component will also
                         support regional knowledge management and exchange.

                         Component 2. Improved governance of priority fisheries (Comoros: US$5.5 million IDA and US$3.5
                         million GEF; Mozambique: US$16.2 million IDA and US$7.0 million GEF; Tanzania: US$17.4
                         million IDA and US$5.0 million GEF). The component primarily targets policies, strategies,
                         institutions and legal frameworks, and actions by the public sector necessary to improve priority
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fisheries management and performance, as well as regional marine environmental health and
                         resilience to climate change. It will be backed by activities aimed at understanding the resource base,
                         and building human and institutional capacity necessary to implement fisheries policies and
                         management plans. Three closely-linked and mutually supportive activities, directed to both the
                         public sector and coastal communities, are envisaged: (2.1) Knowledge and management of priority
                         fisheries; (2.2) Improving the performance of public institutions and assets; and (2.3) Information,
                         communication and awareness.

                         Component 3. Increased economic benefits from priority fisheries (Comoros: US$2.4 million IDA;
                         Mozambique: US$12.4 million IDA; Tanzania: US$10.0 million IDA). The component primarily
                         targets increasing the value addition and diversifying fishers’ livelihoods to reduce poverty and
                         pressure on the region’s fisheries, improving the regional business climate, enabling the private
                         sector productivity and investment, and supporting public investments critical to a viable private
                         sector. Measures decided by the co-management plans developed under component 2 will be
                         implemented here, including compensation for potential access restrictions. The Project will support
                         the following sub-components: (3.1) Improved business and investment climate; (3.2) Expansion of
                         opportunities for priority fisheries and value addition; and (3.3) Planning and investment in strategic
                         infrastructure.

                         Component 4. Project management and coordination (IOC: US$2.0 million IDA grant; Comoros: US


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         $1.6 million IDA; Mozambique: US$1.3 million IDA; Tanzania: US$3.5 million IDA) will support
                         regional Project coordination and implementation, country-level implementation and management,
                         and monitoring and evaluation at regional and country level. It will operate through Regional and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         National Steering Committees (RSC/NSCs) and Regional and National Implementation Units (RIU/
                         NIUs), through the following sub-components: (4.1) Project management at regional level; and (4.2)
                         Project management at country level (Comoros, Mozambique, and Tanzania).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Known areas for investment likely to trigger safeguard policies:
                         •        Mozambique: Coastal and marine areas, with specific focus on the Sofala Bank for the
                         shrimp management plan (northern Inhambane Province, Sofala Province, Zambezia Province and
                         Southern Nampula Province).
                         •        Comoros: Coastal and marine areas of the three islands Grande Comore (Ngazidja), Anjouan
                         (Ndzuwani) and Mohéli (Mwali).
                         •        Tanzania: Coastal and marine areas within Marine Protected Areas/Marine Conservation
                         Areas and where rehabilitation of existing fisheries infrastructure might take place. The specific areas
                         that will receive support for co-management enhancement will be Mkinga, Tanga Town, Pangani,
                         Bagamoyo and Lindi Rural.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         George Campos Ledec (GENDR)
                         Helen Z. Shahriari (GURDR)
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GURDR)
                         Ann Jeannette Glauber (GENDR)
                         Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
                         Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Overall, the environmental and social impacts of
                          BP 4.01                                             the project are expected to be positive. However,
                                                                              small-scale, localized negative effects may arise
                                                                              during the implementation of the limited site
                                                                              specific civil works envisaged under the project.
                                                                              These may include rehabilitation or expansion of
                                                                              fisheries infrastructure (landing sites, markets,
                                                                              office buildings). Safeguards management can be
                                                                              adequately handled through good engineering
                                                                              practices for design and construction. In light of
                                                                              the above, this project has been classified as a
                                                                              Category B project, which requires a partial
                                                                              assessment of social and environmental impacts.
                                                                              Since the locations and impacts of the potential
                                                                              civil works cannot be clearly defined at this stage,
                                                                              an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the
                                                                              Borrowers for each proposed project in the



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                                                     participating three countries. The preparation of
                                                                     the ESMFs involved extensive various
                                                                     stakeholders consultation and participation. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     addition to providing a set of implementable
                                                                     mitigation measures captured under the embedded
                                                                     environmental and social Management Plan
                                                                     (ESMP), the ESMF provides social and
                                                                     environmental screening procedures along with
                                                                     an environmental and social check-list to be
                                                                     applied on each proposed subproject, as well as a
                                                                     set of environmental and social clauses (ESC) to
                                                                     be embedded in Contractors Contracts for
                                                                     consideration during project implementation.
                                                                     Moreover, the ESMF provides also an
                                                                     institutional arrangement mechanism, a
                                                                     monitoring and evaluation mechanism, a conflict
                                                                     resolution/grievance redress mechanism, as well
                                                                     an estimated budget to allow safe and adequate
                                                                     implementation of the ESMF/ESMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           As stated above, the overall environmental and
                                                                     social impacts of the proposed project are
                                                                     expected to be overwhelmingly positive and the
                                                                     project expected impacts on Natural Habitats
                                                                     would also be significantly positive, through
                                                                     efforts to improve participatory conservation and
                                                                     management of key fisheries habitats.
                                                                     Nonetheless, potential civil works could have
                                                                     minor small-scale impacts on Natural Habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Likewise, additional expansion of areas under
                                                                     management could have variant impacts on
                                                                     livelihoods (see OP/BP 4.12 below). Provision is
                                                                     been made in the ESMF to adequately address
                                                                     such expectation. Any subproject funded under
                                                                     the project will be screened for their potential to
                                                                     cause negative impacts to natural habitats under
                                                                     the ESMF procedures. If sub-projects are likely to
                                                                     cause irreversible or significant damages to
                                                                     habitats they will be excluded from project
                                                                     funding.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            The project does not involve forests.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           While no procurement of pesticides or pesticide
                                                                     application is currently envisaged for Bank-
                                                                     funded project activities, it is possible that
                                                                     aquaculture activities supported through the
                                                                     SWIOFish Tanzania project may choose to use
                                                                     aquatic herbicides or antibiotics. This policy is


                                                             Page 4 of 12
                                                                         therefore triggered. While use of pesticides is
                                                                         considered unlikely and should be discouraged in
                                                                         any discussions about project design, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Tanzania ESMF document project screening,
                                                                         implementation and monitoring process addresses
                                                                         this risk and includes specific guidelines on the
                                                                         use of pesticides. In addition to this, the ESMF
                                                                         includes a list of: 1) recommended pesticides; 2)
                                                                         banned pesticides; and 3) pesticides whose use is
                                                                         subject to the Prior Informed Consent (PIC)
                                                                         procedures in Tanzania.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Since project activities are largely going to take
                         BP 4.11                                         place in near-shore and off-shore waters or in
                                                                         rural areas, it is unlikely that cultural resources
                                                                         will be impacted. However, natural features and
                                                                         landscapes with some level of cultural
                                                                         significance might be adversely impacted by the
                                                                         project. Therefore, to the extent that some of the
                                                                         possible infrastructure investments that may occur
                                                                         under the project, such as rehabilitation or
                                                                         expansion of landing sites, markets, office
                                                                         buildings, may be located in coastal towns or
                                                                         where there are historical sites, care will need to
                                                                         be taken to avoid development plans that may
                                                                         impact these cultural resources. The ESMFs have
                                                                         assessed this possibility and included a “chance
                                                                         finds” procedure to be applied during both sub-
                                                                         project screening processes and during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         implementation of Environmental and Social
                                                                         Clauses embedded in Contractors contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                         areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project is not expected to involve land
                         4.12                                            acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement of
                                                                         project-affected persons (PAPs), as project
                                                                         infrastructure would take place on already
                                                                         existing sites. However, because the project
                                                                         proposes to strengthen the effectivemanagement
                                                                         and protection of natural resources in near-shore
                                                                         or off-shore waters as well as potentially expand
                                                                         areas under protection, these access restrictions,
                                                                         be it seasonal, temporary or permanent, there may
                                                                         be negative impacts on livelihoods for some
                                                                         individuals in some coastal communities, at least
                                                                         in the short-term. In fact, footnote 6 of OP 4.12
                                                                         suggests that where restrictions to access of
                                                                         resources are taking place under community-


                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                  based projects, such as fisheries co-management
                                                                  arrangements, the policy would not apply.
                                                                  However, it is reasonable to assume that some
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  decisions taken to restrict access to fisheries will
                                                                  be initiated by government, and will not fall
                                                                  solely within the discretion of the local
                                                                  communities. Therefore, this policy has been
                                                                  triggered and, as part of project preparation, a
                                                                  Process Framework (PF) has been developed for
                                                                  each of the three participating countries, and
                                                                  extensively consulted upon to ensure people
                                                                  views and concerns are fully taken into
                                                                  consideration in the final project design. The PFs
                                                                  established a process whereby individuals,
                                                                  households or communities who may lose some
                                                                  or all of their livelihoods from fishing or
                                                                  fisheries-related activities, as a result of project
                                                                  investments, are able to participate in a process to
                                                                  minimize such negative impact on project
                                                                  affected communities livelihood and living
                                                                  condition, precisely by (i) designing the fisheries
                                                                  resource restrictions; (ii) determining measures
                                                                  necessary to restore or improve their livelihood
                                                                  conditions , and (ii) implementing and monitoring
                                                                  relevant project activities. The PF include
                                                                  institutional arrangement, capacity building,
                                                                  grievance redress mechanism and an estimated
                                                                  budget for PF implementation. Special attention
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  will be given to women, youth and other
                                                                  vulnerable groups whose livelihood are
                                                                  intrinsically linked to the fishing activities.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           N/A

                         Projects on International   No           Project activities will not be located in a river,
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     canal, lake or similar body of water that forms a
                                                                  boundary with another state. While no direct
                                                                  impacts on riparian systems are expected, the
                                                                  project does involve management changes in
                                                                  some bays and straits that are close to borders of
                                                                  other SWIO countries. In consultation with
                                                                  LEGEN it has been decided that this policy will
                                                                  not be triggered.
                                                                  The project does involve significant monitoring
                                                                  and enforcement investments that may also be of
                                                                  benefit to the neighboring countries under
                                                                  regional initiatives to better manage the resources.
                                                                  Furthermore, the project will support the


                                                          Page 6 of 12
                                                                                improved management of migratory and
                                                                                transboundary fish stocks between SWIO
                                                                                countries, which is mainly related to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                migration patterns of large pelagic fish such as
                                                                                tuna, billfish and shark.
                                                                                South West Indian Ocean riparian countries were
                                                                                informed of the project during their Regional
                                                                                Fisheries Body (South West Indian Ocean
                                                                                Fisheries Commission or SWIOFC) sessions and
                                                                                gave consent to the concept note and to the
                                                                                preparation of the first phase of investment
                                                                                (project), and remain associated and kept
                                                                                informed of progress.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Project activities will not be located in disputed
                            7.60                                                areas. In consultation with LEGEN it has
                                                                                therefore been decided that this policy will not be
                                                                                triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Given the project objectives of improving governance in the fisheries management sector through
                              better data collection, sectoral governance and institutional reform, stronger enforcement of
                              conservation measures, and renewed emphasis on co-management strategies, the overall
                              environmental and social impacts of the project are expected to be positive. However, the
                              proposed sub-projects on the construction/expansion/rehabilitation of fisheries infrastructures
Public Disclosure Copy




                              (landing sites, markets, office buildings) and the potential use of aquatic herbicides or antibiotics
                              could generate some minor adverse environmental and social impacts. The ESMFs and draft
                              Environmental and Social Assessments (ESA) prepared by the respective Governments of the
                              three countries pursuant to OP4.01 confirm that large-scale, significant and/or- irreversible
                              environmental impacts are not expected. The ESA documents, however, do point out that some
                              potential negative small-scale and localized environmental and social impacts from project
                              investments may occur, and which should be taken care of in the design of the project and its
                              implementation arrangements. These negative impacts include seasonal, temporary or permanent
                              access restrictions that may be implemented for certain fisheries or in specific geographic
                              locations, short-term reduction in income to artisanal fisheries engaged in illegal or unsustainable
                              fishing activities due to strengthened fisheries Monitoring, Control and Surveillance, and localized
                              environmental and possible social impacts from infrastructure rehabilitation, upgrading or
                              construction such as air, soil and water pollution, loss of vegetation, coastal erosion, increase in
                              HIV AIDS and safety (accidents on the work camps). Through the ESMFs, the proposed project
                              has provided an environmental and social screening form that will be applied by qualified
                              personnel, precisely Environmental and Social Focal Points (ESFPs), in each participating country
                              task-team, at the planning stage of future investments. Given that any adverse environmental and
                              social impacts from implementation of the proposed project are generally expected to be site-
                              specific, not significant, and not irreversible, this project has been designated as a Category ‘B’
                              Partial Assessment. The project has triggered the following Safeguards policies: OP/BP 4.01


                                                                        Page 7 of 12
                           (Environmental Assessment); OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats); OP/BP 4.09 (Pest Management);
                           OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources); and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). Because
                           the exact nature and location of investments may not be determined up front, i.e. prior to appraisal,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the respective governments prepared and consulted upon an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) and a Process Framework (PF).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site-specific, thus
                           easily remediable and reversible and no significant long-term impacts are expected during project
                           implementation. However, it is possible that there will be some long-term negative impacts to
                           some individuals, households or communities in the coastal region. Fisheries resource
                           management will be changing from what is in most cases a largely open access regime to a
                           regulated or limited access regime. There are already significant levels of impoverishment in many
                           coastal communities, which rely on fishers for a significant portion of their subsistence income
                           and food sources. If productive assets are lost in the form of restrictions, it would weaken
                           community and family institutions, social network, traditional authority, and family structures. The
                           only potential cumulative impacts may derive from many new micro, small, or medium-size
                           enterprises undertaking similar activities near environmentally sensitive areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/a
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Since the precise physical locations and potential localized adverse environmental or social
                           impacts of project investments are not yet known, and will not be identified prior to appraisal, and
                           to ensure compliance with the World Bank's safeguards policies triggered, each of the respective
                           governments have completed an ESMF and overall Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as part of project preparation. The overall objective of the ESA is to evaluate the biophysical and
                           socio-economic impacts of the proposed project; more precisely with the development of an
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Process Framework (PF) to
                           manage these impacts in a way that meets the core requirements of both the national regulations
                           and World Bank Safeguard policies.

                           ESMF: The ESMF provides the basis for the preparation and approval of necessary environmental
                           and social work, as needed for the subproject investments supported through the Project. Part of
                           the ESMF is an Environmental and Social Screening Form (ESSF) to be used by the safeguards
                           focal point of the National Project Implementation Unit (NIU) as a checklist to effectively assess
                           the viability of all proposed sub-projects under the project. The ESMF also contains: (i) mitigation
                           of impacts of the potential subprojects to be financed; (ii) capacity assessment including
                           recommendations of specific measures to strengthening safeguards capacity at the Implementing
                           Agencies; (iii) informing stakeholders involved in the implementation of the project and public
                           consultation; (iv) clear procedures for sub-project preparation, review and approval; (v)
                           institutional responsibilities for implementation of the ESMF as well as environmental and social
                           monitoring; the timing for the implementation of measures and the estimated costs for
                           environmental and social measures. The three separate ESMF and PF documents were extensively
                           consulted upon, reviewed by project safeguards specialists and submitted to Bank for review,
                           clearance and publication.


                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                          PF: Due to the possible implementation of various access restrictions to marine resources, which
                          could lead to various social impacts for some fishery communities, the OP/BP 4.12 requires the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          development of a PF as part of the project preparation process. The PF primarily pertains to
                          Component 2 of the project, Improved Governance of Priority Fisheries. It is likely that research
                          on priority fisheries to be conducted under this component will determine that access to some
                          species and/or to some coastal or marine locations will need to be limited to ensure long-term
                          sustainability of the ecosystems and species. The purpose of the PF is to establish a process
                          whereby members of potentially affected communities are able to participate in the design of
                          fisheries resource restrictions, determine measures necessary to achieve livelihood restoration and
                          implement and monitor relevant project activities. The rotating credit and savings schemes and
                          capacity building activities promoted under component 3 will be the main vehicle used by the PFs
                          to address fishers, households and communities affected by access restrictions with project-
                          affected persons (PAPs) getting priority assistance over other self-help groups in fisher
                          communities that may form on their own. The PF provides guidance on how to use the existing co-
                          management framework for fisheries that is to be strengthened under the project as the vehicle for
                          ensuring that those affected by restrictions in access to traditional fishing grounds, marine parks,
                          etc., through access controls on marine resource uses introduced under the project have a
                          participatory process to address potential income loss and ways to replace lost livelihoods. Like
                          the ESMFs, the PFs were extensively consulted upon, and have been reviewed by project
                          safeguards specialists and submitted for Bank’s clearance and publication.

                           The NIUs will bear overall responsibilities for compliance with safeguard activities to national and
                           Bank policies. The supervision of safeguards implementation will be done as part of the overall
                           project implementation by the NIUs in conjunction with the responsible Line Ministries. The NIUs
                           will assign two safeguards focal points (one for social issues and one for environmental issues) to
                           be trained by the project Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists. These Environmental
                           and Social Focal Points (ESFP) will be in charge of coordinating the implementation of the
                           ESMFs and PFs including gender, handicaps and vulnerable groups, the monitoring (control and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           audit) of social and environmental aspects and be an interface between the project, local
                           authorities and other stakeholders. To ensure effective Bank supervision, the NIUs will prepare
                           and update reports on the implementation of the safeguards instruments to be submitted prior to
                           Bank Implementation Support Mission (ISM). The supervision of safeguards implementation will
                           be done as part of the overall project implementation by the NIUs and as part of the Bank’s
                           biannual ISMs.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include coastal artisanal fishing communities These communities include
                           small-scale commercial fishers, fish and seaweed farmers, households where fishing makes up a
                           substantial part of their livelihoods and subsistence fishers. Other stakeholders include producer
                           and professional organizations, industry or fisher organizations, local co-management institutions,
                           the central and regional fishery services, and the association of sellers in the localities. During
                           project preparation and the development of the ESMFs and PFs, public consultation and
                           participation were conducted by the project team and consultants, which included various field
                           visits and stakeholder meetings. The NIUs will be responsible for the public disclosure of the PF
                           and ESMF documents in country media and locations accessible to beneficiaries, (ii) the
                           implementation of communication and sensitization campaigns on programs financed by the
                           project before, during, and after the works, as part of the information, education and


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           communication activities financed under the proposed project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    22-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Comoros                                                           06-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                           Mozambique                                                        07-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                           Tanzania                                                          22-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    22-Aug-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Comoros                                                           06-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                           Mozambique                                                        07-Aug-2014
                           Comments:
                           Tanzania                                                          22-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?


                                                                   Page 10 of 12
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Xavier F. P. Vincent
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                              Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                              Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
