                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA5492
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                             Project ID:    P133338
                            Project Name:      CAMEROON--Equity and Quality for Improved Learning Project (P133338)
                            Task Team          Shobhana Sosale
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Nov-2013                          Estimated   31-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Managing for development results (10%), Education for all (90%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         55.80              Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       2.50
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                                     53.30
                              Total                                                                                         55.80
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to improve the equity and quality of primary education service
                           delivery with an emphasis on disadvantaged areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           The indicative allocation from the Global Partnership for Education for the project is US$53.30
                           million. No co-financing is anticipated at this time. It is proposed that the project be implemented

                                                                          Page 1 of 6
                         over a period of four years. The proposed project components would be as follows:

                         Component 1. Improving the equity and quality of primary education service delivery (US$48.3
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million)

                         Sub-Component 1.1 Increasing teacher availability in disadvantaged areas (US$31.4 million)

                         1. The project would extend a final phase of support for the Contract Teachers Program (CTP) by
                         financing a portion of the CTP salaries on the condition that government recruits more contract
                         teachers intra-regionally or converts existing maîtres des parents to contract teacher cadre, with
                         specific recruitment targets defined for two to three most disadvantaged areas in each region, and for
                         the share of female teachers. New CTP recruits will have to be trained teachers as per the existing
                         requirements of that program. The sub-component would also include strengthening of teacher
                         quality under the CTP and address teacher absenteeism and on-the-job performance. Finally, the
                         project would help to strengthen the CTP administration further, a process already initiated under the
                         previous GPE project (then EFA-FTI) which also provided support for the CTP. This sub-component
                         builds on the strong foundation set up through the previous project.

                         2. Cameroon has demonstrated its ability and willingness to pursue a results-based financing
                         approach through the previous EFA-FTI project. There is every reason to build on the reform that is
                         already in place, and consider a disbursement linked indicator approach to financing contract
                         teachers’ salaries. Continued financing for one more phases would be based on: (i) an analysis of the
                         continued relevance, strengths and weaknesses of the CTP; (ii) identification of opportunities for
                         strengthening teacher quality, reducing absenteeism, and raising on-the-job performance; (iii)
                         addressing the internal control issues raised in the Special Audit undertaken for the previous GPE
                         financing of the CTP; (iv) an institutional assessment of the management capacity of the CTP; and
                         (v) an assessment of the CTP attrition and redistribution issues. A convenant is proposed to be
                         introduced in legal agreement to prevent the horizontal attrition of teachers to other sub-sectors of
                         education for a period of at least 5 years after being recruited as a contract teacher.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 1.2 Provide teaching and learning materials for Primary Grades 1-3 (US$13.3
                         million)

                         3. This sub-component would focus on the competitive procurement and distribution of teaching and
                         learning materials in basic French, English, and Mathematics for primary grades 1, 2 and 3. This is in
                         keeping with the project objective of improving learning outcomes, and the choice to focus on early
                         grade reading and numeracy and application of EGRA and EGMA in Sub-component 1.5. The
                         approach to financing this sub-component would also be based on process based disbursement linked
                         indicators. The indicators would be pegged to the achievement of milestones. The sub-component
                         design is based on lessons from earlier projects and drawing on the experiences of other development
                         partners in providing teaching and learning materials support. A rapid results strategy (RRS)
                         approach could be put in place for the signing of contracts between MINEDUB, the publishers, and
                         the distributors or the publishing, production and distribution of the teaching and learning materials.
                         The project is designed to serve as a demonstration effect for putting in place renewable books, lower
                         the price of textbooks at the early grades to make them more affordable for the government/parents
                         to purchase, and to support improved learning outcomes. Through implementation the project design
                         would inform reforms and help to finalize the draft teaching and learning materials policy. Textbooks
                         would be provided to all public schools in Cameroon, especially to the disadvantaged areas and the
                         ZEP.

                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         Sub-Component 1.3 Capacity development for teachers and inspectors (US$1.1 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. The objective is to train teachers in the use of the new teaching and learning materials to be
                         distributed through the Project. Specifically, the sub-component would include the preparation of a
                         national plan for pre-service training in the ENIEG and in-service capacity development for teachers
                         and inspectors. The content of the national plan would be linked to grades 1, 2 and 3 book titles, the
                         use of the new teaching materials, and the preparation, administration, and grading of students' tests
                         (early grade reading and early grade mathematics). The teacher training would be rol led out
                         progressively over the project implementation period, and teacher performance would be evaluated
                         through third party verification mechanisms.

                         Sub-Component 1.4 Support for girls' education (US$1.1 million)

                         5. The objective is to improve equity in access and retention of girls in primary education. The
                         Project would finance lifeskills advocacy, content and capacity development through gender-oriented
                         campaigns, the preparation and the proactive dissemination of awareness campaigns. The Project
                         would complement the ongoing work on girls' education being undertaken by other development
                         partners incountry. Specifically, the Project would finance the production of lifeskills pamphlets,
                         posters, publicity material, multimedia dissemination options (radio, television) as teaching and
                         learning materials (financed under Sub-Component 1.2 in the amount of an estimated US$1 million)
                         and disseminating them widely.

                         Sub-Component 1.5 Student learning assessment (US$1.4 million)

                         6. The objective is to assist the Government to prepare a National Assessment Framework including
                         a formative evaluation system by instituting the Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) and the
                         Early Grade Mathematics Assessments (EGMA) as tools for measuring learning outcomes for early
                         grade students. These would also be used to monitor the achievement of the two PDO indicators on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         learning outcomes in disadvantaged areas. The project will finance EGRA and EGMA exercises at
                         the end of school years 2014, 2015 and 2016 respectively.

                         Component 2. Building institutional capacity for improved service delivery (US$4.9 million)

                         Sub-Component 2.1 Improving information, governance and accountability, and monitoring and
                         evaluation capacity (US$3.3 million)

                         7. The objective is to support the geo-referencing of schools in the country, linking the school report
                         cards (tableau de bord), and preparing the architecture for the unification of the Education
                         Management Information System (EMIS) for the five ministries of education. In addition, key
                         governance action plan activities would include: (i) a budget transparency strategy (adaptation of
                         budget transparency templates), making it compulsory for schools to complete the template and have
                         them published on school notice boards throughout the academic year for communities/parents to
                         access information, making it systematic to have the names of teachers recruited as well as PTA
                         teachers converted to contract teachers read over the public regional radio, and making it compulsory
                         systematically for schools to present and discuss their respective budget transparency templates at
                         school management meetings and recording the minutes of the meetings for third party verification;
                         and (ii) monitoring and evaluation of the Project interventions.



                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                           Sub-Component 2.2 Building knowledge for improved service delivery and learning (US$1.7
                           million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The objective is to support the preparation of key studies that will help to set the stage for moving
                           Cameroon to the next stage of building human capital for growth and competitiveness. Key studies
                           and strategies proposed would be on the following topics: (i) basic education (education
                           fondamentale) including pre-school education or early childhood deelopment; (ii) skills development
                           for the labor market; (iii) adult literacy (alphabetisation) and out-of-school children (les non-
                           scolarises); and (iv) study on higher education reform based on extracting the analysis of introducing
                           education fondamentale which is expected to change the flow of students in the system to higher
                           levels of education.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Disadvantaged regions: Adamaoua, Far North, and North.
                           Pockets of poverty in the peri-urban and urban areas.
                           Frontier parts of the country.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                           Project activities are expected to have negligible environmental and social impacts. As the focus of
                           the project is financing the recurrent costs of teachers, as well as design and planning for teaching
                           materials, OP 4.10 is not triggered. Should the project move into local curriculum design and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework or Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
                           prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           N/A.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           No safeguards policies are triggered due to Project activities. The Project is based on extensive
                           stakeholder consultations at regional and national level were undertaken during the process of
                           preparing the Education Sector Strategy 2013-2020.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?

                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Shobhana Sosale
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 30-Nov-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                    Date: 06-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 6 of 6
